['10102577', 'Aquaporins, small channel proteins, found in a variety of organisms are members  of the major intrinsic protein (MIP) superfamily and have been shown to  facilitate water transport when expressed in Xenopus oocytes. We isolated two  Arabidopsis cDNAs, SIMIP and SITIP, that encode protein homologues of the MIP  superfamily. SIMIP exhibits a high degree of sequence homology to PIP3 and MIP1,  and thus may belong to the plasmamembrane intrinsic protein (PIP) subfamily,  whereas salt-stress inducible tonoplast intrinsic protein (SITIP) is highly  homologous to VM23 and gamma-TIP, and therefore may belong to the TIP subfamily.  Expression studies revealed that the two genes showed a different expression  pattern. The SIMIP gene was expressed in a tissue-specific manner, for example,  its highest transcript level is found in flowers, relatively low levels in  siliques, and very low level in leaves and roots. In contrast, SITIP was  expressed in nearly equal amounts in all the tissues we examined. Also, the  expression of SIMIP and SITIP showed a temporal regulation pattern. For example,  the highest expression level was at 1 week after germination. In addition, the  transcript levels of SIMIP and SMTIP were increased upon NaCl and ABA treatments.  The biological function of the 2 genes were investigated using two NaCl  stress-sensitive yeast mutant strains. The mutant yeast cells expressing these 2  genes were more resistant to high NaCl conditions. The results suggest that the  proteins encoded by these genes may be involved in the osmoregulation in plants  under high osmotic stress such as under a high salt condition.', '1999 Feb 28', 'Mol Cells', None, 'Hwang']

SIMIP: !belongs to! PIP subfamily 
SITIP: !belongs to! TIP subfamily 
SIMIP: !expressed in! tissue-specific manner 
SITIP: !expressed in! nearly equal amounts 
SIMIP/SITIP: !temporally regulated! 1 week after germination 
SIMIP/SITIP: !increased upon! NaCl/ABA treatments 
SIMIP/SITIP: !involved in! osmoregulation under high osmotic stress