['10224270', 'The RPS5 disease resistance gene of Arabidopsis mediates recognition of  Pseudomonas syringae strains that possess the avirulence gene avrPphB. By  screening for loss of RPS5-specified resistance, we identified five pbs (avrPphB  susceptible) mutants that represent three different genes. Mutations in PBS1  completely blocked RPS5-mediated resistance, but had little to no effect on  resistance specified by other disease resistance genes, suggesting that PBS1  facilitates recognition of the avrPphB protein. The pbs2 mutation dramatically  reduced resistance mediated by the RPS5 and RPM1 resistance genes, but had no  detectable effect on resistance mediated by RPS4 and had an intermediate effect  on RPS2-mediated resistance. The pbs2 mutation also had varying effects on  resistance mediated by seven different RPP (recognition of Peronospora  parasitica) genes. These data indicate that the PBS2 protein functions in a  pathway that is important only to a subset of disease-resistance genes. The pbs3  mutation partially suppressed all four P. syringae-resistance genes (RPS5, RPM1,  RPS2, and RPS4), and it had weak-to-intermediate effects on the RPP genes. In  addition, the pbs3 mutant allowed higher bacterial growth in response to a  virulent strain of P. syringae, indicating that the PBS3 gene product functions  in a pathway involved in restricting the spread of both virulent and avirulent  pathogens. The pbs mutations are recessive and have been mapped to chromosomes I  (pbs2) and V (pbs1 and pbs3).', '1999 May', 'Genetics', '10.1093/genetics/152.1.401', 'Innes']

RPS5: !mediates recognition of! avrPphB
PBS1: !facilitates recognition of! avrPphB protein
PBS2: !reduces resistance of! RPS5 & RPM1
PBS2: !has intermediate effect on! RPS2-mediated resistance
PBS2: !varying effects on! RPP genes
PBS3: !partially suppresses! P. syringae-resistance genes
PBS3: !allows higher bacterial growth in response to! virulent strain of P. syringae
PBS mutations: !mapped to! chromosomes I & V