['10350211', 'In Arabidopsis thaliana the PALE CRESS (PAC) gene product is required for both  chloroplast and cell differentiation. Transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing a  translational fusion of the N-terminal part of the PAC protein harboring the  complete plastid-targeting sequence and the green fluorescent protein (GFP)  exhibit high GFP fluorescence. Detailed analyses based on confocal imaging of  various tissues and cell types revealed that the PAC-GFP fusion protein  accumulates in chloroplasts of mature stomatal guard cells. The GFP fluorescence  within the guard cell chloroplasts is not evenly distributed and appears to be  concentrated in suborganellar regions. GFP localization studies demonstrate that  thin tubular projections emanating from chloroplasts and etioplasts often connect  the organelles with each other. Furthermore, imaging of non-green and etiolated  tissue further revealed that GFP fluorescence is present in proplastids,  etioplasts, chromoplasts, and amyloplasts. Even photobleaching of carotenoid-free  plastids does not affect PAC-GFP accumulation in the organelles of the guard  cells indicating that the protein translocation machinery is functional in all  types of plastids. The specific accumulation of GFP in guard cell chloroplasts,  their tubular connections, the translocation of the precursor polypeptide into  the different types of organelles, as well as the use of a plastid-targeted GFP  protein as a versatile marker is discussed in the context of previously described  observations.', '1999 Apr', 'Eur J Cell Biol', '10.1016/S0171-9335(99)80056-9', 'Oelmuller']

PAC gene: !required for! chloroplast and cell differentiation 
PAC-GFP fusion protein: !accumulates in! chloroplasts of mature stomatal guard cells 
PAC-GFP fusion protein: !concentrated in! suborganellar regions 
PAC-GFP fusion protein: !connects! organelles with each other 
PAC-GFP fusion protein: !present in! proplastids, etioplasts, chromoplasts, and amyloplasts 
PAC-GFP fusion protein: !translocation machinery is functional in! all types of plastids