['10364395', 'An Arabidopsis cDNA encoding the dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase subunit of  the plastid pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (E2) was isolated from a lambdaPRL2  library. The cDNA is 1709 bp in length, with a continuous open reading frame of  1440 bp encoding a protein of 480 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of  50,079 D. Southern analysis suggests that a single gene encodes plastid E2. The  amino acid sequence has characteristic features of an acetyltransferase, namely,  distinct lipoyl, subunit-binding, and catalytic domains, although it is unusual  in having only a single lipoyl domain. The in vitro synthesized plastid E2  precursor protein has a relative molecular weight of 67,000 on sodium dodecyl  sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Upon incubation of the precursor with  pea (Pisum sativum) chloroplasts, it was imported and processed to a mature-sized  relative molecular weight of 60,000. The imported protein was located in the  chloroplast stroma, associated with the endogenous pyruvate dehydrogenase.  Catalytically active recombinant plastid E2 was purified as a glutathione  S-transferase fusion protein. Analysis of plastid E2 mRNA by reverse  transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction showed highest expression in flowers,  followed by leaves, siliques, and roots. The results of immunoblot analysis  indicate that protein expression was similar in roots and flowers, less similar  in leaves, and even less similar in siliques. This is the first report, to our  knowledge, describing a plastid E2.', '1999 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.120.2.443', 'Randall']

cDNA: !encodes! plastid E2 
protein: !has! distinct lipoyl, subunit-binding, and catalytic domains 
precursor protein: !imported to! mature-sized relative molecular weight 
precursor protein: !located in! chloroplast stroma 
recombinant plastid E2: !purified as! glutathione S-transferase fusion protein 
plastid E2 mRNA: !expressed highest in! flowers 
protein expression: !similar in! roots and flowers