['10380805', "WAK1 (wall-associated kinase 1) is a cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinase that  spans the plasma membrane and extends into the extracellular region to bind  tightly to the cell wall. The Wak1 gene was mapped and found to lie in a tight  cluster of five highly similar genes (Wak1-5) within a 30 kb region. All of the  Wak genes encode a cytoplasmic serine/threonine protein kinase, a transmembrane  domain, and an extracytoplasmic region with several epidermal growth factor (EGF)  repeats. The extracellular regions also contain limited amino acid identities to  the tenascin superfamily, collagen, or the neurexins. RNA blot analysis with  gene-specific probes revealed that Wak1, Wak3 and Wak5 are expressed primarily in  leaves and stems of Arabidopsis. Wak4 mRNA is only detected in siliques, while  Wak2 mRNA is found in high levels in leaves and stems, and in lower levels in  flowers and siliques. A trace amount of Wak2 can also be detected in roots. Wak1  is induced by pathogen infection and salicylic acid or its analogue INA and is  involved in the plant's response, and Wak2, Wak3 and Wak5 also can be greatly  induced by salicylic acid or INA. The WAK proteins have the potential to serve as  both linkers of the cell wall to the plasma membrane and as signaling molecules,  and since Wak expression is organ-specific and the isoforms vary significantly in  the cell wall associated domain this family of proteins may be involved in cell  wall-plasma membrane interactions that direct fundamental processes in  angiosperms.", '1999 Apr', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/a:1006197318246', 'Kohorn']

WAK1: !spans! plasma membrane 
WAK1-5: !lie in! 30 kb region 
WAK genes: !encode! cytoplasmic serine/threonine protein kinase 
Wak1, Wak3, Wak5: !expressed in! leaves and stems 
Wak4: !expressed in! siliques 
Wak2: !expressed in! leaves, stems, flowers, siliques, roots 
Wak1: !induced by! pathogen infection, salicylic acid, INA 
Wak2, Wak3, Wak5: !induced by! salicylic acid, INA 
WAK proteins: !serve as! linkers of cell wall to plasma membrane, signaling molecules 
Wak expression: !involved in! cell wall-plasma membrane interactions