['10420644', "Allene oxide synthase (AOS) is encoded by a single intronless gene in Arabidopsis  thaliana (L.) Heynh. The promoter region of the AOS gene exhibits, in addition to  the clements of a minimal promoter and the presence of general enhancers,  cis-elements that, in other promoters, are responsible for stress- and  ethyleneresponsiveness. Arabidopsis thaliana and Nicotiana tabacum L. were  transformed with a chimaeric gene consisting of a 1.9-kb 5'-upstream sequence and  the first 95 nucleotides of the AOS coding sequence translationally fused to uidA  encoding beta-glucuronidase (GUS). Using histochemistry, GUS activity was seen in  older leaves, in the bases of petioles and in stipules, during the early stages  of carpel development, in maturing pollen grains and at the base of elongated  filaments, as well as in abscission-zone scars. A role for jasmonates in floral  organ abscission is suggested by these findings. Furthermore, the AOS promoter  was activated both locally as well as systemically upon wounding. Jasmonic acid,  12-oxophytodienoic acid and coronatine strongly induced GUS activity. This  induction remained confined to the treated leaf when agonists were applied  locally to a leaf, suggesting that neither jasmonic acid nor 12-oxophytodienoic  acid are physiologically relevant components of the systemic wound signal  complex. Rather, the data show that jasmonates behave as local response  regulators produced at or around the sites of action in response to appropriate  triggers of their synthesis.", '1999 Jun', 'Planta', '10.1007/s004250050583', 'Weiler']

AOS gene: !encodes! Allene oxide synthase 
Promoter region: !exhibits! cis-elements 
Chimaeric gene: !consists of! 1.9-kb 5'-upstream sequence 
GUS activity: !seen in! older leaves, petioles, stipules, carpel development, pollen grains, filaments, abscission-zone scars 
AOS promoter: !activated by! wounding, jasmonic acid, 12-oxophytodienoic acid, coronatine 
Jasmonates: !behave as! local response regulators