['10571860', 'Full-length cDNAs coding for two distinct acyl-CoA oxidases were isolated by  screening an Arabidopsis cDNA library. The genes for the two acyl-CoA oxidases  have been termed AtACX1 and AtACX2. AtACX1 encodes a peptide of 664 amino acids  possessing a molecular mass of 74.3 kDa. AtACX2 encodes a peptide of 691 amino  acids in length with a molecular mass of 77.5 kDa. Peroxisomal targeting signals  were identified in the primary sequences. AtACX1 has a putative PTS1, whereas  AtACX2 has a characteristic PTS2. Expression of AtACX1 and AtACX2 in Escherichia  coli gave active enzymes for enzymatic and biochemical analysis. AtACX1 was  active with both medium-and long-chain saturated fatty acyl-CoAs and showed  maximal activity with C14-CoA. Activity with mono-unsaturated acyl-CoAs was  slightly higher than with the corresponding saturated acyl-CoA. AtACX2 was active  with long-chain acyl-CoAs and showed maximal activity with C18-CoA. AtACX2  activity with mono-unsaturated acyl-CoAs was approximately twice as high as with  the corresponding saturated acyl-CoA. Both enzymes have an apparent Km of  approximately 5 microM with the preferred substrate. Northern analysis was  conducted to determine the expression patterns of AtACX1 and AtACX2 during  germination and in various tissues of a mature plant. The two genes showed  generally similar expression profiles and steady-state mRNA levels in seedlings  and mature tissues, but subtle differences were observed. Enzymatic analyses of  plant extracts revealed that AtACX1 and AtACX2 are members of a family that  includes acyl-CoA oxidases specific for shorter-chain acyl-CoAs. Through  expression of antisense constructs of the individual genes, we were able to  decrease long-chain oxidase activity only in antisense AtACX1 plants. Seedlings  with long-chain oxidase activity reduced down to 30% of wild-type levels  germinated and established normally; however, reduced root growth appeared to be  a general feature of antisense AtACX1 plants.', '1999 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.1999.00559.x', 'Graham']

AtACX1: !encodes! peptide 
AtACX2: !encodes! peptide 
AtACX1: !has! PTS1 
AtACX2: !has! PTS2 
AtACX1: !active with! medium-chain fatty acyl-CoAs 
AtACX2: !active with! long-chain fatty acyl-CoAs 
AtACX1: !expresses in! seedlings 
AtACX2: !expresses in! seedlings 
AtACX1: !expresses in! mature tissues 
AtACX2: !expresses in! mature tissues 
AtACX1: !synthesizes! enzyme 
AtACX2: !synthesizes! enzyme 
AtACX1: !represses! long-chain oxidase activity 
AtACX2: !enhances! long-chain oxidase activity