['10572033', "Arabidopsis thaliana trichomes provide an attractive model system to dissect  molecular processes involved in the generation of shape and form in single cell  morphogenesis in plants. We have used transgenic Arabidopsis plants carrying a  GFP-talin chimeric gene to analyze the role of the actin cytoskeleton in trichome  cell morphogenesis. We found that during trichome cell development the actin  microfilaments assumed an increasing degree of complexity from fine filaments to  thick, longitudinally stretched cables. Disruption of the F-actin cytoskeleton by  actin antagonists produced distorted but branched trichomes which phenocopied  trichomes of mutants belonging to the 'distorted' class. Subsequent analysis of  the actin cytoskeleton in trichomes of the distorted mutants, alien, crooked,  distorted1, gnarled, klunker and wurm uncovered actin organization defects in  each case. Treatments of wild-type seedlings with microtubule-interacting drugs  elicited a radically different trichome phenotype characterized by isotropic  growth and a severe inhibition of branch formation; these trichomes did not show  defects in actin cytoskeleton organization. A normal actin cytoskeleton was also  observed in trichomes of the zwichel mutant which have reduced branching.  ZWICHEL, which was previously shown to encode a kinesin-like protein is thought  to be involved in microtubule-linked processes. Based on our results we propose  that microtubules establish the spatial patterning of trichome branches whilst  actin microfilaments elaborate and maintain the overall trichome pattern during  development.", '1999 Dec', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.126.24.5559', 'Chua']

GFP-talin gene: !affects! Actin microfilaments 
Actin microfilaments: !organize! Trichome cell morphogenesis 
Actin antagonists: !produce! Distorted trichomes 
Distorted mutants: !exhibit! Actin organization defects 
Microtubule-interacting drugs: !elicit! Isotropic growth 
ZWICHEL: !encodes! Kinesin-like protein 
Microtubules: !establish! Spatial patterning of trichome branches 
Actin microfilaments: !elaborate and maintain! Overall trichome pattern