['10611295', 'Telomerase is an essential enzyme that maintains telomeres on eukaryotic  chromosomes. In mammals, telomerase is required for the lifelong proliferative  capacity of normal regenerative and reproductive tissues and for sustained growth  in a dedifferentiated state. Although the importance of telomeres was first  elucidated in plants 60 years ago, little is known about the role of telomeres  and telomerase in plant growth and development. Here we report the cloning and  characterization of the Arabidopsis telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene,  AtTERT. AtTERT is predicted to encode a highly basic protein of 131 kDa that  harbors the reverse transcriptase and telomerase-specific motifs common to all  known TERT proteins. AtTERT mRNA is 10-20 times more abundant in callus, which  has high levels of telomerase activity, versus leaves, which contain no  detectable telomerase. Plants homozygous for a transfer DNA insertion into the  AtTERT gene lack telomerase activity, confirming the identity and function of  this gene. Because telomeres in wild-type Arabidopsis are short, the discovery  that telomerase-null plants are viable for at least two generations was  unexpected. In the absence of telomerase, telomeres decline by approximately 500  bp per generation, a rate 10 times slower than seen in telomerase-deficient mice.  This gradual loss of telomeric DNA may reflect a reduced rate of nucleotide  depletion per round of DNA replication, or the requirement for fewer cell  divisions per organismal generation. Nevertheless, progressive telomere  shortening in the mutants, however slow, ultimately should be lethal.', '1999 Dec 21', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.96.26.14813', 'Shippen']

Telomerase: !maintains! Telomeres 
AtTERT: !encodes! Protein 
AtTERT: !localizes to! Callus 
AtTERT: !synthesizes! mRNA 
Transfer DNA: !inserts into! AtTERT 
Telomerase-null Plants: !lack! Telomerase Activity 
Wild-type Arabidopsis: !has short! Telomeres 
Telomerase-deficient Mice: !lose! 500 bp/Generation 
Telomerase-null Plants: !lose! 500 bp/Generation