['10652124', 'beta-Amylase is one of the most abundant starch degrading activities found in  leaves and other plant organs. Despite its abundance, most if not all of this  activity has been reported to be extrachloroplastic and for this reason, it has  been assumed that beta-amylases are not involved in the metabolism of  chloroplast-localized transitory leaf starch. However, we have identified a novel  beta-amylase gene, designated ct-Bmy, which is located on chromosome IV of  Arabidopsis thaliana. Ct-Bmy encodes a precursor protein which contains a typical  N-terminal chloroplast import signal and is highly similar at the amino acid  level to extrachloroplastic beta-amylases of higher plants. Expression of the  ct-Bmy cDNA in E. coli confirmed that the encoded protein possesses beta-amylase  activity. CT-BMY protein, synthesized in vitro, was efficiently imported by  isolated pea chloroplasts and shown to be located in the stroma. In addition,  fusions between the predicted CT-BMY transit peptide and jellyfish green  fluorescent protein (GFP) or the entire CT-BMY protein and GFP showed  accumulation in vivo in chloroplasts of Arabidopsis. Expression of the GUS gene  fused to ct-Bmy promoter sequences was investigated in transgenic tobacco plants.  GUS activity was most strongly expressed in the palisade cell layer in the leaf  blade and in chlorenchyma cells associated with the vascular strands in petioles  and stems. Histochemical staining of whole seedlings showed that GUS activity was  largely confined to the cotyledons during the first 2 weeks of growth and  appeared in the first true leaves at approximately 4 weeks.', '1999 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.1999.00625.x', 'Kavanagh']

ct-Bmy: !encodes! precursor protein 
precursor protein: !contains! N-terminal chloroplast import signal 
ct-Bmy: !synthesizes! CT-BMY protein 
CT-BMY protein: !imported by! isolated pea chloroplasts 
CT-BMY protein: !located in! stroma 
ct-Bmy promoter sequences: !fused to! GUS gene 
GUS gene: !expressed in! transgenic tobacco plants 
GUS activity: !strongly expressed in! palisade cell layer 
GUS activity: !confined to! cotyledons