['10662856', 'AGL15 (AGAMOUS-like 15), a member of the MADS domain family of regulatory  factors, accumulates preferentially throughout the early stages of the plant life  cycle. In this study, we investigated the expression pattern and possible roles  of postembryonic accumulation of AGL15. Using a combination of reporter genes,  RNA gel blot analysis, and immunochemistry, we found that the AGL15 protein  accumulates transiently in the shoot apex in young Arabidopsis and Brassica  seedlings and that promoter activity is associated with the shoot apex and the  base of leaf petioles throughout the vegetative phase. During the reproductive  phase, AGL15 accumulates transiently in floral buds. When AGL15 was expressed in  Arabidopsis under the control of a strong constitutive promoter, we noted a  striking increase in the longevity of the sepals and petals as well as delays in  a selected set of age-dependent developmental processes, including the transition  to flowering and fruit maturation. Although ethylene has been implicated in many  of these same processes, the effects of AGL15 could be clearly distinguished from  the effects of the ethylene resistant1-1 mutation, which confers dominant  insensitivity to ethylene. By comparing the petal breakstrength (the force needed  to remove petals) for flowers of different ages, we determined that ectopic AGL15  had a novel effect: the breakstrength of petals initially declined, as occurs in  the wild type, but was then maintained at an intermediate value over a prolonged  period. Abscission-associated gene expression and structural changes were also  altered in the presence of ectopic AGL15.', '2000 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.12.2.183', 'Fang']

AGL15: !accumulates in! shoot apex 
AGL15: !accumulates in! floral buds 
AGL15: !increases longevity of! sepals and petals 
AGL15: !delays! age-dependent developmental processes 
AGL15: !distinguished from! ethylene resistant1-1 mutation 
AGL15: !maintains! petal breakstrength 
AGL15: !alters! abscission-associated gene expression