['10664126', 'Higher-plant chloroplasts alter the distribution of absorbed radiant energy  between photosynthesis and heat formation in response to changing illumination  level or environmental stress. Fluorescence imaging was used to screen 62  yellow-green T-DNA insertion mutant lines of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. for  reduced photoprotective nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ) capacity.  Pulse-modulation fluorometry was employed to characterize one line (denoted  Lsr1(-)) that exhibited an approximately 50% reduction in NPQ compared to the  wild type (WT). The loss in NPQ capacity was associated with the  DeltapH-dependent phase of quenching (qE). Under the growth conditions employed,  pigment composition and levels of the six photosystem-II light-harvesting  chlorophyll a/b proteins were identical in mutant and WT. Changes in the in-vivo  levels of the xanthophyll pigments violaxanthin, antheraxanthin, and zeaxanthin  in excess light were the same for mutant and WT. However, use of the violaxanthin  de-epoxidase inhibitor dithiothreitol indicated that a zeaxanthin-dependent  component of NPQ was specifically reduced in the mutant. The mutant exhibited  diminished suppression of minimum fluorescence yield (F(o)) in intense light  suggesting an altered threshold in the mechanism of response to light stress in  the mutant. The NPQ-deficient phenotype was meiotically transmissible as a  semidominant trait and mapped near marker T27K12 on chromosome 1. The results  suggest that the mutant is defective in sensing the transthylakoid DeltapH that  reports exposure to excessive illumination.', '2000 Jan', 'Planta', '10.1007/PL00008127', 'Havir']

NPQ: !reduced in! Lsr1(-) mutant 
Lsr1(-): !associated with! reduced NPQ 
Pigment composition: !identical in! WT and mutant 
Xanthophyll pigments: !unchanged in! excess light 
Dithiothreitol: !indicates! zeaxanthin-dependent component of NPQ reduced 
Fo: !diminished in! intense light 
T27K12: !maps near! marker on chromosome 1 
DeltapH: !altered threshold in! response to light stress