['10677553', 'A compatible interaction between a plant and a pathogen is the result of a  complex interplay between many factors of both plant and pathogen origin. Our  objective was to identify host factors involved in this interaction. These  factors may include susceptibility factors required for pathogen growth, factors  manipulated by the pathogen to inactivate or avoid host defenses, or negative  regulators of defense responses. To this end, we identified 20 recessive  Arabidopsis mutants that do not support normal growth of the powdery mildew  pathogen, Erysiphe cichoracearum. Complementation analyses indicated that four  loci, designated powdery mildew resistant 1-4 (pmr1-4), are defined by this  collection. These mutants do not constitutively accumulate elevated levels of PR1  or PDF1.2 mRNA, indicating that resistance is not simply due to constitutive  activation of the salicylic acid- or ethylene- and jasmonic acid-dependent  defense pathways. Further Northern blot analyses revealed that some mutants  accumulate higher levels of PR1 mRNA than wild type in response to infection by  powdery mildew. To test the specificity of the resistance, the pmr mutants were  challenged with other pathogens including Pseudomonas syringae, Peronospora  parasitica, and Erysiphe orontii. Surprisingly, one mutant, pmr1, was susceptible  to E. orontii, a very closely related powdery mildew, suggesting that a very  specific resistance mechanism is operating in this case. Another mutant, pmr4,  was resistant to P. parasitica, indicating that this resistance is more  generalized. Thus, we have identified a novel collection of mutants affecting  genes required for a compatible interaction between a plant and a biotrophic  pathogen.', '2000 Feb 15', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.030531997', 'Somerville']

pmr1: !resists! E. cichoracearum 
pmr1: !susceptible to! E. orontii 
pmr4: !resists! P. parasitica 
pathogen: !manipulates! host defenses 
host: !defends against! pathogen