['10725357', 'The chlorophyll a/b, chlorophyll a/c, and chlorophyll a/a light-harvesting  proteins are part of an extended gene family that also includes the transiently  expressed stress proteins, the Elips (early light-induced proteins). Four Elip  homologue proteins, encoded by single-copy nuclear genes, have been identified in  the Arabidopsis thaliana database. These proteins were divided into two groups  according to the expression pattern under light-stress conditions and the  predicted secondary structure. Group one included two members of the Elip family  with three predicted transmembrane helices and a gene expression strictly related  to light stress. Group two included two proteins, the Seps (stress-enhanced  proteins), which possessed two predicted transmembrane segments. The transcripts  of Sep1 and Sep2 were present under low light conditions, but their level  increased 4- to 10-fold during illumination of plants with high-intensity light.  Preliminary data indicated that the induced transcripts were translated in vivo.  Other physiological stress conditions, such as cold, heat, desiccation, salt,  wounding, or oxidative stress, did not significantly influence the expression of  Sep genes. In vitro import of radioactively labeled precursors of Seps into  isolated chloroplasts confirmed the thylakoid membrane localization of these  proteins. Considering the predicted protein structure and homology to other  pigment-antenna proteins, the two-helix Seps might represent an evolutionary  missing link between the one- and three-helix antenna proteins present in pro-  and eukaryota.', '2000 Mar 28', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.97.7.3741', 'Adamska']

Chlorophyll a/b: !part of! extended gene family 
Elips: !encoded by! single-copy nuclear genes 
Group one: !includes! two Elip family members 
Group two: !includes! two Seps 
Sep1/2: !transcripts present under! low light conditions 
Sep1/2: !level increased! 4- to 10-fold during high-intensity light 
Sep1/2: !translated in vivo! 
Sep1/2: !localized to! thylakoid membrane 
Seps: !evolutionary missing link between! one- and three-helix antenna proteins