['10739959', 'To investigate the biochemical and enzymatic properties of two aldehyde oxidase  (AO) isoforms of Arabidopsis thaliana, we expressed AAO1 and AAO2 cDNAs in a  heterologous yeast (Pichia pastoris) system and successfully obtained the  proteins in active forms. The expressed AAO1 and AAO2 proteins gave activity  bands with the same mobilities on native gel electrophoresis and exhibited the  same substrate preferences on zymograms with 8 aldehydes as those of AOalpha and  AOgamma in Arabidopsis seedlings, respectively. Furthermore, anti-AAO1 and  anti-AAO2 antibodies, which specifically recognize the seedling AOalpha and  AOgamma, respectively, reacted with the AAO1 and AAO2 proteins produced in P.  pastoris, respectively. These results indicate that these AO proteins are  accurately produced in the yeast system, as in Arabidopsis seedlings. Using AO  preparations from P. pastoris, the enzymatic properties of Arabidopsis AOalpha  and AOgamma were investigated. AOalpha showed a relatively wide substrate  specificity for 7 aldehydes tested, with high affinity to benzaldehyde and  indole-3-aldehyde, while AOgamma could most efficiently oxidize naphthaldehyde.  AOalpha was strongly inhibited by iodoacetate and KCN, while AOgamma was  inhibited not only by iodoacetate and KCN but also by 2-mercaptethanol,  dithiothreitol, menadion, and estradiol. AOalpha and AOgamma showed the highest  activity at around 65 and 50 degrees C, respectively, and exhibited pH dependence  around pH 8.0. These results indicate that the two AO isoforms in Arabidopsis  seedlings have different enzymatic properties and may have different  physiological roles in vivo.', '2000 Apr', 'J Biochem', '10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a022654', 'Koshiba']

AAO1: !expresses in! Pichia pastoris
AAO2: !expresses in! Pichia pastoris
AOalpha: !localizes to! Arabidopsis seedlings
AOgamma: !localizes to! Arabidopsis seedlings
AAO1: !recognized by! anti-AAO1 antibodies
AAO2: !recognized by! anti-AAO2 antibodies
AOalpha: !exhibits! wide substrate specificity
AOgamma: !exhibits! narrow substrate specificity
AOalpha: !inhibited by! iodoacetate and KCN
AOgamma: !inhibited by! iodoacetate, KCN, 2-mercaptethanol, dithiothreitol, menadion, and estradiol
AOalpha: !active at! 65 degrees C
AOgamma: !active at! 50 degrees C