['10734119', 'Myristoyl-CoA:protein N-myristoyltransferase (NMT, EC 2.3.1.97) catalyzes the  co-translational addition of myristic acid to the amino-terminal glycine residue  of a number of important proteins of diverse functions. We have isolated a  full-length Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA encoding NMT (AtNMT1), the first described  from a higher plant. This AtNMT1 cDNA clone has an open reading frame of 434  amino acids and a predicted molecular mass of 48,706 Da. The primary structure is  50% identical to the mammalian NMTs. Analyses of Southern blots, genomic clones,  and database sequences suggested that the A. thaliana genome contains two copies  of NMT gene, which are present on different chromosomes and have distinct genomic  organizations. The recombinant AtNMT1 expressed in Escherichia coli exhibited a  high catalytic efficiency for the peptides derived from putative plant  myristoylated proteins AtCDPK6 and Fen kinase. The AtNMT was similar to the  mammalian NMTs with respect to a relative specificity for myristoyl CoA among the  acyl CoA donors and also inhibition by the bovine brain NMT inhibitor NIP(71).  The AtNMT1 expression profile indicated ubiquity in roots, stem, leaves, flowers,  and siliques (approximately 1.7 kb transcript and approximately 50 kDa  immunoreactive polypeptide) but a greater level in the younger tissue, which are  developmentally very active. NMT activity was also evident in all these tissues.  Subcellular distribution studies indicated that, in leaf extracts, approximately  60% of AtNMT activity was associated with the ribosomal fractions, whereas  approximately 30% of the activity was observed in the cytosolic fractions. The  NMT is biologically important to plants, as noted from the stunted development  when the AtNMT1 was down-regulated in transgenic Arabidopsis under the control of  an enhanced CaMV 35S promoter. The results presented in this study provide the  first direct molecular evidence for plant protein N-myristoylation and a  mechanistic basis for understanding the role of this protein modification in  plants.', '2000 Mar 31', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.275.13.9673', 'Datla']

Myristoyl-CoA:protein N-myristoyltransferase (NMT): !catalyzes! co-translational addition of myristic acid 
AtNMT1 cDNA clone: !encodes! NMT 
A. thaliana genome: !contains! two copies of NMT gene 
Recombinant AtNMT1: !exhibited! high catalytic efficiency 
AtNMT1 expression profile: !indicated! ubiquity in roots, stem, leaves, flowers, and siliques 
AtNMT activity: !associated with! ribosomal fractions 
AtNMT1: !down-regulated! in transgenic Arabidopsis