['10758502', "To analyze plant mechanisms for resistance to UV radiation, mutants of  Arabidopsis that are hypersensitive to UV radiation (designated uvh and uvr) have  been isolated. UVR2 and UVR3 products were previously identified as photolyases  that remove UV-induced pyrimidine dimers in the presence of visible light. Plants  also remove dimers in the absence of light by an as yet unidentified dark repair  mechanism and uvh1 mutants are defective in this mechanism. The UVH1 locus was  mapped to chromosome 5 and the position of the UVH1 gene was further delineated  by Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of the uvh1-1 mutant with cosmids from  this location. Cosmid NC23 complemented the UV hypersensitive phenotype and  restored dimer removal in the uvh1-1 mutant. The cosmid encodes a protein similar  to the S. cerevisiae RAD1 and human XPF products, components of an endonuclease  that excises dimers by nucleotide excision repair (NER). The uvh1-1 mutation  creates a G to A transition in intron 5 of this gene, resulting in a new 3'  splice site and introducing an in-frame termination codon. These results provide  evidence that the Arabidopsis UVH1/AtRAD1 product is a subunit of a repair  endonuclease. The previous discovery in Lilium longiflorum of a homolog of human  ERCC1 protein that comprises the second subunit of the repair endonuclease  provides additional evidence for the existence of the repair endonuclease in  plants. The UVH1 gene is strongly expressed in flower tissue and also in other  tissues, suggesting that the repair endonuclease is widely utilized for repair of  DNA damage in plant tissues.", '2000 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00707.x', 'Mount']

UVR2: !synthesizes! photolyases 
UVR3: !synthesizes! photolyases 
UVH1: !localizes to! chromosome 5 
NC23: !complements! UV hypersensitive phenotype 
AtRAD1: !encodes! protein similar to S. cerevisiae RAD1 
XPF: !similar to! human XPF products 
ERCC1: !homolog of! human ERCC1 protein 
UVH1: !strongly expressed in! flower tissue