['10759500', 'Geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) is the precursor for the biosynthesis of  gibberellins, carotenoids, chlorophylls, isoprenoid quinones, and  geranylgeranylated proteins in plants. There is a small gene family for GGPP  synthases encoding five isozymes and one related protein in Arabidopsis, and all  homologs have a putative localization signal to translocate into specific  subcellular compartments. Using a synthetic green fluorescent protein (sGFP), we  studied the subcellular localization of these GGPP synthases. When these fusion  proteins were expressed by the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter in  Arabidopsis, GGPS1-sGFP and GGPS3-sGFP proteins were translocated into the  chloroplast, GGPS2-sGFP and GGPS4-sGFP proteins were localized in the endoplasmic  reticulum, and the GGPS6-sGFP protein was localized in the mitochondria. Both  GGPS1 and GGPS3 proteins synthesized in vitro were taken up into isolated intact  pea chloroplasts and processed to the mature form. RNA-blot and  promoter-beta-glucuronidase (GUS) analysis showed that these GGPP synthases genes  are organ-specifically expressed in Arabidopsis. GGR and GGPS1 were ubiquitously  expressed, while GGPS2, GGPS3, and GGPS4 were expressed specifically in the  flower, root, and flower, respectively. These results suggest that each GGPP  synthase gene is expressed in different tissues during plant development and GGPP  is synthesized by the organelles themselves rather than being transported into  the organelles. Therefore, we predict there will be specific pathways of GGPP  production in each organelle.', '2000 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.122.4.1045', 'Kamiya']

GGPP synthases: !encode! 5 isozymes
GGPS1-sGFP: !localizes to! chloroplast
GGPS2-sGFP: !localizes to! endoplasmic reticulum
GGPS3-sGFP: !localizes to! mitochondria
GGPS1 and GGPS3: !synthesize in vitro! pea chloroplasts
GGR and GGPS1: !expressed ubiquitously! Arabidopsis
GGPS2, GGPS3, GGPS4: !expressed specifically! flower, root, flower