['10758494', 'In higher plants, the correct patterning of the floral meristem in terms of organ  type, number and form is the result of a concerted expression of a network of  genes. We describe phenotypes of flower patterning, resulting from a reduction of  transcript levels of the Arabidopsis SHAGGY-related protein kinase genes  AtSK11(ASKalpha) and AtSK12(ASKgamma). The AtSK genes are plant homologues of the  Drosophila shaggy (SGG) gene and the mammalian Glycogen-Synthase Kinase-3  (GSK-3). The SGG protein kinase is a key component of the wingless signalling  pathway and is required for the establishment of tissue patterning and cell fate  determination. The expression patterns of the AtSK11(ASKalpha) and  AtSK12(ASKgamma) genes during wild-type Arabidopsis inflorescence development,  detected by in situ hybridisation, have been shown to be consistent with a  possible role in floral meristem patterning. AtSK11(ASKalpha) and  AtSK12(ASKgamma) transcripts were detected at the periphery of the inflorescence  meristem and in the floral meristem. At later stages the expression of the AtSK  genes became localised in specific regions of developing flower organ primordia.  Furthermore, we have obtained and analysed transgenic plants containing  AtSK11(ASKalpha) and AtSK12(ASKgamma) gene specific antisense constructs. These  plants developed flowers showing a higher number of perianth organs and an  alteration of the apical-basal patterning of the gynoecium.', '2000 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00691.x', 'Kreis']

AtSK11(ASKalpha): !localizes to! inflorescence meristem 
AtSK12(ASKgamma): !localizes to! inflorescence meristem 
AtSK11(ASKalpha): !localizes to! developing flower organ primordia 
AtSK12(ASKgamma): !localizes to! developing flower organ primordia 
AtSK11(ASKalpha): !enhances! number of perianth organs 
AtSK12(ASKgamma): !enhances! number of perianth organs 
AtSK11(ASKalpha): !enhances! apical-basal patterning of gynoecium 
AtSK12(ASKgamma): !enhances! apical-basal patterning of gynoecium