['10758477', 'In animals and yeast, voltage-dependent chloride channels of the CLC family play  a role in basic cellular functions such as epithelial transport, plasma membrane  excitability, and control of pH and membrane potential in intracellular  compartments. To assess the function of CLCs in plants, we searched for CLC  insertion mutants in a library of Arabidopsis lines transformed by Agrobacterium  tumefaciens transferred DNA (T-DNA). Using a polymerase chain reaction-based  screening procedure, an Arabidopsis line that carries a T-DNA insertion within  the C-terminus of the AtCLC-a coding sequence was identified. Progeny from this  plant line, clca-1, showed dramatically altered transcription of the AtCLC-a  gene. Plants homozygous for the clca-1 mutation exhibited normal development and  a morphology indistinguishable from the wild-type. However, their capacity to  accumulate nitrate under conditions of nitrate excess was reduced in roots and  shoots, by approximately 50%, while chloride, sulphate and phosphate levels were  similar to the wild-type. In addition, the herbicide chlorate, an analogue of  nitrate, induced a faster and more pronounced chlorosis in mutant plants.  Hypersensitivity to chlorate as well as decreased nitrate levels co-segregated  with the T-DNA insertion. They were found at various time points of the clca-1  life cycle, supporting the idea that AtCLC-a has a general role in the control of  the nitrate status in Arabidopsis. Concordant with such a function, AtCLC-a mRNA  was found in roots and shoots, and its levels rapidly increased in both tissues  upon addition of nitrate but not ammonium to the culture medium. The specificity  of AtCLC-a function with respect to nitrate is further supported by a similar  free amino acid content in wild-type and clca-1 plants. Although the cellular  localization of AtCLC-a remains unclear, our results suggest that AtCLC-a plays a  role in controlling the intracellular nitrate status.', '2000 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00680.x', 'Maurel']

AtCLC-a: !controls! nitrate status 
AtCLC-a: !localizes to! roots and shoots 
AtCLC-a: !increases mRNA levels in! roots and shoots 
AtCLC-a: !responds to! nitrate but not ammonium 
AtCLC-a: !induces! chlorosis in mutant plants