['10798613', 'Telomeres and their changes in length throughout the life span of cells have been  intensively investigated in different organisms. Telomere length is assumed to  control replicative senescence in mammalian cells. However, only very few data  are available on the developmental dynamics of plant telomeres. Here, changes of  telomere length and DNA-protein structure of Arabidopsis thaliana telomeres were  analysed in different stages of development, with the main focus resting on the  transition from pre-senescent to senescent leaves. The lengths of the telomeres,  ranging from ca. 2.0 to 6.5 kb, do not significantly change during plant  development indicating that telomere length is not involved in differentiation  and replicative senescence nor in post-mitotic senescence of A. thaliana. In  dedifferentiated cultured cells a slight increase in length can be determined.  The nucleoprotein structure of the telomeric DNA was investigated by gel mobility  shift assays, with synthetic oligonucleotides and nuclear protein extracts  derived from four defined stages of post-mitotic leaf senescence. In all four  stages, a highly salt-resistant DNA-protein complex was formed with the  double-stranded as well as with the single-stranded G-rich telomeric DNA. An  additional DNA-protein complex was identified in nuclear protein extracts  isolated from plants in the transition stage from pre-senescence to senescence.  The protein components of the DNA-protein complexes were analysed on native PAGE  and SDS-PAGE gels. A protein of 67 kDa (ATBP1) bound to the telomeric DNA in all  developmental stages. An additional protein of merely 22 kDa (ATBP2) was  associated via protein-protein interaction with ATBP to form a higher-order  complex exclusively during the onset of senescence. DNA interaction of this  higher-order protein complex seems to be restricted to double-stranded telomeric  DNA. The defined period of ATBP1/ATBP2 complex formation with the telomeric DNA  probably indicates that ATBP2 is involved in the onset of post-mitotic leaf  senescence by either disturbing an established or establishing an additional  function exhibited by the telomeres in the interphase nuclei.', '2000 Feb', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/a:1006324008600', 'Kolb']

Telomere: !controls! Replicative senescence 
Telomere: !does not change! During plant development 
Telomere: !increases in length! In dedifferentiated cultured cells 
Telomeric DNA: !forms! Salt-resistant DNA-protein complex 
ATBP1: !binds to! Telomeric DNA 
ATBP2: !interacts with! ATBP1 
ATBP2: !restricts interaction to! Double-stranded telomeric DNA 
ATBP2: !involved in! Onset of post-mitotic leaf senescence