['10940562', 'The final step of cysteine biosynthesis in plants is catalyzed by O-acetylserine  (thiol) lyase (OAS-TL), which occurs as several isoforms found in the cytosol,  the plastids and the mitochondria. Genomic DNA blot hybridization and isolation  of genomic clones indicate single copy genes (oasA1, oasA2, oasB and oasC) that  encode the activities of OAS-TL A, B and C found in separate subcellular  compartments in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Sequence analysis reveals  that the newly discovered oasA2 gene represents a pseudogene that is still  transcribed, but is not functionally translated. The comparison of gene  structures suggests that oasA1/oasA2 and oasB/oasC are closely related and may be  derived from a common ancestor by subsequent duplications. OAS-TL A, B and C were  overexpressed in an Escherichia coli mutant lacking cysteine synthesis and  exhibited bifunctional OAS-TL and beta-cyanoalanine synthase (CAS) activities.  However, all three proteins represent true OAS-TLs according to kinetic analysis  and are unlikely to function in cyanide detoxification or secondary metabolism.  In addition, it was demonstrated that the mitochondrial OAS-TL C exhibits in vivo  protein-protein interaction capabilities with respect to cysteine synthase  complex formation similar to cytosolic OAS-TL A and plastid OAS-TL B. Multiple  database accessions for each of the A. thaliana OAS-TL isoforms can thus be  attributed to a specified number of oas genes to which functionally defined gene  products are assigned, and which are responsible for compartment-specific  cysteine synthesis.', '2000 Aug 8', 'Gene', '10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00261-4', 'Hell']

OAS-TL A: !localizes to! cytosol 
OAS-TL B: !localizes to! plastids 
OAS-TL C: !localizes to! mitochondria 
oasA1/oasA2: !derived from! common ancestor 
OAS-TL A, B and C: !exhibit! bifunctional OAS-TL and beta-cyanoalanine synthase (CAS) activities 
OAS-TL C: !interacts with! cysteine synthase complex 
oas genes: !synthesize! compartment-specific cysteine