['10952891', "Cell differentiation is generally tightly coordinated with the cell cycle,  typically resulting in a nondividing cell with a unique differentiated  morphology. The unicellular trichomes of Arabidopsis are a well-established model  for the study of plant cell differentiation. Here, we describe a new genetic  locus, SIAMESE (SIM), required for coordinating cell division and cell  differentiation during the development of Arabidopsis trichomes (epidermal  hairs). A recessive mutation in the sim locus on chromosome 5 results in clusters  of adjacent trichomes that appeared to be morphologically identical 'twins'. Upon  closer inspection, the sim mutant was found to produce multicellular trichomes in  contrast to the unicellular trichomes produced by wild-type (WT) plants. Mutant  trichomes consisting of up to 15 cells have been observed. Scanning electron  microscopy of developing sim trichomes suggests that the cell divisions occur  very early in the development of mutant trichomes. WT trichome nuclei continue to  replicate their DNA after mitosis and cytokinesis have ceased, and as a  consequence have a DNA content much greater than 2C. This phenomenon is known as  endoreduplication. Individual nuclei of sim trichomes have a reduced level of  endoreduplication relative to WT trichome nuclei. Endoreduplication is also  reduced in dark-grown sim hypocotyls relative to WT, but not in light-grown  hypocotyls. Double mutants of sim with either of two other mutants affecting  endoreduplication, triptychon (try) and glabra3 (gl3) are consistent with a  function for SIM in endoreduplication. SIM may function as a repressor of mitosis  in the endoreduplication cell cycle. Additionally, the relatively normal  morphology of multicellular sim trichomes indicates that trichome morphogenesis  can occur relatively normally even when the trichome precursor cell continues to  divide. The sim mutant phenotype also has implications for the evolution of  multicellular trichomes.", '2000 Sep', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.127.18.3931', 'Larkin']

Gene: SIM!affects!Cell differentiation 
Gene: SIM!represses!Mitosis 
Gene: SIM!enhances!Endoreduplication 
Gene: SIM!synthesizes!Multicellular trichomes