['10973486', 'The galactolipids, mono- and digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG), are the most  common nonphosphorous lipids in the biosphere and account for 80% of the membrane  lipids found in green plant tissues. These lipids are major constituents of  photosynthetic membranes (thylakoids), and a large body of evidence suggests that  galactolipids are associated primarily with plastid membranes in seed plants. A  null-mutant of Arabidopsis (dgd1), which lacks the DGDG synthase (DGD1) resulting  in a 90% reduction in the amount of DGDG under normal growth conditions,  accumulated DGDG after phosphate deprivation up to 60% of the amount present in  the wild type. This observation suggests the existence of a DGD1-independent  pathway of galactolipid biosynthesis. The fatty acid composition of the newly  formed DGDG was distinct, showing an enrichment of 16-carbon fatty acids in the  C-1 position of the glycerol backbone of DGDG. Roots with their rudimentary  plastids accumulated large amounts of DGDG after phosphate deprivation,  suggesting that this galactolipid may be located in extraplastidic membranes.  Corroborating evidence for this hypothesis was obtained directly by fractionation  of subcellular membranes from leaf tissue and indirectly by lipid analysis of the  phosphate-deprived fad3 mutant primarily deficient in extraplastidic fatty acid  desaturation. The discovery of extraplastidic DGDG biosynthesis induced by  phosphate deprivation has revealed a biochemical mechanism for plants to conserve  phosphate. Apparently, plants replace phospholipids with nonphosphorous  galactolipids if environmental conditions such as phosphate deprivation require  this for survival.', '2000 Sep 12', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.180320497', 'Benning']

DGDG: !accumulates in! thylakoids 
DGD1: !synthesizes! DGDG 
null-mutant: !lacks! DGD1 
DGDG: !enriched with! 16-carbon fatty acids 
roots: !accumulate! DGDG 
subcellular membranes: !fractionate! leaf tissue 
phosphate deprivation: !induces! extraplastidic DGDG biosynthesis 
plants: !replace! phospholipids