['11060241', 'The process of organ positioning has been addressed, using the pin-formed 1  (pin1) mutant as a tool. PIN1 is a transmembrane protein involved in auxin  transport in Arabidopsis. Loss of function severely affects organ initiation, and  pin1 mutants are characterised by an inflorescence meristem that does not  initiate any flowers, resulting in the formation of a naked inflorescence stem.  This phenotype, combined with the proposed role of PIN1 in hormone transport,  makes the mutant an ideal tool to study organ formation and phyllotaxis, and here  we present a detailed analysis of the molecular modifications at the shoot apex  caused by the mutation. We show that meristem structure and function are not  severely affected in the mutant. Major alterations, however, are observed at the  periphery of the pin1 meristem, where organ initiation should occur. Although two  very early markers of organ initiation, LEAFY and AINTEGUMENTA, are expressed at  the periphery of the mutant meristem, the cells are not recruited into distinct  primordia. Instead a ring-like domain expressing those primordium specific genes  is observed around the meristem. This ring-like domain also expresses a boundary  marker, CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON 2, involved in organ separation, showing that the  zone at the meristem periphery has a hybrid identity. This implies that PIN1 is  not only involved in organ outgrowth, but that it is also necessary for organ  separation and positioning. A model is presented in which PIN1 and the local  distribution of auxin control phyllotaxis.', '2000 Dec', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.127.23.5157', 'Traas']

PIN1: !affects! auxin transport 
PIN1: !causes! naked inflorescence stem 
PIN1: !controls! organ initiation 
PIN1: !regulates! meristem structure 
LEAFY/AINTEGUMENTA: !expressed at! periphery of pin1 meristem 
CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON 2: !expressed in! ring-like domain 
PIN1: !involved in! organ separation and positioning 
PIN1/auxin: !control! phyllotaxis