['11063708', 'In an attempt to identify genes involved in the control of leaf morphogenesis, we  have studied 13 Arabidopsis thaliana mutants with curled, involute leaves, a  phenotype herein referred to as Incurvata (Icu), which were isolated by G.  Robbelen and belong to the Arabidopsis Information Service Form Mutants  collection. The Icu phenotype was inherited as a single recessive trait in 10  mutants, with semidominance in 2 mutants and with complete dominance in the  remaining 1. Complementation analyses indicated that the studied mutations  correspond to five genes, representative alleles of which were mapped relative to  polymorphic microsatellites. Although most double-mutant combinations displayed  additivity of the Icu phenotypes, those of icu1 icu2 and icu3 icu4 double mutants  were interpreted as synergistic, which suggests that the five genes studied  represent three independent genetic operations that are at work for the leaf to  acquire its final form at full expansion. We have shown that icu1 mutations are  alleles of the Polycomb group gene CURLY LEAF (CLF) and that the leaf phenotype  of the icu2 mutant is suppressed in an agamous background, as is known for clf  mutants. In addition, we have tested by means of multiplex RT-PCR the  transcription of several floral genes in Icu leaves. Ectopic expression of  AGAMOUS and APETALA3 was observed in clf and icu2, but not in icu3, icu4, and  icu5 mutants. Taken together, these results suggest that CLF and ICU2 play  related roles, the latter being a candidate to belong to the Polycomb group of  regulatory genes. We propose that, as flowers evolved, a new major class of  genes, including CLF and ICU2, may have been recruited to prevent the expression  of floral homeotic genes in the leaves.', '2000 Nov', 'Genetics', '10.1093/genetics/156.3.1363', 'Micol']

Icu: !inherited as! single recessive trait 
Icu: !corresponds to! five genes 
icu1: !alleles of! Polycomb group gene CURLY LEAF (CLF) 
icu2: !suppressed in! agamous background 
icu2: !candidate for! Polycomb group of regulatory genes 
CLF: !prevents expression of! floral homeotic genes in leaves