['11118438', 'The phosphorylation-specific peptidyl prolyl cis/trans isomerase (PPIase) Pin1 in  humans and its homologues in yeast and animal species play an important role in  cell cycle regulation. These PPIases consist of an NH(2)-terminal WW domain that  binds to specific phosphoserine- or phosphothreonine-proline motifs present in a  subset of phosphoproteins and a COOH-terminal PPIase domain that specifically  isomerizes the phosphorylated serine/threonine-proline peptide bonds. Here, we  describe the isolation of MdPin1, a Pin1 homologue from the plant species apple  (Malus domestica) and show that it has the same phosphorylation-specific  substrate specificity and can be inhibited by juglone in vitro, as is the case  for Pin1. A search in the plant expressed sequence tag data bases reveals that  the Pin1-type PPIases are present in various plants, and there are multiple genes  in one organism, such as soybean (Glycine max) and tomato (Lycopersicon  esculentum). Furthermore, all these plant Pin1-type PPIases, including AtPin1 in  Arabidopsis thaliana, do not have a WW domain, but all contain a four-amino acid  insertion next to the phospho-specific recognition site of the active site.  Interestingly, like Pin1, both MdPin1 and AtPin1 are able to rescue the lethal  mitotic phenotype of a temperature-sensitive mutation in the Pin1 homologue  ESS1/PTF1 gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. However, deleting the extra four  amino acid residues abolished the ability of AtPin1 to rescue the yeast mutation  under non-overexpression conditions, indicating that these extra amino acids may  be important for mediating the substrate interaction of plant enzymes. Finally,  expression of MdPin1 is tightly associated with cell division both during apple  fruit development in vivo and during cell cultures in vitro. These results have  demonstrated that phosphorylation-specific PPIases are highly conserved  functionally in yeast, animal, and plant species. Furthermore, the experiments  suggest that although plant Pin1-type enzymes do not have a WW domain, they may  fulfill the same functions as Pin1 and its homologues do in other organisms.', '2001 Apr 27', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M007006200', 'Lu']

Pin1: !binds to! phosphoserine- or phosphothreonine-proline motifs 
Pin1: !isomerizes! phosphorylated serine/threonine-proline peptide bonds 
MdPin1: !rescues! lethal mitotic phenotype of ESS1/PTF1 gene 
AtPin1: !rescues! lethal mitotic phenotype of ESS1/PTF1 gene 
AtPin1: !requires! extra four amino acid residues for substrate interaction 
MdPin1: !associated with! cell division in apple fruit development and cell cultures