['11115895', 'Saccharomyces cerevisiae opi3 mutant strains do not have the phospholipid  N-methyltransferase that catalyzes the two terminal methylations in the  phosphatidylcholine (PC) biosynthetic pathway. This results in a build up of the  intermediate phosphatidylmonomethylethanolamine, causing a temperature-sensitive  growth phenotype. An Arabidopsis cDNA library was used to isolate three  overlapping plasmids that complemented the temperature-sensitive phenotype.  Phospholipid analysis showed that the presence of the cloned cDNA caused a  65-fold reduction in the level of phosphatidylmonomethylethanolamine and a  significant, though not equivalent, increase in the production of PC. Sequence  analysis established that the cDNA was not homologous to OPI3 or to CHO2, the  only other yeast phospholipid N-methyltransferase, but was similar to several  other classes of methyltransferases. S-adenosyl-Met:phospho-base  N-methyltransferase assays revealed that the cDNA catalyzed the three sequential  methylations of phospho-ethanolamine to form phospho-choline. Phospho-choline is  converted to PC by the CDP-choline pathway, explaining the phenotype conferred  upon the yeast mutant strain by the cDNA. In accordance with this the gene has  been named AtNMT1. The identification of this enzyme and the failure to isolate a  plant phospholipid N-methyltransferase suggests that there are fundamental  differences between the pathways utilized by yeast and by some plants for  synthesis of PC.', '2000 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.124.4.1800', 'McGraw']

opi3 mutant: !lacks! N-methyltransferase 
Arabidopsis cDNA library: !isolates! three overlapping plasmids 
cDNA: !reduces! phosphatidylmonomethylethanolamine 
cDNA: !increases! production of PC 
cDNA: !not homologous to! OPI3 or CHO2 
S-adenosyl-Met:phospho-base N-methyltransferase assays: !reveal! cDNA catalyzes three sequential methylations 
AtNMT1 gene: !identifies! enzyme 
plant phospholipid N-methyltransferase: !fails to isolate!