['11134508', 'Histone acetylation and deacetylation play essential roles in eukaryotic gene  regulation. Reversible modifications of core histones are catalyzed by two  intrinsic enzymes, histone acetyltransferase and histone deacetylase (HD). In  general, histone deacetylation is related to transcriptional gene silencing,  whereas acetylation correlates with gene activation. We produced transgenic  plants expressing the antisense Arabidopsis HD (AtHD1) gene. AtHD1 is a homolog  of human HD1 and RPD3 global transcriptional regulator in yeast. Expression of  the antisense AtHD1 caused dramatic reduction in endogenous AtHD1 transcription,  resulting in accumulation of acetylated histones, notably tetraacetylated H4.  Reduction in AtHD1 expression and AtHD1 production and changes in acetylation  profiles were associated with various developmental abnormalities, including  early senescence, ectopic expression of silenced genes, suppression of apical  dominance, homeotic changes, heterochronic shift toward juvenility, flower  defects, and male and female sterility. Some of the phenotypes could be  attributed to ectopic expression of tissue-specific genes (e.g., SUPERMAN) in  vegetative tissues. No changes in genomic DNA methylation were detected in the  transgenic plants. These results suggest that AtHD1 is a global regulator, which  controls gene expression during development through DNA-sequence independent or  epigenetic mechanisms in plants. In addition to DNA methylation, histone  modifications may be involved in a general regulatory mechanism responsible for  plant plasticity and variation in nature.', '2001 Jan 2', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.98.1.200', 'Chen']

Histone acetyltransferase: !catalyzes! histone deacetylation 
histone deacetylase: !regulates! transcriptional gene silencing 
AtHD1: !reduces! endogenous AtHD1 transcription 
acetylated histones: !accumulate! with reduction in AtHD1 expression 
AtHD1: !controls! gene expression during development 
DNA methylation: !not detected! in transgenic plants 
histone modifications: !may be involved! in plant plasticity