['11156608', 'Plants perceive light via specialized photoreceptors of which the phytochromes  (phyA-E), absorbing far-red (FR) and red light (R) are best understood. Several  nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins have been characterized whose deficiencies lead  to changes in light-dependent morphological responses and gene expression.  However, no plastid protein has yet been identified to play a role in phytochrome  signal transduction. We have isolated a new Arabidopsis mutant, laf (long after  FR) 6, with reduced responsiveness preferentially toward continuous FR light. The  disrupted gene in laf6 encodes a novel plant ATP-binding-cassette (atABC1)  protein of 557 amino acids with high homology to ABC-like proteins from lower  eukaryotes. In contrast to lower eukaryotic ABCs, however, atABC1 contains an  N-terminal transit peptide, which targets it to chloroplasts. atABC1 deficiency  in laf6 results in an accumulation of the chlorophyll precursor protoporphyrin IX  and in attenuation of FR-regulated gene expression. The long hypocotyl phenotype  of laf6 and the accumulation of protoporphyrin IX in the mutant can be  recapitulated by treating wild-type (WT) seedlings with flumioxazin, a  protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase (PPO) inhibitor. Moreover, protoporphyrin IX  accumulation in flumioxazin-treated WT seedlings can be reduced by overexpression  of atABC1. Consistent with the notion that ABC proteins are involved in  transport, these observations suggest that functional atABC1 is required for the  transport and correct distribution of protoporphyrin IX, which may act as a  light-specific signaling factor involved in coordinating intercompartmental  communication between plastids and the nucleus.', '2001 Jan 1', 'Genes Dev', '10.1101/gad.850101', 'Chua']

phytochromes: !perceive! light 
nuclear proteins: !affect! light-dependent morphological responses 
cytoplasmic proteins: !affect! gene expression 
atABC1: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
atABC1: !represses! FR-regulated gene expression 
flumioxazin: !inhibits! protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase 
atABC1: !reduces! protoporphyrin IX accumulation 
protoporphyrin IX: !acts as! light-specific signaling factor 
plastids: !communicate with! nucleus