['11169180', 'The Rad50 protein is involved in the cellular response to DNA-double strand  breaks (DSBs), including the detection of damage, activation of cell-cycle  checkpoints, and DSB repair via recombination. It is essential for meiosis in  yeast, is involved in telomere maintenance, and is essential for cellular  viability in mice. Here we present the isolation, sequence and characterization  of the Arabidopsis thaliana RAD50 homologue (AtRAD50) and an Arabidopsis mutant  of this gene. A single copy of this gene is present in the Arabidopsis genome,  located on chromosome II. Northern analysis shows a single 4.3 Kb mRNA species in  all plant tissues tested, which is strongly enriched in flowers and other tissues  with many dividing cells. The predicted protein presents strong conservation with  the other known Rad50 homologues of the amino- and carboxy-terminal regions.  Mutant plants present a sterility phenotype which co-segregates with the T-DNA  insertion. Molecular analysis of the mutant plants shows that the sterility  phenotype is present only in the plants homozygous for the T-DNA insertion. An in  vitro mutant cell line, derived from the mutant plant, shows a clear  hypersensitivity to the DNA-damaging agent methylmethane sulphonate, suggesting a  role of RAD50 in double-strand break repair in plant cells. This is the first  report of a plant mutated in a protein of the Rad50-Mre11-Xrs2 complex, as well  as the first data suggesting the involvement of the Rad50 homologue protein in  meiosis and DNA repair in plants.', '2001 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.00928.x', 'White']

Rad50: !essential for! meiosis in yeast 
Rad50: !essential for! cellular viability in mice 
AtRAD50: !located on! chromosome II 
AtRAD50: !enriched in! flowers and other tissues with many dividing cells 
AtRAD50: !strongly conserved! amino- and carboxy-terminal regions 
AtRAD50 mutant plants: !present! sterility phenotype 
AtRAD50 mutant plants: !co-segregates with! T-DNA insertion 
AtRAD50 mutant cell line: !hypersensitive to! DNA-damaging agent methylmethane sulphonate 
AtRAD50: !involved in! double-strand break repair in plant cells