['11247608', 'A vast array of triterpenes are found in living organisms in addition to  lanosterol and cycloartenol, which are involved in sterol biosynthesis in  non-photosynthetic and photosynthetic eukaryotes respectively. The chemical  structure of these triterpenes is determined by a single step catalysed by  2,3-oxidosqualene-triterpene cyclases. The present study describes cloning and  functional expression in yeast of several OS-triterpene cyclases. Three  Arabidopsis thaliana cDNAs encoding proteins (ATLUP1, ATLUP2, ATPEN1) 57%, 58%  and 49% identical to cycloartenol synthase from the same plant were isolated.  Expression of these cDNAs in yeast showed that the recombinant proteins catalyse  the synthesis of various pentacyclic triterpenes. Whereas ATLUP1 is essentially  involved in the synthesis of lupeol, ATLUP2 catalyses the production of lupeol,  beta- and alpha-amyrin (in a 15:55:30 ratio). ATLUP2 is therefore a typical  multifunctional enzyme. Under the same conditions, ATPEN1 did not lead to any  product. Systematic sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome has led to genomic  sequences encoding proteins identical to the above triterpene synthases. ATLUPI  and ATLUP2 are representative of a small subfamily (A) of at least five genes,  whereas ATPEN1 is representative of a subfamily (B) of at least seven genes. The  number of introns is characteristic of each subfamily. Whereas genes of family A  possess 17 exons and 16 introns, genes of the subfamily B contain 14 exons and 13  introns. The size of each exon is remarkably conserved within each subfamily  whereas that of each intron appears to be highly variable. Organization of the  genes, sequences and functions of the deduced proteins are discussed in  evolutionary terms.', '2001 Jan', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/a:1006476123930', 'Benveniste']

ATLUP1: !synthesizes! lupeol 
ATLUP2: !synthesizes! lupeol, beta-amyrin, alpha-amyrin 
ATPEN1: !does not lead to! product 
ATLUPI: !belongs to! subfamily A 
ATLUP2: !belongs to! subfamily A 
ATPEN1: !belongs to! subfamily B