['11251105', 'Secondary metabolites are a diverse set of plant compounds believed to have  numerous functions in plant-environment interactions. The large chemical  diversity of secondary metabolites undoubtedly arises from an equally diverse set  of enzymes responsible for their biosynthesis. However, little is known about the  evolution of enzymes involved in secondary metabolism. We are studying the  biosynthesis of glucosinolates, a large group of secondary metabolites, in  Arabidopsis to investigate the evolution of enzymes involved in secondary  metabolism. Arabidopsis contains natural variations in the presence of  methylsulfinylalkyl, alkenyl, and hydroxyalkyl glucosinolates. In this article,  we report the identification of genes encoding two 2-oxoglutarate--dependent  dioxygenases that are responsible for this variation. These genes, AOP2 and AOP3,  which map to the same position on chromosome IV, result from an apparent gene  duplication and control the conversion of methylsulfinylalkyl glucosinolate to  either the alkenyl or the hydroxyalkyl form. By heterologous expression in  Escherichia and the correlation of gene expression patterns to the glucosinolate  phenotype, we show that AOP2 catalyzes the conversion of methylsulfinylalkyl  glucosinolates to alkenyl glucosinolates. Conversely, AOP3 directs the formation  of hydroxyalkyl glucosinolates from methylsulfinylalkyl glucosinolates. No  ecotype coexpressed both genes. Furthermore, the absence of functional AOP2 and  AOP3 leads to the accumulation of the precursor methylsulfinylalkyl  glucosinolates. A third member of this gene family, AOP1, is present in at least  two forms and found in all ecotypes examined. However, its catalytic role is  still uncertain.', '2001 Mar', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.13.3.681', 'Mitchell-Olds']

AOP2: !catalyzes! conversion of methylsulfinylalkyl glucosinolates to alkenyl glucosinolates
AOP3: !catalyzes! conversion of methylsulfinylalkyl glucosinolates to hydroxyalkyl glucosinolates
AOP1: !present in! at least two forms 
AOP2/AOP3: !result from! gene duplication
AOP2/AOP3: !control! conversion of methylsulfinylalkyl glucosinolate