['11278556', 'An Arabidopsis thaliana gene (AtLPP1) was isolated on the basis that it was  transiently induced by ionizing radiation. The putative AtLPP1 gene product  showed homology to the yeast and mammalian lipid phosphate phosphatase enzymes  and possessed a phosphatase signature sequence motif. Heterologous expression and  biochemical characterization of the AtLPP1 gene in yeast showed that it encoded  an enzyme (AtLpp1p) that exhibited both diacylglycerol pyrophosphate phosphatase  and phosphatidate phosphatase activities. Kinetic analysis indicated that  diacylglycerol pyrophosphate was the preferred substrate for AtLpp1p in vitro. A  second Arabidopsis gene (AtLPP2) was identified based on sequence homology to  AtLPP1 that was also heterologously expressed in yeast. The AtLpp2p enzyme also  utilized diacylglycerol pyrophosphate and phosphatidate but with no preference  for either substrate. The AtLpp1p and AtLpp2p enzymes showed differences in their  apparent affinities for diacylglycerol pyrophosphate and phosphatidate as well as  other enzymological properties. Northern blot analyses showed that the AtLPP1  gene was preferentially expressed in leaves and roots, whereas the AtLPP2 gene  was expressed in all tissues examined. AtLPP1, but not AtLPP2, was regulated in  response to various stress conditions. The AtLPP1 gene was transiently induced by  genotoxic stress (gamma ray or UV-B) and elicitor treatments with mastoparan and  harpin. The regulation of the AtLPP1 gene in response to stress was consistent  with the hypothesis that its encoded lipid phosphate phosphatase enzyme may  attenuate the signaling functions of phosphatidate and/or diacylglycerol  pyrophosphate that form in response to stress in plants.', '2001 Jun 8', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M009726200', 'Kazmaier']

AtLPP1: !encodes! enzyme 
AtLpp1p: !exhibits! diacylglycerol pyrophosphate phosphatase and phosphatidate phosphatase activities 
AtLPP2: !encodes! enzyme 
AtLpp2p: !utilizes! diacylglycerol pyrophosphate and phosphatidate 
AtLPP1: !preferentially expressed in! leaves and roots 
AtLPP2: !expressed in! all tissues 
AtLPP1: !regulated by! genotoxic stress, mastoparan, harpin 
AtLPP1: !attenuates signaling functions of! phosphatidate and/or diacylglycerol pyrophosphate