['11340190', 'Profilin (PRF) is a low-molecular-weight actin binding protein encoded by a  diverse gene family in plants. Arabidopsis PRF1 transcripts are moderately well  expressed in all vegetative organs. A regulatory mutant in PRF1, prf1-1, was  isolated from a library of T-DNA insertions. The insertion disrupted the promoter  region of PRF1 100 bp upstream from the transcriptional start site. Although  steady state levels of PRF1 transcripts appeared normal in mature prf1-1 plants,  the levels in young seedlings were only one-half those observed in wild type.  Reactions with a PRF1 isovariant-specific monoclonal antiserum and general  anti-profilin antisera demonstrated that PRF1 protein levels also were one-half  those found in wild-type seedlings, although total profilin levels were  unaffected. Mutant seedlings no longer could downregulate PRF1 levels in the  light, as did wild type. Consistent with their molecular phenotypes, young mutant  seedlings displayed several morphological phenotypes but developed into  apparently normal adult plants. Their initial germination rate and development  were slow, and they produced excessive numbers of root hairs. Mutant seedlings  had abnormally raised cotyledons, elongated hypocotyls, and elongated cells in  the hypocotyl, typical of phenotypes associated with some defects in light and  circadian responses. A wild-type PRF1 transgene fully complements the hypocotyl  phenotypes in the prf1-1 mutant. The ability of profilin to regulate actin  polymerization and participate directly in signal transduction pathways is  discussed in light of the prf1-1 phenotypes.', '2001 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.13.5.1179', 'Meagher']

PRF1: !encodes! low-molecular-weight actin binding protein 
prf1-1: !disrupts! PRF1 promoter region 
PRF1: !regulates! actin polymerization 
PRF1: !participates in! signal transduction pathways 
PRF1: !downregulates! PRF1 levels in light 
wild-type PRF1 transgene: !complements! hypocotyl phenotypes in prf1-1 mutant