['11352464', 'The proteolytic machinery of plant organelles is largely unknown, although  indications so far point to several proteases of bacterial origin. In this study  an Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA was isolated that encodes a homologue of bacterial  ClpX, a molecular chaperone and regulatory subunit of the ATP-dependent,  serine-type Clp protease. Computer analysis of the predicted plant ClpX revealed  a putative mitochondrial transit peptide at the N-terminus, as well as overall  sequence similarity to other eukaryotic ClpX homologues. Specific polyclonal  antibodies were made to the Arabidopsis ClpX protein and used to confirm its  localization in plant mitochondria. In addition to ClpX, a ClpP protein located  in mitochondria was also identified from the numerous ClpP isomers in  Arabidopsis. Localization of this nuclear-encoded protein, termed ClpP2, was  determined first by its close sequence similarity to mitochondrial ClpP human,  and later experimentally using ClpP2-specific antibodies with isolated plant  organellar fractions. In Arabidopsis, transcripts for both clpX and clpP2 genes  were detected in various tissues and under different growth conditions, with no  significant variation in mRNA level (i.e. 2-fold) for each gene between samples.  Using beta-casein as a substrate, plant mitochondria were found to possess an  ATP-stimulated, serine-type proteolytic activity that could be strongly inhibited  by antibodies specific for ClpX or ClpP2, suggesting an active ClpXP protease.  The recent discovery of homologous mitochondrial ClpX and ClpP proteins in  mammals suggests that this type of protease may be common to multicellular  eukaryotes.', '2001 Mar', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/a:1010677220323', 'Adam']

ClpX: !encodes! Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA 
ClpX: !localizes to! Plant mitochondria 
ClpP2: !localizes to! Plant mitochondria 
ClpX: !synthesizes! mRNA 
ClpP2: !synthesizes! mRNA 
ClpX: !interacts with! ClpP2 
ClpXP: !enhances! ATP-stimulated, serine-type proteolytic activity