['11402218', 'An alpha-xylosidase active against xyloglucan oligosaccharides was purified from  cabbage (Brassica oleracea var. capitata) leaves. Two peptide sequences were  obtained from this protein, the N-terminal and an internal one, and these were  used to identify an Arabidopsis gene coding for an alpha-xylosidase that we  propose to call AtXYL1. It has been mapped to a region of chromosome I between  markers at 100.44 and 107.48 cM. AtXYL1 comprised three exons and encoded a  peptide that was 915 amino acids long, with a potential signal peptide of 22  amino acids and eight possible N-glycosylation sites. The protein encoded by  AtXYL1 showed the signature regions of family 31 glycosyl hydrolases, which  comprises not only alpha-xylosidases, but also alpha-glucosidases. The  alpha-xylosidase activity is present in apoplastic extractions from Arabidopsis  seedlings, as suggested by the deduced signal peptide. The first eight leaves  from Arabidopsis plants were harvested to analyze alpha-xylosidase activity and  AtXYL1 expression levels. Both increased from older to younger leaves, where  xyloglucan turnover is expected to be higher. When this gene was introduced in a  suitable expression vector and used to transform Saccharomyces cerevisiae,  significantly higher alpha-xylosidase activity was detected in the yeast cells.  alpha-Glucosidase activity was also increased in the transformed cells, although  to a lesser extent. These results show that AtXYL1 encodes for an apoplastic  alpha-xylosidase active against xyloglucan oligosaccharides that probably also  has activity against p-nitrophenyl-alpha-D-glucoside.', '2001 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.126.2.910', 'Zarra']

AtXYL1: !encodes! alpha-xylosidase 
AtXYL1: !localizes to! chromosome I 
AtXYL1: !synthesizes! peptide 
alpha-xylosidase: !present in! apoplastic extractions 
alpha-xylosidase: !active against! xyloglucan oligosaccharides 
alpha-xylosidase: !enhances! alpha-glucosidase activity 
alpha-xylosidase: !increases! from older to younger leaves 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae: !transformed with! AtXYL1 expression vector 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae: !shows! increased alpha-xylosidase activity