['11404361', 'The Arabidopsis chy1 mutant is resistant to indole-3-butyric acid, a naturally  occurring form of the plant hormone auxin. Because the mutant also has defects in  peroxisomal beta-oxidation, this resistance presumably results from a reduced  conversion of indole-3-butyric acid to indole-3-acetic acid. We have cloned CHY1,  which appears to encode a peroxisomal protein 43% identical to a mammalian valine  catabolic enzyme that hydrolyzes beta-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA. We demonstrated that  a human beta-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase functionally complements chy1 when  redirected from the mitochondria to the peroxisomes. We expressed CHY1 as a  glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein and demonstrated that purified  GST-CHY1 hydrolyzes beta-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA. Mutagenesis studies showed that a  glutamate that is catalytically essential in homologous enoyl-CoA hydratases was  also essential in CHY1. Mutating a residue that is differentially conserved  between hydrolases and hydratases established that this position is relevant to  the catalytic distinction between the enzyme classes. It is likely that CHY1 acts  in peroxisomal valine catabolism and that accumulation of a toxic intermediate,  methacrylyl-CoA, causes the altered beta-oxidation phenotypes of the chy1 mutant.  Our results support the hypothesis that the energy-intensive sequence unique to  valine catabolism, where an intermediate CoA ester is hydrolyzed and a new CoA  ester is formed two steps later, avoids methacrylyl-CoA accumulation.', '2001 Aug 17', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M104679200', 'Bartel']

CHY1: !encodes! peroxisomal protein 
CHY1: !hydrolyzes! beta-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA 
mutagenesis studies: !show! glutamate essential in homologous enoyl-CoA hydratases 
mutating residue: !relevant to! catalytic distinction between enzyme classes 
CHY1: !acts in! peroxisomal valine catabolism 
accumulation of toxic intermediate: !causes! altered beta-oxidation phenotypes 
energy-intensive sequence: !avoids! methacrylyl-CoA accumulation