['11402206', 'Ultraviolet B radiation (UV-B, 290-315 nm) can cause damage and induce  photomorphogenic responses in plants. The mechanisms that mediate the  photomorphogenic effects of UV-B are unclear. In etiolated Arabidopsis seedlings,  a daily exposure to 2.5 h of UV-B enhanced the cotyledon opening response induced  by a subsequent red light (R) pulse. An R pulse alone, 2.5 h of UV-B terminated  with a far-red pulse, or 2.5 h of continuous R caused very little cotyledon  opening. The enhancing effect of UV-B increased with fluence rate up to  approximately 7.58 micromol m(-2) s(-1); at higher fluence rates the response to  UV-B was greatly reduced. The phyA, phyA cry1, and cry1 cry2 mutants behaved like  the wild type when exposed to UV-B followed by an R pulse. In contrast, phyB,  phyB cry1, and phyB phyA mutants failed to open the cotyledons. Thus, phytochrome  B was required for the cotyledon opening response to UV-B --> R treatments,  whereas phytochrome A and cryptochromes 1 and 2 were not necessary under the  conditions of our experiments. The enhancing effect of low doses of UV-B on  cotyledon opening in uvr1 uvr2 and uvr1 uvr3 mutants, deficient in DNA repair,  was similar to that found in the wild type, suggesting that this effect of UV-B  was not elicited by signals derived from UV-B-induced DNA lesions (cyclobutane  pyrimidine dimers and 6-4 photoproducts). We conclude that low doses of UV-B,  perceived by a receptor system different from phytochromes, cryptochromes, or  DNA, enhance a de-etiolation response that is induced by active phytochrome B.', '2001 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.126.2.780', 'Ballare']

UV-B: !enhances! cotyledon opening response
phytochrome B: !required for! cotyledon opening response to UV-B --> R treatments
phytochrome A: !not necessary for! cotyledon opening response to UV-B --> R treatments
cryptochromes 1 and 2: !not necessary for! cotyledon opening response to UV-B --> R treatments
DNA: !not source of! signals eliciting cotyledon opening response to UV-B