['11430991', "Cinnamoyl-CoA reductase (CCR; EC 1.2.1.44) catalyses the conversion of  cinnamoyl-CoAs into their corresponding cinnamaldehydes, i.e. the first step of  the phenylpropanoid pathway specifically dedicated to the monolignol biosynthetic  branch. In previous work, we described the isolation and characterisation of the  first cDNA encoding CCR in Eucalyptus (Lacombe, E., Hawkins, S., Van Dorsselaere,  J., Piquemal, J., Goffner, D., Poeydomenge, O., Boudet, A.M., Grima-Pettenati,  J., 1997. Cinnamoyl CoA reductase, the first committed enzyme of the lignin  branch biosynthetic pathway: cloning, expression and phylogenetic relationships.  Plant Journal 11, 429--441) and shown the role of this enzyme in controlling the  carbon flux into lignins (Piquemal, J., Lapierre, C., Myton, K., O'Connell, A.,  Schuch, W., Grima-Pettenati, J., Boudet, A.M., 1998. Down-regulation of  cinnamoyl-CoA reductase induces significant changes of lignin profiles in  transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Journal 13, 71--83). Here, we report the  characterisation of two functionally and structurally distinct cDNA clones,  AtCCR1 and AtCCR2 (81.6% protein sequence identity) in Arabidopsis thaliana. The  two recombinant proteins expressed in Escherichia coli are able to use the three  cinnamoyl-CoAs tested but with different levels of efficiency. AtCCR1 is five  times more efficient with feruloyl-CoA and sinapoyl-CoA than AtCCR2. In addition,  the two genes are differentially expressed during development and in response to  infection. AtCCR1 is preferentially expressed in tissues undergoing  lignification. In contrast, AtCCR2, which is poorly expressed during development,  is strongly and transiently induced during the incompatible interaction with  Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris leading to a hypersensitive response.  Altogether, these data suggest that AtCCR1 is involved in constitutive  lignification whereas AtCCR2 is involved in the biosynthesis of phenolics whose  accumulation may lead to resistance.", '2001 Aug', 'Phytochemistry', '10.1016/s0031-9422(01)00053-x', 'Grima-Pettenati']

Cinnamoyl-CoA reductase: !catalyses! Conversion 
AtCCR1: !enhances! Lignification 
AtCCR2: !induces! Hypersensitive Response 
AtCCR1: !expressed in! Tissues undergoing lignification 
AtCCR2: !strongly expressed in! Incompatible Interaction