['11500541', 'Geranylgeranyltransferase-I (GGT-I) is a heterodimeric enzyme that shares a  common alpha-subunit with farnesyltransferase (FTase) and has a distinct  beta-subunit. GGT-I preferentially modifies proteins, which terminate in a CaaL  box sequence motif. Cloning of Arabidopsis GGT-I beta-subunit (AtGGT-IB) was  achieved by a yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) two-hybrid screen, using the  tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) FTase alpha-subunit (FTA) as bait. Sequence and  structure analysis revealed that the core active site of GGT-I and FTase are very  similar. AtGGT-IA/FTA and AtGGT-IB were co-expressed in baculovirus-infected  insect cells to obtain recombinant protein that was used for biochemical and  molecular analysis. The recombinant AtGGT-I prenylated efficiently CaaL box  fusion proteins in which the a(2) position was occupied by an aliphatic residue,  whereas charged or polar residues at the same position greatly reduced the  efficiency of prenylation. A polybasic domain proximal to the CaaL box motif  induced a 5-fold increase in the maximal reaction rate, and increased the  affinity of the enzyme to the protein substrate by an order of magnitude. GGT-I  retained high activity in a temperature range between 24 degrees C and 42 degrees  C, and showed increased activity rate at relatively basic pH values of 7.9 and  8.5. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, protein immuno-blots, and  transient expression assays of green fluorescent protein fusion proteins show  that GGT-IB is ubiquitously expressed in a number of tissues, and that expression  levels and protein activity were not changed in mutant plants lacking FTase  beta-subunit.', '2001 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.126.4.1416', 'Yalovsky']

GGT-I: !modifies! proteins 
AtGGT-IB: !cloned by! yeast two-hybrid screen 
GGT-I/FTase: !share! alpha-subunit 
AtGGT-IA/FTA: !co-expressed in! baculovirus-infected insect cells 
CaaL box motif: !prenylated efficiently by! GGT-I 
polybasic domain: !induces! 5-fold increase in maximal reaction rate 
GGT-I: !retains high activity! 24-42 degrees C 
GGT-IB: !ubiquitously expressed in! a number of tissues 
mutant plants: !lack! FTase beta-subunit