['11511543', 'Plants have evolved a number of adaptive responses to cope with growth in  conditions of limited phosphate (Pi) supply involving biochemical, metabolic, and  developmental changes. We prepared an EMS-mutagenized M(2) population of an  Arabidopsis thaliana transgenic line harboring a reporter gene specifically  responsive to Pi starvation (AtIPS1::GUS), and screened for mutants altered in Pi  starvation regulation. One of the mutants, phr1 (phosphate starvation response  1), displayed reduced response of AtIPS1::GUS to Pi starvation, and also had a  broad range of Pi starvation responses impaired, including the responsiveness of  various other Pi starvation-induced genes and metabolic responses, such as the  increase in anthocyanin accumulation. PHR1 was positionally cloned and shown be  related to the PHOSPHORUS STARVATION RESPONSE 1 (PSR1) gene from Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii. A GFP::PHR1 protein fusion was localized in the nucleus  independently of Pi status, as is the case for PSR1. PHR1 is expressed in Pi  sufficient conditions and, in contrast to PSR1, is only weakly responsive to Pi  starvation. PHR1, PSR1, and other members of the protein family share a MYB  domain and a predicted coiled-coil (CC) domain, defining a subtype within the MYB  superfamily, the MYB-CC family. Therefore, PHR1 was found to bind as a dimer to  an imperfect palindromic sequence. PHR1-binding sequences are present in the  promoter of Pi starvation-responsive structural genes, indicating that this  protein acts downstream in the Pi starvation signaling pathway.', '2001 Aug 15', 'Genes Dev', '10.1101/gad.204401', 'Paz-Ares']

AtIPS1::GUS: !responds to! Pi starvation 
PHR1: !impairs! AtIPS1::GUS response 
PHR1: !related to! PSR1 
GFP::PHR1: !localizes to! nucleus 
PHR1: !expressed in! Pi sufficient conditions 
MYB domain/CC domain: !define! MYB-CC family 
PHR1: !binds as dimer to! imperfect palindromic sequence 
PHR1-binding sequences: !present in! Pi starvation-responsive structural genes 
PHR1: !acts downstream in! Pi starvation signaling pathway