['11525507', "Three of the nitrilase isoenzymes of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. are located  on chromosome III in tandem and these genes (NIT2/NIT1/NIT3 in the 5'-->3'  direction) encode highly similar polypeptides. Copy DNAs encompassing the entire  coding sequences for all three nitrilases were expressed in Escherichia coli as  fusion proteins containing a C-terminal hexahistidine extension. All three  nitrilases were obtained as enzymatically active proteins, and their  characteristics were determined, including a detailed comparative analysis of  their substrate preferences. All three nitrilases converted indole-3-acetonitrile  (IAN) to indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), albeit, compared to the most effective  substrates found, phenylpropionitrile (PPN), allylcyanide,  (phenylthio)acetonitrile and (methylthio)acetonitrile, with low affinity and  velocity. The preferred substrates are either naturally occurring substrates,  which may originate from glucosinolate breakdown, or they are close relatives of  these. Thus, a major function of NIT1, NIT2 and NIT3 is assigned to be the  conversion to carboxylic acids of nitriles from glucosinolate turnover or  degradation. While all nitrilases exhibit a similar pH optimum around neutral,  and NIT1 and NIT3 exhibit a similar temperature optimum around 30 degrees C  independent of the substrate analyzed (IAN, PPN), NIT2 showed a remarkably  different temperature optimum for IAN (15 degrees C) and PPN (35-40 degrees C). A  potential role for NIT2 in breaking seed dormancy in A. thaliana by low  temperatures (stratification), however, was ruled out, although NIT2 was the  predominantly expressed nitrilase isoform in developing embryos and in  germinating seeds, as judged from an analysis of beta-glucuronidase reporter gene  expression under the control of the promoters of the four isogenes. It is  possible that NIT2 is involved in supplying IAA during seed development rather  than during stratification.", '2001 Mar', 'Planta', '10.1007/s004250000420', 'Piotrowski']

NIT2/NIT1/NIT3: !encode! polypeptides 
E. coli: !expresses! fusion proteins 
NIT1/NIT2/NIT3: !convert! nitriles to carboxylic acids 
NIT2: !exhibits! different temperature optimum 
NIT2: !predominantly expressed! in developing embryos and germinating seeds