['11526245', 'At least three transport systems function in targeting nuclear-encoded  chloroplast proteins to the chloroplast thylakoid membrane. One of these systems  requires a thylakoid pH gradient and is named the DeltapH-dependent protein  transport system. A similar DeltapH export system of Escherichia coli contains  four components, twin arginine translocation A (TatA), TatB, TatC, and TatE. TatC  is a major component of the DeltapH-dependent protein transporter in E. coli and  functions in the translocation of tightly folded proteins across membranes. We  have isolated four transposon-inserted albino mutants named albino and pale green  2 (apg2) from Arabidopsis thaliana and showed that the transposons were inserted  into different sites of a single gene. The APG2 gene product (named cpTatC) has  sequence similarity with bacterial TatC and contains six putative transmembrane  domains, including bacterial TatC proteins and a transit peptide in its N  terminus. apg2 mutants showed albino phenotypes and could not grow in soil. The  apg2 plastids were highly vacuolated, lacked internal membrane structures and  lamellae of the thylakoid membrane, and contained many densely stained globule  structures, like undifferentiated proplastids. Immunoblot analysis detected no  thylakoid membrane proteins such as D1, light-harvesting complex, and OE23 in  apg2 plastids, whereas soluble proteins such as rubisco large and small subunits  were not decreased. These results indicate an essential role of cpTatC in  chloroplast development, especially in thylakoid membrane formation.', '2001 Aug 28', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.181304598', 'Shinozaki']

DeltapH-dependent protein transport system: !requires! thylakoid pH gradient 
TatC: !functions in! translocation of tightly folded proteins across membranes 
APG2 gene product (cpTatC): !contains! six putative transmembrane domains 
apg2 mutants: !show! albino phenotypes 
apg2 plastids: !lack! internal membrane structures and lamellae of the thylakoid membrane 
cpTatC: !plays essential role in! chloroplast development, especially in thylakoid membrane formation