['11532166', 'A novel Arabidopsis mutant has been identified with constitutive expression of  GST1-GUS using plants with a pathogen-responsive reporter transgene containing  the beta-glucuronidase (GUS) coding region driven by the GST1 promoter. The  recessive mutant, called agd2 (aberrant growth and death2), has salicylic acid  (SA)-dependent increased resistance to virulent and avirulent strains of the  bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae, elevated SA levels, a low level of  spontaneous cell death, callose deposition, and enlarged cells in leaves. The  enhanced resistance of agd2 to virulent P. syringae requires the SA signaling  component NONEXPRESSOR OF PR1 (NPR1). However, agd2 renders the resistance  response to P. syringae carrying avrRpt2 NPR1-independent. Thus agd2 affects both  an SA- and NPR1-dependent general defense pathway and an SA-dependent,  NPR1-independent pathway that is active during the recognition of avirulent P.  syringae. agd2 plants also fail to show a hypersensitive cell death response (HR)  unless NPR1 is removed. This novel function for NPR1 is also apparent in  otherwise wild-type plants: npr1 mutants show a stronger HR, while  NPR1-overproducing plants show a weaker HR when infected with P. syringae  carrying the avrRpm1 gene. Spontaneous cell death in agd2 is partially suppressed  by npr1, indicating that NPR1 can suppress or enhance cell death depending on the  cellular context. agd2 plants depleted of SA show a dramatic exacerbation of the  cell-growth phenotype and increased callose deposition, suggesting a role for SA  in regulating growth and this cell-wall modification. AGD2 may function in cell  death and/or growth control as well as the defense response, similarly to what  has been described in animals for the functions of NFkappaB.', '2001 Aug', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.1075umedoc.x', 'Greenberg']

GST1-GUS: !constitutively expresses! GUS
agd2: !enhances resistance to! virulent P. syringae
agd2: !requires! SA signaling component NPR1
agd2: !renders resistance to! avirulent P. syringae NPR1-independent
agd2: !requires! NPR1 for HR response
NPR1: !suppresses or enhances! cell death depending on context
SA: !regulates! growth and callose deposition
AGD2: !functions in! cell death and/or growth control