['11549768', "To understand the functional significance of RNA processing for the expression of  plastome-encoded photosynthesis genes, we investigated the nuclear mutation  hcf107 of Arabidopsis. The mutation is represented by two alleles, both of which  lead to a defective photosystem II (PSII). In vivo protein labeling, in vitro  phosphorylation, and immunoblot experiments revealed that the psbB gene product  (CP47) and an 8-kD phosphoprotein, the psbH gene product (PsbH), are absent in  mutant plants. PsbH and PsbB are essential requirements for PSII assembly in  photosynthetic eukaryotes, and their absence in hcf107 is consistent with the  PSII-less mutant phenotype. RNA gel blot hybridizations showed that the hcf107  mutation specifically impairs the accumulation of some but not all oligocistronic  psbH transcripts that are released from the pentacistronic  psbB-psbT-psbH-petB-petD precursor RNA by intergenic endonucleolytic cleavage. In  contrast, neither the levels nor the sizes of psbB-containing RNAs are affected.  S1 nuclease protection analyses revealed that psbH RNAs are lacking only where  psbH is the leading cistron and that they are processed at position -45 in the 5'  leader segment of psbH. These data and additional experiments with the cytochrome  b(6)f complex mutant hcf152, which is defective in 3' psbH processing, suggest  that only those psbH-containing transcripts that are processed at their -45 5'  ends can be translated. Secondary structure analysis of the 5' psbH leader  predicted the formation of stable stem loops in the nonprocessed transcripts,  which are unfolded by processing at the -45 site. We propose that this unfolding  of the psbH leader segment as a result of RNA processing is essential for the  translation of the psbH reading frame. We suggest further that HCF107 has dual  functions: it is involved in intercistronic processing of the psbH 5'  untranslated region or the stabilization of 5' processed psbH RNAs, and  concomitantly, it is required for the synthesis of CP47.", '2001 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.010090', 'Westhoff']

psbB: !synthesizes! CP47
psbH: !essential for! PSII assembly
hcf107: !impairs accumulation of! psbH transcripts
hcf152: !defective in! 3' psbH processing
RNA processing: !unfolds! psbH leader segment
HCF107: !involved in! intercistronic processing