['11595795', 'Certain small outer envelope membrane proteins of chloroplasts are encoded by the  nuclear genome without a cleavable N-terminal transit peptide. We investigated in  vivo the targeting mechanism of AtOEP7, an Arabidopsis homolog of the small outer  envelope membrane protein. AtOEP7 was expressed as a fusion protein with the  green fluorescent protein (GFP) either transiently in protoplasts or stably in  transgenic plants. In either case, fluorescence microscopy of transformed cells  and protein gel blot analysis of fractionated proteins confirmed that the  AtOEP7:GFP fusion protein was targeted to the chloroplast outer envelope  membrane. In vivo targeting experiments revealed that two regions, the  transmembrane domain (TMD) and its C-terminal neighboring seven-amino acid  region, were necessary and sufficient for targeting to the chloroplast outer  membrane. Substitution of aspartic acid or lysine residues with glycine residues  or scrambling of the amino acid sequence of the seven-amino acid region caused  mistargeting to the plasma membrane. Although the amino acid sequence of the TMD  is not important for targeting, amino acid residues with large side chains  inhibited targeting to the chloroplasts and resulted in the formation of large  aggregates in the protoplasts. In addition, introduction of a proline residue  within the TMD resulted in inhibition of targeting. Finally, a fusion protein,  AtOEP7:NLS:GFP, was targeted efficiently to the chloroplast envelope membranes  despite the presence of a nuclear localization signal. On the basis of these  results, we conclude that the seven-amino acid region and the TMD are  determinants for targeting to the chloroplast outer envelope membrane. The  seven-amino acid region plays a critical role in AtOEP7 evading the endomembrane  system and entering the chloroplast pathway, and the TMD plays critical roles in  migration to the chloroplasts and/or subsequent insertion into the membrane.', '2001 Oct', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.010232', 'Hwang']

AtOEP7: !targets to! chloroplast outer envelope membrane 
TMD: !necessary and sufficient for! targeting 
seven-amino acid region: !necessary and sufficient for! targeting 
large side chains: !inhibit! targeting 
proline residue: !inhibits! targeting 
AtOEP7:NLS:GFP: !targeted efficiently to! chloroplast envelope membranes