['11607555', 'Plants possess multiple resistance mechanisms that guard against pathogen attack.  Among these are inducible systems such as systemic acquired resistance (SAR). SAR  is activated by pathogen exposure and leads to an increase in salicylic acid  (SA), high-level expression of SAR-related genes, and resistance to a spectrum of  pathogens. To identify components of the signal transduction pathways regulating  SAR, a mutant screen was developed that uses 2,6-dichloroisonicotinic acid as an  activator of SAR gene expression and pathogen resistance, followed by assays for  resistance to the fungal pathogen Peronospora parasitica. Mutants from this  screen were subsequently examined to assess their defense responses. We describe  here a recessive mutation that causes a phenotype of insensitivity to chemical  and biological inducers of SAR genes and resistance. These data indicate the  existence of a common signaling pathway that couples these diverse stimuli to  induction of SAR genes and resistance. Because of its non-inducible immunity  phenotype, we call this mutant nim1. Although nim1 plants fail to respond to SA,  they retain the ability to accumulate wild-type levels of SA, a probable  endogenous signal for SAR. Further, the ability of nim1 plants to support growth  of normally incompatible races of a fungal pathogen indicates a role for this  pathway in expression of genetically determined resistance, consistent with  earlier findings for transgenic plants engineered to break down SA. These results  suggest that the wild-type NIM1 gene product functions in a pathway regulating  acquired resistance, at a position downstream of SA accumulation and upstream of  SAR gene induction and expression of resistance.', '1995 Jul 3', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.92.14.6602', 'Ryals']

Plants: !possess! multiple resistance mechanisms
Pathogen: !activates! SAR
Mutant screen: !uses! 2,6-dichloroisonicotinic acid
Mutant: !causes! insensitivity to inducers of SAR genes
NIM1 gene product: !functions in! pathway regulating acquired resistance
SA: !accumulated by! wild-type NIM1 plants
SAR genes: !induced by! SA accumulation