['11641410', 'Benzoates are a class of natural products containing compounds of industrial and  strategic importance. In plants, the compounds exist in free form and as  conjugates to a wide range of other metabolites such as glucose, which can be  attached to the carboxyl group or to specific hydroxyl groups on the benzene  ring. These glucosylation reactions have been studied for many years, but to date  only one gene encoding a benzoate glucosyltransferase has been cloned. A  phylogenetic analysis of sequences in the Arabidopsis genome revealed a large  multigene family of putative glycosyltransferases containing a consensus sequence  typically found in enzymes transferring glucose to small molecular weight  compounds such as secondary metabolites. Ninety of these sequences have now been  expressed as recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli, and their in vitro  catalytic activities toward benzoates have been analyzed. The data show that only  14 proteins display activity toward 2-hydroxybenzoic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid,  and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid. Of these, only two enzymes are active toward  2-hydroxybenzoic acid, suggesting they are the Arabidopsis salicylic acid  glucosyltransferases. All of the enzymes forming glucose esters with the  metabolites were located in Group L of the phylogenetic tree, whereas those  forming O-glucosides were dispersed among five different groups. Catalytic  activities were observed toward glucosylation of the 2-, 3-, or 4-hydroxyl group  on the ring. To further explore their regioselectivity, the 14 enzymes were  analyzed against benzoic acid, 3-hydroxybenzoic acid, 2,3-, 2,4-, 2,5-, and  2,6-dihydroxybenzoic acid. The data showed that glycosylation of specific sites  could be positively or negatively influenced by the presence of additional  hydroxyl groups on the ring. This study provides new tools for biotransformation  reactions in vitro and a basis for engineering benzoate metabolism in plants.', '2002 Jan 4', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M109287200', 'Bowles']

Gene: !encodes! Benzoate glucosyltransferase 
Gene: !reveals! Multigene family 
Gene: !expresses! Recombinant proteins 
Gene: !catalyzes! Glucosylation of 2-, 3-, or 4-hydroxyl group 
Gene: !influences! Regioselectivity