['11696182', '3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase (KAT) (EC: 2.3.1.16) catalyses a key step in fatty acid  beta-oxidation. Expression of the Arabidopsis thaliana KAT gene on chromosome 2  (KAT2), which encodes a peroxisomal thiolase, is activated in early seedling  growth. We identified a T-DNA insertion in this gene which abolishes its  expression and eliminates most of the thiolase activity in seedlings. In the  homozygous kat2 mutant, seedling growth is dependent upon exogenous sugar, and  storage triacylglycerol (TAG) and lipid bodies persist in green cotyledons. The  peroxisomes in cotyledons of kat2 seedlings are very large, the total peroxisomal  compartment is dramatically increased, and some peroxisomes contain unusual  membrane inclusions. The size and number of plastids and mitochondria are also  modified. Long-chain (C16 to C20) fatty acyl-CoAs accumulate in kat2 seedlings,  indicating that the mutant lacks long-chain thiolase activity. In addition,  extracts from kat2 seedlings have significantly decreased activity with  aceto-acetyl CoA, and KAT2 appears to be the only thiolase gene expressed at  significant levels during germination and seedling growth, indicating that KAT2  has broad substrate specificity. The kat2 phenotype can be complemented by KAT2  or KAT5 cDNAs driven by the CaMV 35S promoter, showing that these enzymes are  functionally equivalent, but that expression of the KAT5 gene in seedlings is too  low for effective catabolism of TAG. By comparison with glyoxylate cycle mutants,  it is concluded that while gluconeogenesis from fatty acids is not absolutely  required to support Arabidopsis seedling growth, peroxisomal beta-oxidation is  essential, which is in turn required for breakdown of TAG in lipid bodies.', '2001 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.01095.x', 'Smith']

KAT2: !activates! Expression 
KAT2: !catalyses! Key Step 
T-DNA insertion: !abolishes! KAT2 expression 
kat2 mutant: !depends on! Exogenous sugar 
kat2 mutant: !persists in! Storage triacylglycerol 
kat2 mutant: !modifies! Peroxisomes, plastids, mitochondria 
kat2 seedlings: !accumulate! Long-chain fatty acyl-CoAs 
kat2 seedlings: !lack! Long-chain thiolase activity 
kat2 phenotype: !complemented by! KAT2 or KAT5 cDNAs 
Arabidopsis seedling growth: !requires! Peroxisomal beta-oxidation