['11717304', 'Using a var2-2 mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana, which lacks a homologue of the  zinc-metalloprotease, FtsH, we demonstrate that this protease is required for the  efficient turnover of the D1 polypeptide of photosystem II and protection against  photoinhibition in vivo. We show that var2-2 leaves are much more susceptible to  light-induced photosystem II photoinhibition than wild-type leaves. Furthermore,  the rate of photosystem II photoinhibition in untreated var2-2 leaves is  equivalent to that of var2-2 and wild-type leaves, which have been treated with  lincomycin, an inhibitor of the photosystem II repair cycle at the level of D1  synthesis. This is in contrast to untreated wild-type leaves, which show a much  slower rate of photosystem II photoinhibition due to an efficient photosystem II  repair cycle. The recovery of var2-2 leaves from photosystem II photoinhibition  is also impaired relative to wild-type. Using Western blot analysis in the  presence of lincomycin we show that the D1 polypeptide remains stable in leaves  of the var2-2 mutant under photoinhibitory conditions that lead to D1 degradation  in wild-type leaves and that the abundance of DegP2 is not affected by the var2-2  mutation. We conclude, therefore, that the Var2 FtsH homologue is required for  the cleavage of the D1 polypeptide in vivo. In addition, we identify a conserved  lumenal domain in Var2 that is unique to FtsH homologues from oxygenic  phototrophs.', '2002 Jan 18', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M105878200', 'Mann']

FtsH: !required for! efficient turnover of D1 polypeptide 
var2-2 mutant: !more susceptible to! light-induced photosystem II photoinhibition 
var2-2 leaves: !equivalent to! lincomycin-treated wild-type leaves 
wild-type leaves: !show! slower rate of photosystem II photoinhibition 
var2-2 leaves: !impaired relative to! wild-type 
Western blot analysis: !show! D1 polypeptide remains stable in var2-2 leaves 
DegP2: !not affected by! var2-2 mutation 
Var2 FtsH homologue: !required for! cleavage of D1 polypeptide 
Var2: !contains! conserved lumenal domain