['11733990', 'Peptide deformylases (PDFs) are essential enzymes of the N-terminal protein  processing pathway of eubacteria. The recent discovery of two types of PDFs in  higher plants, PDF1A and PDF1B, and the detection of PDF1A in humans, have raised  questions concerning the importance of deformylation in eukaryotes. Here, we have  characterized fully in vitro and compared the properties of the two classes of  eukaryotic PDFs, PDF1A and PDF1B, using the PDFs from Arabidopsis thaliana and  Lycopersicon esculentum. We have shown that the PDFs of a given class (1A or 1B)  all display similar features, independently of their origin. We also observed  similar specificity of all plant PDFs for natural substrate peptides, but  identified a number of biochemical differences between the two classes (1A or  1B). The main difference lies at the level of the bound cofactor, iron for  PDF1B-like bacterial PDFs, and zinc for PDF1A. The nature of the metal cation has  important consequences concerning the relative sensitivity to oxygen of the two  plant PDFs. Investigation of the specificity of these enzymes with unusual  substrates revealed additional differences between the two types of PDFs,  enabling us to identify specific inhibitors with a lower affinity against PDF1As.  However, the two plant PDFs were inhibited equally strongly in vitro by  actinonin, an antibiotic that specifically acts on bacterial PDFs. Uptake of  actinonin by A. thaliana seedlings was used to investigate the function of PDFs  in the plant. Because it induces an albino phenotype, we conclude that  deformylation is likely to play an essential role in the chloroplast.', '2001 Dec 7', 'J Mol Biol', '10.1006/jmbi.2001.5175', 'Meinnel']

Peptide deformylases (PDFs): !essential enzymes! eubacteria 
PDF1A: !detected in! humans 
PDF1A/PDF1B: !compared! properties 
PDF1A/PDF1B: !similar specificity! natural substrate peptides 
PDF1A/PDF1B: !differ in! bound cofactor 
PDF1A/PDF1B: !inhibited equally! actinonin 
actinonin: !induces albino phenotype! A. thaliana seedlings 
deformylation: !likely to play essential role! chloroplast