['11752472', 'Tetrahydrofolate coenzymes involved in one-carbon (C1) metabolism are  polyglutamylated. In organisms that synthesize tetrahydrofolate de novo,  dihydrofolate synthetase (DHFS) and folylpolyglutamate synthetase (FPGS) catalyze  the attachment of glutamate residues to the folate molecule. In this study we  isolated cDNAs coding a DHFS and three isoforms of FPGS from Arabidopsis  thaliana. The function of each enzyme was demonstrated by complementation of  yeast mutants deficient in DHFS or FPGS activity, and by measuring in vitro  glutamate incorporation into dihydrofolate or tetrahydrofolate. DHFS is present  exclusively in the mitochondria, making this compartment the sole site of  synthesis of dihydrofolate in the plant cell. In contrast, FPGS is present as  distinct isoforms in the mitochondria, the cytosol, and the chloroplast. Each  isoform is encoded by a separate gene, a situation that is unique among  eukaryotes. The compartmentation of FPGS isoforms is in agreement with the  predominance of gamma-glutamyl-conjugated tetrahydrofolate derivatives and the  presence of serine hydroxymethyltransferase and C1-tetrahydrofolate  interconverting enzymes in the cytosol, the mitochondria, and the plastids. Thus,  the combination of FPGS with these folate-mediated reactions can supply each  compartment with the polyglutamylated folate coenzymes required for the reactions  of C1 metabolism. Also, the multicompartmentation of FPGS in the plant cell  suggests that the transported forms of folate are unconjugated.', '2001 Dec 18', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.261585098', 'Rebeille']

DHFS: !synthesizes! dihydrofolate 
FPGS: !synthesizes! tetrahydrofolate 
DHFS: !localizes to! mitochondria 
FPGS: !localizes to! mitochondria, cytosol, chloroplast 
FPGS: !encoded by! separate gene 
gamma-glutamyl-conjugated tetrahydrofolate derivatives: !predominant in! cytosol, mitochondria, plastids 
serine hydroxymethyltransferase and C1-tetrahydrofolate interconverting enzymes: !present in! cytosol, mitochondria, plastids 
FPGS: !combined with! folate-mediated reactions 
FPGS: !supplies! each compartment with polyglutamylated folate coenzymes 
transported forms of folate: !unconjugated!