['11818058', 'BACKGROUND: The plant-specific transcriptional activator LEAFY (LFY) is a central  regulator of the transition to reproductive development in Arabidopsis. LFY has a  second, later role in the induction of floral homeotic gene expression. Available  data suggests that, while LFY activity is controlled via interaction with  tissue-specific coactivators, other mechanisms exist that regulate LFY activity,  the identity of which are not known. RESULTS: We have identified a novel  component in the temporal control of the switch from vegetative to reproductive  development in Arabidopsis thaliana. The SPLAYED (SYD) gene product acts with LFY  to regulate shoot apical meristem identity. SYD is also involved in the  regulation of floral homeotic gene expression. In addition, mutations in SYD  cause LFY-independent phenotypes that indicate that SYD is necessary for meristem  maintenance during reproductive development and that SYD is required for proper  carpel and ovule development. SYD encodes a presumptive Arabidopsis homolog of  the yeast Snf2p ATPase, which is implicated in transcriptional control via  chromatin remodeling. CONCLUSIONS: SYD acts as a LFY-dependent repressor of the  meristem identity switch in the floral transition, most likely by altering the  activity of the LFY transcription factor. That SYD regulates flowering in  response to environmental stimuli suggests that the effect of environmental cues  on plant development may be achieved in part by regulating transcription factor  activity via alteration of the chromatin state.', '2002 Jan 22', 'Curr Biol', '10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00651-0', 'Meyerowitz']

LFY: !regulates! reproductive development 
SYD: !acts with! LFY 
SYD: !regulates! shoot apical meristem identity 
SYD: !regulates! floral homeotic gene expression 
SYD: !maintains! meristem during reproductive development 
SYD: !required for! carpel and ovule development 
SYD: !represses! meristem identity switch 
SYD: !alters activity of! LFY transcription factor 
environmental cues: !regulate! transcription factor activity