['11842155', 'Plastids are the site of the reductive and the oxidative pentose phosphate  pathways, which both generate pentose phosphates as intermediates. A plastidic  transporter from Arabidopsis has been identified that is able to transport, in  exchange with inorganic phosphate or triose phosphates, xylulose 5-phosphate  (Xul-5-P) and, to a lesser extent, also ribulose 5-phosphate, but does not accept  ribose 5-phosphate or hexose phosphates as substrates. Under physiological  conditions, Xul-5-P would be the preferred substrate. Therefore, the translocator  was named Xul-5-P/phosphate translocator (XPT). The XPT shares only approximately  35% to 40% sequence identity with members of both the triose phosphate  translocator and the phosphoenolpyruvate/phosphate translocator classes, but a  higher identity of approximately 50% to glucose 6-phosphate/phosphate  translocators. Therefore, it represents a fourth group of plastidic phosphate  translocators. Database analysis revealed that plant cells contain, in addition  to enzymes of the oxidative branch of the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway,  ribose 5-phosphate isomerase and ribulose 5-phosphate epimerase in both the  cytosol and the plastids, whereas the transketolase and transaldolase converting  the produced pentose phosphates to triose phosphates and hexose phosphates are  probably solely confined to plastids. It is assumed that the XPT function is to  provide the plastidic pentose phosphate pathways with cytosolic carbon skeletons  in the form of Xul-5-P, especially under conditions of a high demand for  intermediates of the cycles.', '2002 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.010576', 'Fischer']

XPT: !transports! Xul-5-P 
Ribose 5-phosphate isomerase: !localizes to! cytosol and plastids 
Ribulose 5-phosphate epimerase: !localizes to! cytosol and plastids 
Transketolase: !localizes to! plastids 
Transaldolase: !localizes to! plastids 
XPT: !provides! plastidic pentose phosphate pathways with carbon skeletons