['11846875', 'Raffinose family oligosaccharides (RFO) accumulating during seed development are  thought to play a role in the desiccation tolerance of seeds. However, the  functions of RFO in desiccation tolerance have not been elucidated. Here we  examine the functions of RFO in Arabidopsis thaliana plants under drought- and  cold-stress conditions, based on the analyses of function and expression of genes  involved in RFO biosynthesis. Sugar analysis showed that drought-, high salinity-  and cold-treated Arabidopsis plants accumulate a large amount of raffinose and  galactinol, but not stachyose. Raffinose and galactinol were not detected in  unstressed plants. This suggests that raffinose and galactinol are involved in  tolerance to drought, high salinity and cold stresses. Galactinol synthase (GolS)  catalyses the first step in the biosynthesis of RFO from UDP-galactose. We  identified three stress-responsive GolS genes (AtGolS1, 2 and 3) among seven  Arabidopsis GolS genes. AtGolS1 and 2 were induced by drought and high-salinity  stresses, but not by cold stress. By contrast, AtGolS3 was induced by cold stress  but not by drought or salt stress. All the GST fusion proteins of GST-AtGolS1, 2  and 3 expressed in Escherichia coli had galactinol synthase activities.  Overexpression of AtGolS2 in transgenic Arabidopsis caused an increase in  endogenous galactinol and raffinose, and showed reduced transpiration from leaves  to improve drought tolerance. These results show that stress-inducible galactinol  synthase plays a key role in the accumulation of galactinol and raffinose under  abiotic stress conditions, and that galactinol and raffinose may function as  osmoprotectants in drought-stress tolerance of plants.', '2002 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.01227.x', 'Shinozaki']

RFO: !accumulate in! seed development 
drought/high salinity/cold: !induce! AtGolS1/2/3 
AtGolS2: !overexpresses in! transgenic Arabidopsis 
AtGolS2: !increases! galactinol/raffinose 
galactinol/raffinose: !function as! osmoprotectants 
osmoprotectants: !improve! drought tolerance