['11846876', 'We isolated two allelic mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana that showed an early  senescence phenotype under light/dark and continuous dark photo regimes, and  designated the mutant hypersenescence1 (hys1). The hys1 mutants decreased  chlorophyll and protein content, lowered the efficiency of photosystem II, and  accumulated several senescence upregulated gene transcripts earlier than the  wild-type plants. In addition to these senescence features, the hys1 seedlings  responded more intensely to exogenously applied sugars than did wild-type  seedlings in sugar-induced growth inhibition and sugar-mediated transcript  accumulation, both of which are known to be regulated by the sugar sensor  hexokinase. The hys1 mutant also had abnormal trichomes. Map-based cloning of the  HYS1 gene identified a novel gene that encodes a protein with a potential nuclear  localization signal in the amino-terminal region, and five putative transmembrane  domains in the carboxyl-terminal region. Furthermore, we found that the  constitutive expressor of pathogenesis-related genes 5 (cpr5) mutant, which shows  spontaneous pathogen-defence responses and abnormal trichomes, has a point  mutation in the HYS1 gene, suggesting that these independently isolated mutants  are allelic to each other. Although no definite conclusion can be drawn from  these results, we suggest that altered sensitivity to sugars and/or enhanced  efficiency of sugar signalling in the hys1/cpr5 mutant may have important roles  in the initiation processes of leaf senescence and pathogen-defence responses in  Arabidopsis.', '2002 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.01228.x', 'Watanabe']

hys1: !decreases! chlorophyll and protein content 
hys1: !lowers! efficiency of photosystem II 
hys1: !accumulates! senescence upregulated gene transcripts 
hys1: !responds more intensely to! exogenously applied sugars 
hys1: !encodes! protein with potential nuclear localization signal 
hys1: !has five putative transmembrane domains! in carboxyl-terminal region 
cpr5: !has point mutation in! HYS1 gene 
cpr5: !shows spontaneous pathogen-defence responses! 
cpr5: !has abnormal trichomes!