['11874577', 'Programmed cell death (PCD) is a fundamental cellular process conserved in  metazoans, plants and yeast. Evidence is presented that salt induces PCD in yeast  and plants because of an ionic, rather than osmotic, etiology. In yeast, NaCl  inhibited growth and caused a time-dependent reduction in viability that was  preceded by DNA fragmentation. NaCl also induced the cytological hallmarks of  lysigenous-type PCD, including nuclear fragmentation, vacuolation and lysis. The  human anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 increased salt tolerance of wild-type yeast  strain and calcineurin-deficient yeast mutant (cnb1Delta) that is defective for  ion homeostasis, but had no effect on the NaCl or sorbitol sensitivity of the  osmotic hypersensitive hog1Delta mutant -- results that further link PCD in the  response to the ion disequilibrium under salt stress. Bcl-2 suppression of  cnb1Delta salt sensitivity was ENA1 (P-type ATPase gene)-dependent, due in part  to transcriptional activation. Salt-induced PCD (TUNEL staining and DNA  laddering) in primary roots of both Arabidopsis thaliana wild type (Col-1 gl1)  and sos1 (salt overly sensitive) mutant seedlings correlated positively with  treatment lethality. Wild-type plants survived salt stress levels that were  lethal to sos1 plants because secondary roots were produced from the shoot/root  transition zone. PCD-mediated elimination of the primary root in response to salt  shock appears to be an adaptive mechanism that facilitates the production of  roots more able to cope with a saline environment. Both salt-sensitive mutants of  yeast (cnb1Delta) and Arabidopsis (sos1) exhibit substantially more profound PCD  symptoms, indicating that salt-induced PCD is mediated by ion disequilibrium.', '2002 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.01247.x', 'Hasegawa']

NaCl: !induces! PCD 
Bcl-2: !increases! salt tolerance 
ENA1: !activates! Bcl-2 
sos1: !exhibits! more profound PCD symptoms 
primary root: !eliminates! in response to salt shock