['11891238', "Adenosine (Ado) kinase (ADK; ATP:Ado 5' phosphotransferase, EC 2.7.1.20)  catalyzes the salvage synthesis of adenine monophosphate from Ado and ATP. In  Arabidopsis, ADK is encoded by two cDNAs that share 89% nucleotide identity and  are constitutively, yet differentially, expressed in leaves, stems, roots, and  flowers. To investigate the role of ADK in plant metabolism, lines deficient in  this enzyme activity have been created by sense and antisense expression of the  ADK1 cDNA. The levels of ADK activity in these lines range from 7% to 70% of the  activity found in wild-type Arabidopsis. Transgenic plants with 50% or more of  the wild-type activity have a normal morphology. In contrast, plants with less  than 10% ADK activity are small with rounded, wavy leaves and a compact, bushy  appearance. Because of the lack of elongation of the primary shoot, the siliques  extend in a cluster from the rosette. Fertility is decreased because the stamen  filaments do not elongate normally; hypocotyl and root elongation are reduced  also. The hydrolysis of S-adenosyl-L-homo-cysteine (SAH) produced from  S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM)-dependent methylation reactions is a key source of  Ado in plants. The lack of Ado salvage in the ADK-deficient lines leads to an  increase in the SAH level and results in the inhibition of SAM-dependent  transmethylation. There is a direct correlation between ADK activity and the  level of methylesterified pectin in seed mucilage, as monitored by staining with  ruthenium red, immunofluorescence labeling, or direct assay. These results  indicate that Ado must be steadily removed by ADK to prevent feedback inhibition  of SAH hydrolase and maintain SAM utilization and recycling.", '2002 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.010880', 'Wagner']

ADK: !catalyzes! salvage synthesis of adenine monophosphate 
ADK: !constitutively expressed in! leaves, stems, roots, and flowers 
ADK: !deficient in! transgenic plants 
ADK: !correlated with! methylesterified pectin level 
SAH: !inhibited by! Ado salvage 
SAM: !utilized by! Ado salvage