['11910005', 'Salt stress is a major environmental factor influencing plant growth and  development. To identify salt tolerance determinants, a genetic screen for salt  overly sensitive (sos) mutants was performed in Arabidopsis. We present here the  characterization of sos4 mutants and the positional cloning of the SOS4 gene.  sos4 mutant plants are hypersensitive to Na(+), K(+), and Li(+) ions. Under NaCl  stress, sos4 plants accumulate more Na(+) and retain less K(+) compared with  wild-type plants. SOS4 encodes a pyridoxal kinase that is involved in the  biosynthesis of pyridoxal-5-phosphate, an active form of vitamin B6. The  expression of SOS4 cDNAs complements an Escherichia coli mutant defective in  pyridoxal kinase. Supplementation of pyridoxine but not pyridoxal in the growth  medium can partially rescue the sos4 defect in salt tolerance. SOS4 is expressed  ubiquitously in all plant tissues. As a result of alternative splicing, two  transcripts are derived from the SOS4 gene, the relative abundance of which is  modulated by development and environmental stresses. Besides being essential  cofactors for numerous enzymes, as shown by pharmacological studies in animal  cells, pyridoxal-5-phosphate and its derivatives are also ligands for P2X  receptor ion channels. Our results demonstrate that pyridoxal kinase is a novel  salt tolerance determinant important for the regulation of Na(+) and K(+)  homeostasis in plants. We propose that pyridoxal-5-phosphate regulates Na(+) and  K(+) homeostasis by modulating the activities of ion transporters.', '2002 Mar', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.010417', 'Zhu']

SOS4: !encodes! pyridoxal kinase 
pyridoxal kinase: !synthesizes! pyridoxal-5-phosphate 
sos4 mutant plants: !accumulate more! Na(+) 
sos4 mutant plants: !retain less! K(+) 
pyridoxine: !partially rescues! sos4 defect 
SOS4: !expressed ubiquitously! in all plant tissues 
pyridoxal-5-phosphate: !ligands for! P2X receptor ion channels 
pyridoxal-5-phosphate: !regulates! Na(+) and K(+) homeostasis