['11925432', 'Screening of cDNA expression libraries derived from plants exposed to stress,  with 35S-labeled recombinant calmodulin as a probe, revealed a new family of  proteins containing a transcription activation domain and two types of  DNA-binding domains designated the CG-1 domain and the transcription factor  immunoglobulin domain, ankyrin repeats, and a varying number of IQ  calmodulin-binding motifs. Based on domain organization and amino acid sequence  comparisons, similar proteins, with the same domain organization, were identified  in the genomes of other multicellular organisms including human, Drosophila, and  Caenorhabditis, whereas none were found in the complete genomes of single cell  eukaryotes and prokaryotes. This family of proteins was designated  calmodulin-binding transcription activators (CAMTAs). Arabidopsis thaliana  contains six CAMTA genes (AtCAMTA1-AtCAMTA6). The transcription activation domain  of AtCAMTA1 was mapped by testing a series of protein fusions with the  DNA-binding domain of the bacterial LexA transcription factor and two reporter  genes fused to LexA recognition sequences in yeast cells. Two human proteins  designated HsCAMTA1 and HsCAMTA2 were also shown to activate transcription in  yeast using the same reporter system. Subcellular fractionation of Arabidopsis  tissues revealed the presence of CAMTAs predominantly in the nucleus. Calmodulin  binding assays identified a region of 25 amino acids capable of binding  calmodulin with high affinity (K(d) = 1.2 nm) in the presence of calcium. We  suggest that CAMTAs comprise a conserved family of transcription factors in a  wide range of multicellular eukaryotes, which possibly respond to calcium  signaling by direct binding of calmodulin.', '2002 Jun 14', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M200268200', 'Fromm']

CAMTAs: !comprise! conserved family of transcription factors 
CAMTAs: !bind! calmodulin 
AtCAMTA1: !activates! transcription in yeast 
HsCAMTA1/2: !activate! transcription in yeast 
CAMTAs: !localize to! nucleus 
35S-labeled recombinant calmodulin: !screens! cDNA expression libraries 
CAMTAs: !contain! transcription activation domain 
CAMTAs: !contain! two types of DNA-binding domains