['12047634', 'In response to drought, plants synthesise the hormone abscisic acid (ABA), which  triggers closure of the stomatal pores. This process is vital for plants to  conserve water by reducing transpirational water loss. Moreover, recent studies  have demonstrated the advantages of the Arabidopsis stomatal guard cell for  combining genetic, molecular and biophysical approaches to characterise ABA  action. However, genetic dissection of stomatal regulation has been limited by  the difficulty of identifying a reliable phenotype for mutant screening. Leaf  temperature can be used as an indicator to detect mutants with altered stomatal  control, since transpiration causes leaf cooling. In this study, we optimised  experimental conditions under which individual Arabidopsis plants with altered  stomatal responses to drought can be identified by infrared thermography. These  conditions were then used to perform a pilot screen for mutants that displayed a  reduced ability to close their stomata and hence appeared colder than the wild  type. Some of the mutants recovered were deficient in ABA accumulation, and  corresponded to alleles of the ABA biosynthesis loci ABA1, ABA2 and ABA3.  Interestingly, two of these novel aba2 alleles were able to intragenically  complement the aba2-1 mutation. The remaining mutants showed reduced ABA  responsiveness in guard cells. In addition to the previously known abi1-1  mutation, we isolated mutations at two novel loci designated as OST1 (OPEN  STOMATA 1) and OST2. Remarkably, ost1 and ost2 represent, to our knowledge, the  first Arabidopsis mutations altering ABA responsiveness in stomata and not in  seeds.', '2002 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2002.01322.x', 'Giraudat']

ABA: !triggers! stomatal closure 
ABA: !accumulates in! mutants 
ABA: !synthesized by! ABA1, ABA2, ABA3 
ABA: !responds to! OST1, OST2 
Leaf temperature: !indicates! altered stomatal control 
Infrared thermography: !used to! identify individual plants with altered stomatal responses 
Mutants: !deficient in! ABA accumulation 
Mutants: !intragenically complement! aba2-1 mutation