['12068103', 'Root hair development in plants is controlled by many genetic, hormonal, and  environmental factors. A number of genes have been shown to be important for root  hair formation. Arabidopsis salt overly sensitive 4 mutants were originally  identified by screening for NaCl-hypersensitive growth. The SOS4 (Salt Overly  Sensitive 4) gene was recently isolated by map-based cloning and shown to encode  a pyridoxal (PL) kinase involved in the production of PL-5-phosphate, which is an  important cofactor for various enzymes and a ligand for certain ion transporters.  The root growth of sos4 mutants is slower than that of the wild type. Microscopic  observations revealed that sos4 mutants do not have root hairs in the maturation  zone. The sos4 mutations block the initiation of most root hairs, and impair the  tip growth of those that are initiated. The root hairless phenotype of sos4  mutants was complemented by the wild-type SOS4 gene. SOS4  promoter-beta-glucuronidase analysis showed that SOS4 is expressed in the root  hair and other hair-like structures. Consistent with SOS4 function as a PL  kinase, in vitro application of pyridoxine and pyridoxamine, but not PL,  partially rescued the root hair defect in sos4 mutants.  1-Aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid  treatments promoted root hair formation in both wild-type and sos4 plants,  indicating that genetically SOS4 functions upstream of ethylene and auxin in root  hair development. The possible role of SOS4 in ethylene and auxin biosynthesis is  discussed.', '2002 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.001982', 'Zhu']

SOS4: !encodes! pyridoxal kinase 
SOS4: !affects! root hair formation 
SOS4: !promotes! tip growth of initiated hairs 
SOS4: !expresses in! root hair and other hair-like structures 
pyridoxine/pyridoxamine: !partially rescue! root hair defect in sos4 mutants 
ethylene/auxin: !promote! root hair formation in wild-type and sos4 plants 
SOS4: !functions upstream of! ethylene and auxin in root hair development