['12139003', 'Progression through the cell cycle is driven by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs)  whose activity is controlled by regulatory subunits called cyclins. The  expression of cyclins is subject to numerous controls at multiple levels, not  least at the level of transcription. As a first step to unravel the mechanisms  that regulate expression of B-cyclins in plants, we undertook the identification  of the required promoter elements of the Arath;CycB1;1 gene. A detailed analysis  of different promoter fragments consisted in analysing their ability to mediate  cell cycle-dependent transcriptional oscillations of the gus reporter gene in  transformed BY-2 cell lines. We showed that different promoter regions took part  in transcriptional activation. Furthermore, 202 bp upstream of the ATG were  sufficient to induce M-phase-specific expression. This region contains an 18 bp  sequence including a Myb-binding core (AACGG) which is able to activate reporter  gene without leading to M-phase-specific expression. Electrophoretic mobility  shift assays showed that this 18 bp sequence specifically binds protein complexes  from Arabidopsis cell suspension enriched either in G1 or G2 phase. Furthermore,  the Myb core, AACGG, was characterized as necessary for the binding of proteins.  DNA affinity purification of the complexes bound to the 18 bp sequence allowed  the isolation of three different complexes and two proteins from these complexes  were identified by mass spectrometry analyses. A new putative Myb transcription  factor and a hypothetical protein, HYP containing with a leucine zipper and  Myc-type dimerization domains were identified. When over-expressed in plants, HYP  factor is able to trans-activate the expression of gus reporter gene downstream  from the -202 promoter fragment as well as the endogenous CycB1;1 gene.', '2002 Sep', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/a:1016018711532', 'Bergounioux']

CycB1;1: !regulated by! Cyclins 
Cyclins: !controls! CDKs 
-202 promoter fragment: !induces! M-phase-specific expression 
18 bp sequence: !binds! Protein complexes 
Myb core: !necessary for! Binding of proteins 
Putative Myb transcription factor: !isolated from! DNA affinity purification 
HYP factor: !identified by! Mass spectrometry analyses 
HYP factor: !trans-activates! Gus reporter gene 
HYP factor: !trans-activates! Endogenous CycB1;1 gene