['12148530', 'Amides and acidic amino acids represent the major long distance transport forms  of organic nitrogen. Six amino acid permeases (AAPs) from Arabidopsis mediating  transport of a wide spectrum of amino acids were isolated. AAPs are distantly  related to plasma membrane amino acid transport systems N and A and to vesicular  transporters such as VGAT from mammals. A detailed comparison of the properties  by electrophysiology after heterologous expression in Xenopus oocytes shows that,  although capable of recognizing and transporting a wide spectrum of amino acids,  individual AAPs differ with respect to specificity. Apparent substrate affinities  are influenced by structure and net charge and vary by three orders of magnitude.  AAPs mediate cotransport of neutral amino acids with one proton. Uncharged forms  of acidic and basic amino acids are cotransported with one proton. Since all AAPs  are differentially expressed, different tissues may be supplied with a different  spectrum of amino acids. AAP3 and AAP5 are the only transporters mediating  efficient transport of the basic amino acids. In vivo competition shows that the  capability to transport basic amino acids in planta might be overruled by excess  amides and acidic amino acids in the apoplasm. With the exception of AAP6, AAPs  do not recognize aspartate; only AAP6 has an affinity for aspartate in the  physiologically relevant range. This property is due to an overall higher  affinity of AAP6 for neutral and acidic amino acids. Thus AAP6 may serve a  different role either in cooperating with the lower affinity systems to acquire  amino acids in the low concentration range, as a system responsible for aspartate  transport or as an uptake system from the xylem. In agreement, a yeast mutant  deficient in acidic amino acid uptake at low aspartate concentrations was  complemented only by AAP6. Taken together, the AAPs transport neutral, acidic and  cationic amino acids, including the major transport forms, i.e. glutamine,  asparagine and glutamate. Increasing proton concentrations strongly activate  transport of amino acids. Thus the actual apoplasmic concentration of amino acids  and the pH will determine what is transported in vivo, i.e. major amino acids  such as glutamine, asparagine, and glutamate will be mobilized preferentially.', '2002 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2002.01248.x', 'Frommer']

AAPs: !mediate! transport of a wide spectrum of amino acids 
AAPs: !differ in! specificity 
AAPs: !influenced by! structure and net charge 
AAPs: !cotransport! neutral amino acids with one proton 
AAPs: !cotransport! uncharged forms of acidic and basic amino acids with one proton 
AAP3/5: !transport! basic amino acids 
AAP6: !recognizes! aspartate 
AAP6: !has higher affinity for! neutral and acidic amino acids 
AAPs: !transport! neutral, acidic and cationic amino acids 
AAPs: !activated by! increasing proton concentrations