['12149434', 'Cold, hyperosmolarity, and abscisic acid (ABA) signaling induce RD29A expression,  which is an indicator of the plant stress adaptation response. Two nonallelic  Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype C24) T-DNA insertional mutations, cpl1 and cpl3,  were identified based on hyperinduction of RD29A expression that was monitored by  using the luciferase (LUC) reporter gene (RD29ALUC) imaging system. Genetic  linkage analysis and complementation data established that the recessive cpl1 and  cpl3 mutations are caused by T-DNA insertions in AtCPL1 (Arabidopsis C-terminal  domain phosphatase-like) and AtCPL3, respectively. Gel assays using recombinant  AtCPL1 and AtCPL3 detected innate phosphatase activity like other members of the  phylogenetically conserved family that dephosphorylate the C-terminal domain of  RNA polymerase II (RNAP II). cpl1 mutation causes RD29ALUC hyperexpression and  transcript accumulation in response to cold, ABA, and NaCl treatments, whereas  the cpl3 mutation mediates hyperresponsiveness only to ABA. Northern analysis  confirmed that LUC transcript accumulation also occurs in response to these  stimuli. cpl1 plants accumulate biomass more rapidly and exhibit delayed  flowering relative to wild type whereas cpl3 plants grow more slowly and flower  earlier than wild-type plants. Hence AtCPL1 and AtCPL3 are negative regulators of  stress responsive gene transcription and modulators of growth and development.  These results suggest that C-terminal domain phosphatase regulation of RNAP II  phosphorylation status is a focal control point of complex processes like plant  stress responses and development. AtCPL family members apparently have both  unique and overlapping transcriptional regulatory functions that differentiate  the signal output that determines the plant response.', '2002 Aug 6', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.112276199', 'Hasegawa']

RD29A expression: !induced by! Cold, hyperosmolarity, ABA
cpl1 mutation: !caused by! T-DNA insertion in AtCPL1
cpl3 mutation: !caused by! T-DNA insertion in AtCPL3
AtCPL1: !dephosphorylates! C-terminal domain of RNAP II
AtCPL3: !dephosphorylates! C-terminal domain of RNAP II
cpl1 mutation: !mediates hyperresponsiveness to! Cold, ABA, NaCl
cpl3 mutation: !mediates hyperresponsiveness to! ABA
AtCPL1: !regulates! Stress responsive gene transcription
AtCPL3: !regulates! Stress responsive gene transcription
AtCPL family members: !differentiate! Signal output