['12151602', 'Many plant, animal, and fungal genomes contain cytosine DNA methylation in  asymmetric sequence contexts (CpHpH, H = A, T, C). Although the enzymes  responsible for this methylation are unknown, it has been assumed that asymmetric  methylation is maintained by the persistent activity of de novo  methyltransferases (enzymes capable of methylating previously unmodified DNA). We  recently reported that the DOMAINS REARRANGED METHYLASE (DRM) genes are required  for de novo DNA methylation in Arabidopsis thaliana because drm1 drm2 double  mutants lack the de novo methylation normally associated with transgene  silencing. In this study, we have used bisulfite sequencing and Southern blot  analysis to examine the role of the DRM loci in the maintenance of asymmetric  methylation. At some loci, drm1 drm2 double mutants eliminated all asymmetric  methylation. However, at the SUPERMAN locus, asymmetric methylation was only  completely abolished in drm1 drm2 chromomethylase 3 (cmt3) triple mutant plants.  drm1 drm2 double mutants also showed a strong reduction of CpNpG (n = A, T, C, or  G) methylation at some loci, but not at others. The drm1 drm2 cmt3 triple mutant  plants did not affect CpG methylation at any locus tested, suggesting that the  primary CpG methylases are encoded by the MET1 class of genes. Although neither  the drm1 drm2 double mutants nor the cmt3 single mutants show morphological  defects, drm1 drm2 cmt3 triple mutant plants show pleiotropic effects on plant  development. Our results suggest that the DRM and CMT3 genes act in a partially  redundant and locus-specific manner to control asymmetric and CpNpG methylation.', '2002 Dec 10', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.162371599', 'Jacobsen']

DRM: !maintains! asymmetric methylation
drm1 drm2: !eliminates! asymmetric methylation
drm1 drm2 cmt3: !abolishes! asymmetric methylation
drm1 drm2: !reduces! CpNpG methylation
cmt3: !no effect on! CpG methylation
MET1: !encodes primary! CpG methylases
DRM: !partially redundant with! CMT3
DRM: !locus-specifically controls! methylation