['12182338', 'Phospholipase D (PLD; EC 3.1.4.4) has been linked to a number of cellular  processes, including Tran membrane signaling and membrane degradation. Four PLD  genes (alpha, beta, gamma1, and gamma2) have been cloned from Arabidopsis  thalami. They encode isoforms with distinct regulatory and catalytic properties  but little is known about their physiological roles. Using cDNA amplified  fragment length polymorphism display and RNA blot analysis, we identified  Arabidopsis PLDgamma1 and a gene encoding a lysophospholipase (EC 3.1.1.5),  lysoPL1, to be differentially expressed during host response to virulent and  avirulent pathogen challenge. Examination of the expression pattern of  phospholipase genes induced in response to pathogen challenge was undertaken  using the lysoPL1 and gene-specific probes corresponding to the PLD isoforms a,  beta, and gamma1. Each mRNA class exhibited different temporal patterns of  expression after infiltration of leaves with Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato with  or without avrRpm1. PLDalpha was rapidly induced and remained constitutively  elevated regardless of treatment. PLDbeta was transiently induced upon pathogen  challenge. However, mRNA for the lysoPL1 and PLDgamma1 genes showed enhanced and  sustained elevation during an incompatible interaction, in both ndr1 and  overexpressing NahG genetic backgrounds. Further evidence for differential  engagement of these PLD mRNA during defense responses, other than gene-for-gene  interactions, was demonstrated by their response to salicylic acid treatment or  wounding. Our results indicate that genes encoding lysoPL1, PLDgamma1, and  PLDbeta are induced during early responses to pathogen challenge and,  additionally, PLDyl and lysoPL1 are specifically upregulated during gene-for-gene  interactions, leading to the hypersensitive response. We discuss the possible  role of these genes in plant-pathogen interactions.', '2002 Aug', 'Mol Plant Microbe Interact', '10.1094/MPMI.2002.15.8.808', 'Grant']

PLD: !linked to! cellular processes 
PLDalpha: !induced and! remained elevated 
PLDbeta: !transiently induced! upon pathogen challenge 
lysoPL1: !differentially expressed! during host response 
lysoPL1: !enhanced and sustained! elevation during incompatible interaction 
PLDgamma1: !induced during early responses! to pathogen challenge 
PLDyl: !upregulated! during gene-for-gene interactions