['12361963', 'Gynoecium ontogenesis in Arabidopsis is accomplished by the co-ordinated activity  of genes that control patterning and the regional differentiation of tissues, and  ultimately results in the formation of a basal ovary, a short style and an apical  stigma. A transposon insertion in the STYLISH1 (STY1) gene results in gynoecia  with aberrant style morphology, while an insertion mutation in the closely  related STYLISH2 (STY2) gene has no visible effect on gynoecium development.  However, sty1-1 sty2-1 double mutant plants exhibit an enhanced sty1-1 mutant  phenotype and are characterized by a further reduction in the amount of stylar  and stigmatic tissues and decreased proliferation of stylar xylem. These data  imply that STY1 and STY2 are partially redundant and that both genes promote  style and stigma formation and influence vascular development during Arabidopsis  gynoecium development. Consistently, STY1 and STY2 are expressed in the apical  parts of the developing gynoecium and ectopic expression of either STY1 or STY2  driven by the CaMV 35S promoter is sufficient to transform valve cells into style  cells. STY1::GUS and STY2::GUS activity is detected in many other organs as well  as the gynoecium, suggesting that STY1 and STY2 may have additional functions.  This is supported by the sty1-1 sty2-1 double mutants producing rosette and  cauline leaves with a higher degree of serration than wild-type leaves. STY1 and  STY2 are members of a small gene family, and encode proteins with a RING  finger-like motif. Double mutant analyses indicate that STY1 genetically  interacts with SPATULA and possibly also with CRABS CLAW.', '2002 Oct', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.129.20.4707', 'Sundberg']

STY1: !promotes! style and stigma formation
STY1: !influences! vascular development
STY2: !promotes! style and stigma formation
STY2: !influences! vascular development
STY1: !transforms! valve cells into style cells
STY2: !transforms! valve cells into style cells
STY1: !detected in! other organs
STY2: !detected in! other organs
STY1: !interacts with! SPATULA
STY2: !interacts with! SPATULA
STY1: !possibly interacts with! CRABS CLAW
STY2: !possibly interacts with! CRABS CLAW