['12376625', 'Proanthocyanidin (PA), or condensed tannin, is a polymeric flavanol that  accumulates in a number of tissues in a wide variety of plants. In Arabidopsis,  we found that PA precursors (detected histochemically using OsO(4)) accumulate in  the endothelial cell layer of the seed coat from the two-terminal cell stage of  embryo development onwards. To understand how PA is made, we screened mature seed  pools of T-DNA-tagged Arabidopsis lines to identify mutants defective in the  synthesis of PA and found six tds (tannin-deficient seed) complementation groups  defective in PA synthesis. Mutations in these loci disrupt the amount (tds1,  tds2, tds3, tds5, and tds6) or location and amount of PA (tds4) in the  endothelial cell layer. The PA intermediate epicatechin has been identified in  wild type and mutants tds1, tds2, tds3, and tds5 (which do not produce PA) and  tds6 (6% of wild-type PA), whereas tds4 (2% of wild-type PA) produces an  unidentified dimethylaminocinnamaldehyde-reacting compound, indicating that the  mutations may be acting on genes beyond leucoanthocyanidin reductase, the first  enzymatic reduction step dedicated to PA synthesis. Two other mutants were  identified, an allele of tt7, which has a spotted pattern of PA deposition and  produces only 8% of the wild-type level of type PA as propelargonidin, and an  allele of tt8 producing no PA. Spotted patterns of PA deposition observed in seed  of mutants tds4 and tt7-3 result from altered PA composition and distribution in  the cell. Our mutant screen, which was not exhaustive, suggests that the  cooperation of many genes is required for successful PA accumulation.', '2002 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.006189', 'Ashton']

Proanthocyanidin: !accumulates in! tissues 
OsO(4): !detects! PA precursors 
Mutations: !disrupt! amount/location of PA 
Epicatechin: !identified in! wild type/mutants 
tt7: !produces! propelargonidin 
tt8: !produces! no PA 
Mutants: !alter! PA composition/distribution 
Genes: !cooperate for! successful PA accumulation