['12376641', 'Acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) is used in the cytosol of plant cells for the synthesis  of a diverse set of phytochemicals including waxes, isoprenoids, stilbenes, and  flavonoids. The source of cytosolic acetyl-CoA is unclear. We identified two  Arabidopsis cDNAs that encode proteins similar to the amino and carboxy portions  of human ATP-citrate lyase (ACL). Coexpression of these cDNAs in yeast  (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) confers ACL activity, indicating that both the  Arabidopsis genes are required for ACL activity. Arabidopsis ACL is a heteromeric  enzyme composed of two distinct subunits, ACLA (45 kD) and ACLB (65 kD). The  holoprotein has a molecular mass of 500 kD, which corresponds to a heterooctomer  with an A(4)B(4) configuration. ACL activity and the ACLA and ACLB polypeptides  are located in the cytosol, consistent with the lack of targeting peptides in the  ACLA and ACLB sequences. In the Arabidopsis genome, three genes encode for the  ACLA subunit (ACLA-1, At1g10670; ACLA-2, At1g60810; and ACLA-3, At1g09430), and  two genes encode the ACLB subunit (ACLB-1, At3g06650 and ACLB-2, At5g49460). The  ACLA and ACLB mRNAs accumulate in coordinated spatial and temporal patterns  during plant development. This complex accumulation pattern is consistent with  the predicted physiological needs for cytosolic acetyl-CoA, and is closely  coordinated with the accumulation pattern of cytosolic acetyl-CoA carboxylase, an  enzyme using cytosolic acetyl-CoA as a substrate. Taken together, these results  indicate that ACL, encoded by the ACLA and ACLB genes of Arabidopsis, generates  cytosolic acetyl-CoA. The heteromeric organization of this enzyme is common to  green plants (including Chlorophyceae, Marchantimorpha, Bryopsida, Pinaceae,  monocotyledons, and eudicots), species of fungi, Glaucophytes, Chlamydomonas, and  prokaryotes. In contrast, all known animal ACL enzymes have a homomeric  structure, indicating that a evolutionary fusion of the ACLA and ACLB genes  probably occurred early in the evolutionary history of this kingdom.', '2002 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.008110', 'Wurtele']

ACL: !synthesizes! cytosolic acetyl-CoA 
ACLA: !interacts with! ACLB 
ACLB: !interacts with! ACLA 
ACLA: !localizes to! cytosol 
ACLB: !localizes to! cytosol 
ACLA: !enhances! ACL activity 
ACLB: !enhances! ACL activity