['12427994', 'Abscisic acid (ABA) regulates developmental processes and abiotic stress  responses in plants. We recently characterized a new Arabidopsis mutant, abh1,  which shows ABA-hypersensitive regulation of seed germination, stomatal closing,  and cytosolic calcium increases in guard cells (V. Hugouvieux, J.M. Kwak, J.I.  Schroeder [2001] Cell 106: 477-487). ABH1 encodes the large subunit of a dimeric  Arabidopsis mRNA cap-binding complex and in expression profiling experiments was  shown to affect mRNA levels of a subset of genes. Here, we show that the dimeric  ABH1 and AtCBP20 subunits are ubiquitously expressed. Whole-plant growth  phenotypes of abh1 are described and properties of ABH1 in guard cells are  further analyzed. Complemented abh1 lines expressing a green fluorescent  protein-ABH1 fusion protein demonstrate that ABH1 mainly localizes in guard cell  nuclei. Stomatal apertures were smaller in abh1 compared with wild type (WT) when  plants were grown at 40% humidity, and similar at 95% humidity. Correlated with  stomatal apertures from plants grown at 40% humidity, slow anion channel currents  were enhanced and inward potassium channel currents were decreased in abh1 guard  cells compared with WT. Gas exchange measurements showed similar primary humidity  responses in abh1 and WT, which together with results from abh1/abi1-1  double-mutant analyses suggest that abh1 shows enhanced sensitivity to endogenous  ABA. Double-mutant analyses of the ABA-hypersensitive signaling mutants, era1-2  and abh1, showed complex genetic interactions, suggesting that ABH1 and ERA1 do  not modulate the same negative regulator in ABA signaling. Mutations in the  RNA-binding protein sad1 showed hypersensitive ABA-induced stomatal closing,  whereas hyl1 did not affect this response. These data provide evidence for the  model that the mRNA-processing proteins ABH1 and SAD1 function as negative  regulators in guard cell ABA signaling.', '2002 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.009480', 'Schroeder']

ABA: !regulates! developmental processes 
ABH1: !encodes! large subunit of mRNA cap-binding complex 
ABH1: !localizes to! guard cell nuclei 
abh1: !enhances! slow anion channel currents 
abh1: !decreases! inward potassium channel currents 
abh1: !shows enhanced sensitivity to! endogenous ABA 
ERA1: !interacts with! ABH1 in ABA signaling 
SAD1: !represses! ABA-induced stomatal closing 
HYL1: !does not affect! ABA-induced stomatal closing