['12437129', 'Sulfurtransferases/rhodaneses are a group of enzymes widely distributed in  plants, animals, and bacteria that catalyze the transfer of sulfur from a donor  molecule to a thiophilic acceptor substrate. Sulfurtransferases (STs) consist of  two globular domains of nearly identical size and conformation connected by a  short linker sequence. In plant STs this linker sequence is exceptionally longer  than in sequences from other species. The Arabidopsis ST1 protein (AJ131404)  contains five cysteine residues: one residue is universally conserved in all STs  and considered to be catalytically essential; a second one, closely located in  the primary sequence, is conserved only in sequences from eukaryotic species. Of  the remaining three cysteine residues two are conserved in the so far known plant  STs and one is unique to the Arabidopsis ST1. The aim of our study was to  investigate the role of the two-domain structure, of the unique plant linker  sequence and of each cysteine residue. The N- and C-terminal domains of the  Arabidopsis ST1, the full-length protein with a shortened linker sequence and  several point-mutated proteins were overexpressed in E. coli, purified and used  for enzyme activity measurements. The C-terminal domain itself displayed ST  activity which could be increased by adding the separately prepared N-terminal  domain. The activity of an ST1 derivative with a shortened linker sequence was  reduced by more than 60% of the wild-type activity, probably because of a  drastically reduced protein stability. The replacement of each cysteine residue  resulted in mutant forms which differed significantly in their stability, in the  specific ST activities, and in their kinetic parameters which were determined for  3-mercaptopyruvate as well as thiosulfate as sulfur substrates: mutation of the  putative active site cysteine (C332) essentially abolished activity; for C339 a  crucial role at least for the turnover of thiosulfate could be identified.', '2002 Sep', 'Biol Chem', '10.1515/BC.2002.155', 'Papenbrock']

Sulfurtransferases/rhodaneses: !catalyze! transfer of sulfur 
Arabidopsis ST1 protein: !contains! five cysteine residues 
N- and C-terminal domains: !overexpressed in! E. coli 
Full-length protein: !reduced activity by! 60% 
C332: !essentially abolished! activity 
C339: !crucial role for! turnover of thiosulfate