['12441300', 'The plant leaf provides an ideal system to study the mechanisms of organ  formation and morphogenesis. The key factors that control leaf morphogenesis  include the timing, location and extent of meristematic activity during cell  division and differentiation. We identified an Arabidopsis mutant in which the  regulation of meristematic activities in leaves was aberrant. The recessive  mutant allele blade-on-petiole1-1 (bop1-1) produced ectopic, lobed blades along  the adaxial side of petioles of the cotyledon and rosette leaves. The ectopic  organ, which has some of the characteristics of rosette leaf blades with  formation of trichomes in a dorsoventrally dependent manner, was generated by  prolonged and clustered cell division in the mutant petioles. Ectopic, lobed  blades were also formed on the proximal part of cauline leaves that lacked a  petiole. Thus, BOP1 regulates the meristematic activity of leaf cells in a  proximodistally dependent manner. Manifestation of the phenotypes in the mutant  leaves was dependent on the leaf position. Thus, BOP1 controls leaf morphogenesis  through control of the ectopic meristematic activity but within the context of  the leaf proximodistality, dorsoventrality and heteroblasty. BOP1 appears to  regulate meristematic activity in organs other than leaves, since the mutation  also causes some ectopic outgrowths on stem surfaces and at the base of floral  organs. Three class I knox genes, i.e., KNAT1, KNAT2 and KNAT6, were expressed  aberrantly in the leaves of the bop1-1 mutant. Furthermore, the bop1-1 mutation  showed some synergistic effect in double mutants with as1-1 or as2-2 mutation  that is known to be defective in the regulation of meristematic activity and  class I knox gene expression in leaves. The bop1-1 mutation also showed a  synergistic effect with the stm-1 mutation, a strong mutant allele of a class I  knox gene, STM. We, thus, suggest that BOP1 promotes or maintains a  developmentally determinate state in leaf cells through the regulation of class I  knox genes.', '2003 Jan', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.00196', 'Nam']

BOP1: !regulates! meristematic activity 
BOP1: !controls! leaf morphogenesis 
KNAT1/2/6: !expressed aberrantly in! bop1-1 mutant 
as1-1/as2-2: !show synergistic effect with! bop1-1 mutation 
stm-1: !show synergistic effect with! bop1-1 mutation 
BOP1: !promotes or maintains! developmentally determinate state