['12447533', 'We have developed experimental systems to study hydrotropism in seedling roots of  Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. Arabidopsis roots showed a strong curvature in  response to a moisture gradient, established by applying 1% agar and a saturated  solution of KCl or K(2)CO(3) in a closed chamber. In this system, the hydrotropic  response overcame the gravitropic response. Hydrotropic curvature commenced  within 30 min and reached 80-100 degrees within 24 h of hydrostimulation. When 1%  agar and agar containing 1 MPa sorbitol were placed side-by-side in humid air, a  water potential gradient formed at the border between the two media. Although the  gradient changed with time, it still elicited a hydrotropic response in  Arabidopsis roots. The roots curved away from 0.5-1.5 MPa of sorbitol agar.  Various Arabidopsis mutants were tested for their hydrotropic response. Roots of  aba1-1 and abi2-1 mutants were less sensitive to hydrotropic stimulation.  Addition of abscisic acid restored the normal hydrotropic response in aba1-1  roots. In comparison, mutants that exhibit a reduced response to gravity and  auxin, axr1-3 and axr2-1, showed a hydrotropic response greater than that of the  wild type. Wavy mutants, wav2-1 and wav3-1, showed increased sensitivity to the  induction of hydrotropism by the moisture gradient. These results suggest that  auxin plays divergent roles in hydrotropism and gravitropism, and that abscisic  acid plays a positive role in hydrotropism. Furthermore, hydrotropism and the  wavy response may share part of a common molecular pathway controlling the  directional growth of roots.', '2002 Dec', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-002-0840-3', 'Takahashi']

hydrotropism: !overcomes! gravitropism 
hydrotropism: !elicited by! water potential gradient 
mutants: !less sensitive to! hydrotropic stimulation 
mutants: !greater response to! hydrotropic stimulation 
abscisic acid: !positive role in! hydrotropism 
auxin: !divergent roles in! hydrotropism and gravitropism 
hydrotropism: !shared pathway with! wavy response