['12456757', 'Plant Rac-like GTPases have been classified phylogenetically into two major  groups-class I and class II. Several pollen-expressed class I Rac-like GTPases  have been shown to be important regulators of polar pollen tube growth. The  functional participation by some of the class I and all of the class II  Arabidopsis Rac-like GTPases in pollen tube growth remains to be explored. It is  shown that at least four members of the Arabidopsis Rac GTPase family are  expressed in pollen, including a class II Rac, AtRac7. However, when  over-expressed as fusion proteins with GFP, both pollen- and non-pollen-expressed  AtRacs interfered with the normal pollen tube tip growth process. These  observations suggest that these AtRacs share similar biochemical activities and  may integrate into the pollen cellular machinery that regulates the polar tube  growth process. Therefore, the functional contribution by individual Rac GTPase  to the pollen tube growth process probably depends to a considerable extent on  their expression characteristics in pollen. Among the Arabidopsis Racs,  GFP-AtRac7 showed association with the cell membrane and Golgi bodies, a pattern  distinct from all previously reported localization for other plant Racs.  Over-expressing GFP-AtRac7 also induced the broadest spectrum of pollen tube  growth defects, including pollen tubes that are bifurcated, with diverted growth  trajectory or a ballooned tip. Transgenic plants with multiple copies of the  chimeric Lat52-GFP-AtRac7 showed severely reduced seed set, probably many of  these defective pollen tubes were arrested, or reduced in their growth rates that  they did not arrive at the ovules while they were still receptive for  fertilization. These observations substantiate the importance of Rac-like GTPases  to sexual reproduction.', '2003 Jan', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erg044', 'Wu']

Class I Rac-like GTPases: !regulate! polar pollen tube growth 
AtRacs: !interfere with! normal pollen tube tip growth process 
GFP-AtRac7: !localizes to! cell membrane and Golgi bodies 
GFP-AtRac7: !induces! broad spectrum of pollen tube growth defects 
Lat52-GFP-AtRac7: !reduces! seed set 
Rac-like GTPases: !important for! sexual reproduction