['12468733', 'In a screen for suppressors of npr1-5-based salicylic acid (SA) insensitivity, we  isolated a semidominant gain-of-function mutation, designated ssi4, that confers  constitutive expression of several PR (pathogenesis-related) genes, induces SA  accumulation, triggers programmed cell death, and enhances resistance to  bacterial and oomycete pathogens. Through map-based cloning, ssi4 was identified  and found to encode a putative protein belonging to the TIR-NBS-LRR (Toll  Interleukin1 Receptor-Nucleotide Binding Site-Leu-Rich Repeat) class of R  (resistance) proteins. Comparison between ssi4 and the corresponding wild-type  sequence revealed a single amino acid substitution in the NBS. Epistasis analysis  indicated that SA and EDS1 are required for ssi4-induced PR-1 expression and  enhanced disease resistance; they also are required for the increased  accumulation of SSI4 and EDS1 transcripts detected in the ssi4 mutant. Although  high levels of ssi4 transcripts correlate with the appearance of the mutant  phenotype, overexpression of the wild-type SSI4 gene failed to induce stunting,  spontaneous lesion formation, or increased PR-1 expression associated with the  ssi4 mutation. Thus, the ssi4 phenotype does not appear to be caused by  overexpression of this R gene; rather, we propose that the NBS substitution  generates a constitutively activated R protein. Furthermore, because SA treatment  induced the expression of SSI4 and the closely related TIR-NBS-LRR genes RPP1 and  RPS4 but had little effect on the expression of the coiled-coil NBS-LRR genes  RPM1 and RPS2, we suggest that SA not only functions as a critical signal for  downstream resistance events but also upregulates the expression of certain R  genes.', '2002 Dec', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.005348', 'Klessig']

Gene: !affects! Process 
SSI4: !confers! Constitutive expression of PR genes 
SSI4: !induces! SA accumulation 
SSI4: !triggers! Programmed cell death 
SSI4: !enhances! Resistance to bacterial and oomycete pathogens 
SSI4: !encodes! Putative protein 
NBS: !substitution! Generates constitutively activated R protein 
SA: !functions as! Critical signal for downstream resistance events 
SA: !upregulates! Expression of certain R genes