['12468727', 'Selective ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis through the cell cycle controls the  availability, and therefore the activity, of several cell proliferation proteins.  E2F transcription factors play distinct roles in both proliferating and  differentiated cells by regulating gene expression. Here, we report that  Arabidopsis AtE2Fc is regulated by a balance between gene expression and  ubiquitin-proteasome proteolysis. AtE2Fc degradation implicates the function of  the E3 ubiquitin-ligase Skp1, Cullin, F-box (SCF(AtSKP2)) complex and seems to be  dependent on cyclin-dependent kinase phosphorylation. In addition, we found that  AtE2Fc degradation is triggered by light stimulation of dark-grown seedlings.  Interestingly, the auxin response mutant axr1-12, in which RUB1 modification of  the SCF component CUL1 is impaired, shows increased AtE2Fc protein levels,  suggesting a dysfunction in the control of AtE2Fc stability. Likewise,  overexpression of a stable form of the AtE2Fc protein negatively affects cell  division and increases cell size. These effects are mediated, at least in part,  by downregulating the cell cycle gene AtCDC6. The negative role of AtE2Fc in gene  expression is further supported by the fact that AtE2Fc interacts with plant  retinoblastoma-related protein, suggesting that AtE2Fc might form part of a  repressor complex. We propose that AtE2Fc might play a role in cell division and  during the transition from skotomorphogenesis to photomorphogenesis.', '2002 Dec', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.006791', 'Gutierrez']

AtE2Fc: !regulated by! balance between gene expression and ubiquitin-proteasome proteolysis
AtE2Fc: !degraded by! SCF(AtSKP2) complex
AtE2Fc: !triggered by! light stimulation of dark-grown seedlings
AtE2Fc: !impaired in! axr1-12 mutant
AtE2Fc: !overexpression affects! cell division and size
AtE2Fc: !downregulates! AtCDC6
AtE2Fc: !interacts with! plant retinoblastoma-related protein
AtE2Fc: !plays role in! cell division and skotomorphogenesis to photomorphogenesis