['12481102', 'UDP-xylose (Xyl) is an important sugar donor for the synthesis of glycoproteins,  polysaccharides, various metabolites, and oligosaccharides in animals, plants,  fungi, and bacteria. UDP-Xyl also feedback inhibits upstream enzymes (UDP-glucose  [Glc] dehydrogenase, UDP-Glc pyrophosphorylase, and UDP-GlcA decarboxylase) and  is involved in its own synthesis and the synthesis of UDP-arabinose. In plants,  biosynthesis of UDP-Xyl is catalyzed by different membrane-bound and soluble  UDP-GlcA decarboxylase (UDP-GlcA-DC) isozymes, all of which convert UDP-GlcA to  UDP-Xyl. Because synthesis of UDP-Xyl occurs both in the cytosol and in  membranes, it is not known which source of UDP-Xyl the different Golgi-localized  xylosyltransferases are utilizing. Here, we describe the identification of  several distinct Arabidopsis genes (named AtUXS for UDP-Xyl synthase) that encode  functional UDP-GlcA-DC isoforms. The Arabidopsis genome contains five UXS genes  and their protein products can be subdivided into three isozyme classes (A-C),  one soluble and two distinct putative membrane bound. AtUxs from each class, when  expressed in Escherichia coli, generate active UDP-GlcA-DC that converts UDP-GlcA  to UDP-Xyl. Members of this gene family have a large conserved C-terminal  catalytic domain (approximately 300 amino acids long) and an N-terminal variable  domain differing in sequence and size (30-120 amino acids long). Isoforms of  class A and B appear to encode putative type II membrane proteins with their  catalytic domains facing the lumen (like Golgi-glycosyltransferases) and their  N-terminal variable domain facing the cytosol. Uxs class C is likely a cytosolic  isoform. The characteristics of the plant Uxs support the hypothesis that unique  UDP-GlcA-DCs with distinct subcellular localizations are required for specific  xylosylation events.', '2002 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.009654', 'Bar-Peled']

UDP-xylose: !synthesized by! AtUXS genes 
AtUXS genes: !encode! functional UDP-GlcA-DC isoforms 
UDP-GlcA-DC isoforms: !convert! UDP-GlcA to UDP-Xyl 
AtUXS genes: !divided into! three isozyme classes (A-C) 
AtUXS class A/B: !encode! putative type II membrane proteins 
AtUXS class C: !likely a! cytosolic isoform