['12481103', 'The ACT2 gene, encoding one of eight actin isovariants in Arabidopsis, is the  most strongly expressed actin gene in vegetative tissues. A search was conducted  for physical defects in act2-1 mutant plants to account for their reduced fitness  compared with wild type in population studies. The act2-1 insertion fully  disrupted expression of ACT2 RNA and significantly lowered the level of total  actin protein in vegetative organs. The root hairs of the act2-1 mutants were 10%  to 70% the length of wild-type root hairs, and they bulged severely at the base.  The length of the mutant root hairs and degree of bulging at the base were  affected by adjusting the osmolarity and gelling agent of the growth medium. The  act2-1 mutant phenotypes were fully rescued by an ACT2 genomic transgene. When  the act2-1 mutation was combined with another vegetative actin mutation, act7-1,  the resulting double mutant exhibited extensive synergistic phenotypes ranging  from developmental lethality to severe dwarfism. Transgenic overexpression of the  ACT7 vegetative isovariant and ectopic expression of the ACT1 reproductive actin  isovariant also rescued the root hair elongation defects of the act2-1 mutant.  These results suggest normal ACT2 gene regulation is essential to proper root  hair elongation and that even minor differences may cause root defects. However,  differences in the actin protein isovariant are not significant to root hair  elongation, in sharp contrast to recent reports on the functional nonequivalency  of plant actin isovariants. Impairment of root hair functions such as nutrient  mining, water uptake, and physical anchoring are the likely cause of the reduced  fitness seen for act2-1 mutants in multigenerational studies.', '2002 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.014068', 'Meagher']

ACT2 gene: !encodes! actin isovariants 
act2-1 mutant: !exhibits! reduced fitness 
ACT2 RNA: !disrupted by! act2-1 insertion 
total actin protein: !lowered by! act2-1 insertion 
root hairs: !shortened by! act2-1 mutation 
osmolarity/gelling agent: !affects! root hair length 
ACT2 genomic transgene: !rescues! act2-1 mutant phenotypes 
act7-1 mutation: !combined with! act2-1 mutation 
double mutant: !exhibits! synergistic phenotypes 
ACT7 vegetative isovariant: !overexpressed by! transgenic plants 
ACT1 reproductive actin isovariant: !expressed ectopically by! transgenic plants 
root hair functions: !impaired by! act2-1 mutants