['12482876', 'Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) is a member of the superfamily of  ubiquitin-like polypeptides that become covalently attached to various  intracellular target proteins as a way to alter their function, location, and/or  half-life. Here we show that the SUMO conjugation system operates in plants  through a characterization of the Arabidopsis SUMO pathway. An eight-gene family  encoding the SUMO tag was discovered as were genes encoding the various enzymes  required for SUMO processing, ligation, and release. A diverse array of  conjugates could be detected, some of which appear to be SUMO isoform-specific.  The levels of SUMO1 and -2 conjugates but not SUMO3 conjugates increased  substantially following exposure of seedlings to stress conditions, including  heat shock, H(2)O(2), ethanol, and the amino acid analog canavanine. The  heat-induced accumulation could be detected within 2 min from the start of a  temperature upshift, suggesting that SUMO1/2 conjugation is one of the early  plant responses to heat stress. Overexpression of SUMO2 enhanced both the steady  state levels of SUMO2 conjugates under normal growth conditions and the  subsequent heat shock-induced accumulation. This accumulation was dampened in an  Arabidopsis line engineered for increased thermotolerance by overexpressing the  cytosolic isoform of the HSP70 chaperonin. Taken together, the SUMO conjugation  system appears to be a complex and functionally heterogeneous pathway for protein  modification in plants with initial data indicating that one important function  may be in stress protection and/or repair.', '2003 Feb 28', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M209694200', 'Vierstra']

Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO): !conjugates to! target proteins 
Arabidopsis SUMO pathway: !encodes! eight-gene family 
SUMO1/2 conjugates: !increase! following stress conditions 
SUMO2: !overexpression enhances! steady state levels of SUMO2 conjugates 
SUMO2: !overexpression dampened! in Arabidopsis line engineered for increased thermotolerance 
SUMO conjugation system: !functionally heterogeneous! protein modification in plants 
SUMO conjugation system: !important function! in stress protection and/or repair