['12492839', 'The EDR1 gene of Arabidopsis has previously been reported to encode a Raf-like  mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK) kinase, and to function as a  negative regulator of disease resistance. A phylogenetic analysis of plant and  animal protein kinases revealed, however, that plant Raf-like kinases are more  closely related to animal mixed lineage kinases (MLKs) than Raf-like kinases, and  are deeply divergent from both classes of animal kinases, making inferences of  substrate specificity questionable. We, therefore, assayed the kinase activity of  recombinant EDR1 protein in vitro. The EDR1 kinase domain displayed  autophosphorylation activity and phosphorylated the common MAP kinase substrate  myelin basic protein. The EDR1 kinase domain also phosphorylated a  kinase-deficient EDR1 protein, indicating that EDR1 autophosphorylation can occur  via an intermolecular mechanism. Overexpression of a kinase-deficient full-length  EDR1 gene (35S::dnEDR1) in wild-type Arabidopsis plants caused a dominant  negative phenotype, conferring resistance to powdery mildew (Erysiphe  cichoracearum) and enhancing ethylene-induced senescence. RNA-gel blot analyses  showed that the 35S::dnEDR1 transgene was highly transcribed in transgenic  plants. Western blot analysis, however, revealed that neither the wild-type nor  mutant EDR1 protein could be detected in these lines, indicating that the  dominant negative phenotype may be caused by a translational inhibition mechanism  rather than by a protein level effect. Overexpression of orthologous dnEDR1  constructs may provide a novel strategy for controlling powdery mildew disease in  crops.', '2002 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2002.01482.x', 'Innes']

EDR1: !encodes! MAPKK kinase 
EDR1: !functions as! negative regulator of disease resistance 
EDR1: !autophosphorylates! itself 
EDR1: !phosphorylates! myelin basic protein 
EDR1: !overexpression of! dnEDR1 
dnEDR1: !confers! resistance to powdery mildew 
dnEDR1: !enhances! ethylene-induced senescence