['12492837', 'rsw3 is a temperature-sensitive mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana showing radially  swollen roots and a deficiency in cellulose. The rsw3 gene was identified by a  map-based strategy, and shows high similarity to the catalytic alpha-subunits of  glucosidase II from mouse, yeast and potato. These enzymes process N-linked  glycans in the ER, so that they bind and then release chaperones as part of the  quality control pathway, ensuring correct protein folding. Putative beta-subunits  for the glucosidase II holoenzyme identified in the Arabidopsis and rice genomes  share characteristic motifs (including an HDEL ER-retention signal) with  beta-subunits in mammals and yeast. The genes encoding the putative alpha- and  beta-subunits are single copy and, like the rsw3 phenotype, widely expressed.  rsw3 reduces cell number more strongly than cell size in stamen filaments and  probably stems. Most features of the rsw3 phenotype are shared with other  cellulose-deficient mutants, but some--notably, production of multiple rosettes  and a lack of secreted seed mucilage--are not and may reflect glucosidase II  affecting processes other than cellulose synthesis. The rsw3 root phenotype  develops more slowly than the rsw1 and rsw2 phenotypes when seedlings are  transferred to the restrictive temperature. This is consistent with rsw3 reducing  glycoprotein delivery from the ER to the plasma membrane whereas rsw1 and rsw2  act more rapidly by affecting the properties of already delivered enzymes.', '2002 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2002.01483.x', 'Williamson']

rsw3: !affects! glycoprotein delivery 
rsw3: !reduces! cell number 
rsw3: !shares features with! cellulose-deficient mutants 
rsw3: !shows similarity to! catalytic alpha-subunits of glucosidase II 
rsw3: !processes! N-linked glycans 
rsw3: !binds and releases! chaperones 
rsw3: !ensures! correct protein folding 
rsw3: !synthesizes! beta-subunits 
rsw1/2: !affects! properties of already delivered enzymes 
rsw1/2: !acts more rapidly than! rsw3