['12502715', 'Triacylglycerols (TAGs) and wax esters are neutral lipids with considerable  importance for dietetic, technical, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical applications.  Acinetobacter calcoaceticus ADP1 accumulates wax esters and TAGs as intracellular  storage lipids. We describe here the identification of a bifunctional enzyme from  this bacterium exhibiting acyl-CoA:fatty alcohol acyltransferase (wax ester  synthase, WS) as well as acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT) activity.  Experiments with a knock-out mutant demonstrated the key role of the bifunctional  WS/DGAT for biosynthesis of both storage lipids in A. calcoaceticus. This novel  type of long-chain acyl-CoA acyltransferase is not related to known  acyltransferases including the WS from jojoba (Simmondsia chinensis), the DGAT1  or DGAT2 families present in yeast, plants, and animals, and the  phospholipid:diacylglycerol acyltransferase catalyzing TAG formation in yeast and  plants. A large number of WS/DGAT-related proteins were identified in  Mycobacterium and Arabidopsis thaliana indicating an important function of these  proteins. WS and DGAT activity was demonstrated for the translational product of  one WS/DGAT homologous gene from M. smegmatis mc(2)155. The potential of WS/DGAT  to establish novel processes for biotechnological production of jojoba-like wax  esters was demonstrated by heterologous expression in recombinant Pseudomonas  citronellolis. The potential of WS/DGAT as a selective therapeutic target of  mycobacterial infections is discussed.', '2003 Mar 7', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M210533200', 'Steinbuchel']

Triacylglycerols (TAGs): !accumulated as! intracellular storage lipids 
Acyl-CoA:fatty alcohol acyltransferase (WS): !exhibits! DGAT activity 
Knock-out mutant: !demonstrated key role of! bifunctional WS/DGAT 
WS/DGAT: !not related to! known acyltransferases 
Mycobacterium and Arabidopsis thaliana: !contain! WS/DGAT-related proteins 
M. smegmatis mc(2)155: !demonstrated WS and DGAT activity for! translational product 
Recombinant Pseudomonas citronellolis: !used to demonstrate potential of! WS/DGAT 
WS/DGAT: !potential therapeutic target of! mycobacterial infections