['12586874', 'Wild-type Arabidopsis roots develop a wavy pattern of growth on tilted agar  surfaces. For many Arabidopsis ecotypes, roots also grow askew on such surfaces,  typically slanting to the right of the gravity vector. We identified a mutant,  wvd2-1, that displays suppressed root waving and leftward root slanting under  these conditions. These phenotypes arise from transcriptional activation of the  novel WAVE-DAMPENED2 (WVD2) gene by the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter in  mutant plants. Seedlings overexpressing WVD2 exhibit constitutive right-handed  helical growth in both roots and etiolated hypocotyls, whereas the petioles of  WVD2-overexpressing rosette leaves exhibit left-handed twisting. Moreover, the  anisotropic expansion of cells is impaired, resulting in the formation of shorter  and stockier organs. In roots, the phenotype is accompanied by a change in the  arrangement of cortical microtubules within peripheral cap cells and cells at the  basal end of the elongation zone. WVD2 transcripts are detectable by reverse  transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction in multiple organs of wild-type plants.  Its predicted gene product contains a conserved region named "KLEEK," which is  found only in plant proteins. The Arabidopsis genome possesses seven other genes  predicted to encode KLEEK-containing products. Overexpression of one of these  genes, WVD2-LIKE 1, which encodes a protein with regions of similarity to WVD2  extending beyond the KLEEK domain, results in phenotypes that are highly similar  to wvd2-1. Silencing of WVD2 and its paralogs results in enhanced root skewing in  the wild-type direction. Our observations suggest that at least two members of  this gene family may modulate both rotational polarity and anisotropic cell  expansion during organ growth.', '2003 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.015966', 'Masson']

WVD2: !activates! transcription 
35S promoter: !activates! WVD2 
WVD2: !causes! right-handed helical growth 
WVD2: !impairs! anisotropic expansion 
WVD2: !alters! arrangement of cortical microtubules 
WVD2-LIKE 1: !encodes! protein similar to WVD2 
WVD2-LIKE 1: !results in! phenotypes similar to wvd2-1 
WVD2: !silencing of! !enhances! root skewing