['12609049', 'Cytoplasmic aggregation, the rapid translocation of cytoplasm and subcellular  components to the site of pathogen penetration, is one of the earliest reactions  of plant cells against attack by microorganisms. We have investigated cytoplasmic  aggregation during Arabidopsis-oomycete interactions. Infection by non-pathogenic  Phytophthora sojae was prevented in the plant epidermal cell layer, whereas  Peronospora parasitica isolates Cala2 (avirulent) and Noks1 (virulent) could both  penetrate into the mesophyll cell layer. Epidermal cell responses to penetration  by these oomycetes were examined cytologically with a range of transgenic  Arabidopsis plants expressing Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP)-tagged cell  components. These included plants containing GFP-TUA6 for visualizing  microtubules, GFP-hTalin for actin microfilaments, GFP-tm-KKXX for endoplasmic  reticulum (ER), and STtmd-GFP for the Golgi apparatus. In all interactions, actin  microfilaments were actively re-arranged and formed large bundles in cytoplasmic  strands focused on the penetration site. Aggregation of ER membrane and  accumulation of Golgi bodies at the infection site were observed, suggesting that  production and secretion of plant materials were activated around the penetration  site. Microtubules did not become focused on the penetration site. No difference  was evident between the responses of epidermal cells in the non-host,  incompatible and compatible interactions. This result indicates that the  induction of cytoplasmic aggregation in Arabidopsis epidermal cells was neither  suppressed by the virulent strain of Peronospora, nor effective in stopping  infection.', '2003 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01673.x', 'Hardham']

GFP-TUA6: !localizes to! microtubules 
GFP-hTalin: !localizes to! actin microfilaments 
GFP-tm-KKXX: !localizes to! endoplasmic reticulum 
STtmd-GFP: !localizes to! Golgi apparatus 
actin microfilaments: !rearrange and form bundles! at penetration site 
ER membrane: !aggregates! at infection site 
Golgi bodies: !accumulate! at infection site