['12627976', 'A functional homologue of eukaryotic Ogg1 proteins in the model plant Arabidopsis  thalianahas recently been cloned, isolated, and characterized [Garcia-Ortiz, M.  V., Ariza, R. R., and Roldan-Arjona, T. (2001) Plant Mol. Biol. 47, 795-804].  This enzyme (AtOgg1) exhibits a high degree of sequence similarity in several  highly conserved regions with Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster,  and human Ogg1 proteins. We investigated the substrate specificity and kinetics  of AtOgg1 for excision of modified bases from oxidatively damaged DNA that  contained multiple pyrimidine- and purine-derived lesions. Two different DNA  substrates prepared by exposure to ionizing radiation in aqueous solution under  N2O or air were used for this purpose. Gas chromatography/isotope-dilution mass  spectrometry was applied to identify and quantify modified bases in DNA samples.  Of the 17 modified bases identified in DNA samples, only 8-hydroxyguanine and  2,6-diamino-4-hydroxy-5-formamidopyrimidine were significantly excised from both  DNA substrates. This is in agreement with the substrate specificities of other  eukaryotic Ogg1 proteins that had previously been studied under identical  conditions. Excision depended on incubation time, enzyme concentration, and  substrate concentration and followed Michaelis-Menten kinetics. A significant  dependence of excision on the nature of DNA substrate was observed in accord with  previous studies on other DNA glycosylases. A comparison of excision kinetics  pointed to significant differences between AtOgg1 and other Ogg1 proteins. We  also investigated the effect of base-pairing on the excision using  double-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides that contained 8-OH-Gua paired with each of  the four DNA bases. The activity of AtOgg1 was most effective on the 8-OH-Gua:C  pair with some or very low activity on other pairs in agreement with the activity  of other Ogg1 proteins. The results unequivocally show that AtOgg1 possesses  common substrates with other eukaryotic Ogg1 proteins albeit significant  differences between their excision kinetics.', '2003 Mar 18', 'Biochemistry', '10.1021/bi027226u', 'Dizdaroglu']

AtOgg1: !excision of! modified bases 
AtOgg1: !follows! Michaelis-Menten kinetics 
AtOgg1: !most effective on! 8-OH-Gua:C pair 
AtOgg1: !shares substrates with! other eukaryotic Ogg1 proteins