['12642673', 'Chloroplast division in plant cells is orchestrated by a complex macromolecular  machine with components positioned on both the inner and outer envelope surfaces.  The only plastid division proteins identified to date are of endosymbiotic origin  and are localized inside the organelle. Employing positional cloning methods in  Arabidopsis in conjunction with a novel strategy for pinpointing the mutant  locus, we have identified a gene encoding a new chloroplast division protein,  ARC5. Mutants of ARC5 exhibit defects in chloroplast constriction, have enlarged,  dumbbell-shaped chloroplasts, and are rescued by a wild-type copy of ARC5. The  ARC5 gene product shares similarity with the dynamin family of GTPases, which  mediate endocytosis, mitochondrial division, and other organellar fission and  fusion events in eukaryotes. Phylogenetic analysis showed that ARC5 is related to  a group of dynamin-like proteins unique to plants. A GFP-ARC5 fusion protein  localizes to a ring at the chloroplast division site. Chloroplast import and  protease protection assays indicate that the ARC5 ring is positioned on the outer  surface of the chloroplast. Thus, ARC5 is the first cytosolic component of the  chloroplast division complex to be identified. ARC5 has no obvious counterparts  in prokaryotes, suggesting that it evolved from a dynamin-related protein present  in the eukaryotic ancestor of plants. These results indicate that the chloroplast  division apparatus is of mixed evolutionary origin and that it shares structural  and mechanistic similarities with both the cell division machinery of bacteria  and the dynamin-mediated organellar fission machineries of eukaryotes.', '2003 Apr 1', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0530206100', 'Osteryoung']

ARC5: !localizes to! chloroplast division site 
ARC5: !shares similarity with! dynamin family of GTPases 
ARC5: !is related to! group of dynamin-like proteins unique to plants 
ARC5: !has no obvious counterparts in! prokaryotes 
chloroplast division complex: !contains! ARC5 
chloroplast division complex: !shares structural and mechanistic similarities with! cell division machinery of bacteria and dynamin-mediated organellar fission machineries of eukaryotes