['12650615', 'Cytosolic acyl-CoA binding proteins bind long-chain acyl-CoAs and act as  intracellular acyl-CoA transporters and pool formers. Recently, we have  characterized Arabidopsis thaliana cDNAs encoding novel forms of ACBP, designated  ACBP1 and ACBP2, that contain a hydrophobic domain at the N-terminus and show  conservation at the acyl-CoA binding domain to cytosolic ACBPs. We have  previously demonstrated that ACBP1 is membrane-associated in Arabidopsis. Here,  western blot analysis of anti-ACBP2 antibodies on A. thaliana protein showed that  ACBP2 is located in the microsome-containing membrane fraction and in the  subcellular fraction containing large particles (mitochondria, chloroplasts and  peroxisomes), resembling the subcellular localization of ACBP1. To further  investigate the subcellular localization of ACBP2, we fused ACBP2 translationally  in-frame to GFP. By means of particle gene bombardment, ACBP2-GFP and ACBP1-GFP  fusion proteins were observed transiently expressed at the plasma membrane and at  the endoplasmic reticulum in onion epidermal cells. GFP fusions with deletion  derivatives of ACBPI or ACBP2 lacking the transmembrane domain were impaired in  membrane targeting. Our investigations also showed that when the transmembrane  domain of ACBP1 or that of ACBP2 was fused with GFP, the fusion protein was  targeted to the plasma membrane, thereby establishing their role in membrane  targeting. The localization of ACBP1-GFP is consistent with our previous  observations using immunoelectron microscopy whereby ACBPI was localized to the  plasma membrane and vesicles. We conclude that ACBP2, like ACBP1, is a membrane  protein that likely functions in membrane-associated acyl-CoA  transfer/metabolism.', '2003 Mar', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/a:1022330304402', 'Chye']

ACBP1: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
ACBP2: !localizes to! microsome-containing membrane fraction 
ACBP2: !localizes to! subcellular fraction containing large particles 
ACBP2: !fused with! GFP 
ACBP1: !fused with! GFP 
ACBP1/2: !targeted to! plasma membrane 
ACBP1/2: !role in! membrane-associated acyl-CoA transfer/metabolism