['12671095', 'Acyl-acyl carrier protein thioesterases determine the amount and type of fatty  acids that are exported from the plastids. To better understand the role of the  FATB class of acyl-acyl carrier protein thioesterases, we identified an  Arabidopsis mutant with a T-DNA insertion in the FATB gene. Palmitate (16:0)  content of glycerolipids of the mutant was reduced by 42% in leaves, by 56% in  flowers, by 48% in roots, and by 56% in seeds. In addition, stearate (18:0) was  reduced by 50% in leaves and by 30% in seeds. The growth rate was reduced in the  mutant, resulting in 50% less fresh weight at 4 weeks compared with wild-type  plants. Furthermore, mutant plants produced seeds with low viability and altered  morphology. Analysis of individual glycerolipids revealed that the fatty acid  composition of prokaryotic plastid lipids was largely unaltered, whereas the  impact on eukaryotic lipids varied but was particularly severe for  phosphatidylcholine, with a >4-fold reduction of 16:0 and a 10-fold reduction of  18:0 levels. The total wax load of fatb-ko plants was reduced by 20% in leaves  and by 50% in stems, implicating FATB in the supply of saturated fatty acids for  wax biosynthesis. Analysis of C(18) sphingoid bases derived from 16:0 indicated  that, despite a 50% reduction in exported 16:0, the mutant cells maintained  wild-type levels of sphingoid bases, presumably at the expense of other cell  components. The growth retardation caused by the fatb mutation was enhanced in a  fatb-ko act1 double mutant in which saturated fatty acid content was reduced  further. Together, these results demonstrate the in vivo role of FATB as a major  determinant of saturated fatty acid synthesis and the essential role of saturates  for the biosynthesis and/or regulation of cellular components critical for plant  growth and seed development.', '2003 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.008946', 'Ohlrogge']

FATB: !determines! Amount/Type of Fatty Acids 
FATB: !reduces! Palmitate/Stearate Content 
FATB: !reduces! Growth Rate 
FATB: !alters! Seed Morphology 
FATB: !alters! Eukaryotic Lipid Composition 
FATB: !supplies! Saturated Fatty Acids for Wax Biosynthesis 
FATB: !maintains! Wild-Type Levels of Sphingoid Bases 
FATB: !enhances! Growth Retardation in Double Mutant