['12692340', 'Methionine (Met) S-methyltransferase (MMT) catalyzes the synthesis of  S-methyl-Met (SMM) from Met and S-adenosyl-Met (Ado-Met). SMM can be reconverted  to Met by donating a methyl group to homocysteine (homo-Cys), and concurrent  operation of this reaction and that mediated by MMT sets up the SMM cycle. SMM  has been hypothesized to be essential as a methyl donor or as a transport form of  sulfur, and the SMM cycle has been hypothesized to guard against depletion of the  free Met pool by excess Ado-Met synthesis or to regulate Ado-Met level and hence  the Ado-Met to S-adenosylhomo-Cys ratio (the methylation ratio). To test these  hypotheses, we isolated insertional mmt mutants of Arabidopsis and maize (Zea  mays). Both mutants lacked the capacity to produce SMM and thus had no SMM cycle.  They nevertheless grew and reproduced normally, and the seeds of the Arabidopsis  mutant had normal sulfur contents. These findings rule out an indispensable role  for SMM as a methyl donor or in sulfur transport. The Arabidopsis mutant had  significantly higher Ado-Met and lower S-adenosylhomo-Cys levels than the wild  type and consequently had a higher methylation ratio (13.8 versus 9.5). Free Met  and thiol pools were unaltered in this mutant, although there were moderate  decreases (of 30%-60%) in free serine, threonine, proline, and other amino acids.  These data indicate that the SMM cycle contributes to regulation of Ado-Met  levels rather than preventing depletion of free Met.', '2003 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.102.018846', 'Hanson']

Methionine S-methyltransferase: !catalyzes! Synthesis of S-methyl-Met 
S-methyl-Met: !donates! Methyl group to homocysteine 
S-methyl-Met cycle: !hypothesized to! Guard against depletion of free Met pool 
Insertional mmt mutants: !lacked! Capacity to produce SMM 
Mutants: !grew and reproduced normally! 
Arabidopsis mutant: !had higher! Ado-Met levels 
Arabidopsis mutant: !had lower! S-adenosylhomo-Cys levels 
Arabidopsis mutant: !had higher! Methylation ratio 
Free Met pool: !unaltered! In mutant