['12724542', 'Insertional mutagenesis of Arabidopsis ecotype C24 was used to identify a novel  mutant, designated wax2, that had alterations in both cuticle membrane and  cuticular waxes. Arabidopsis mutants with altered cuticle membrane have not been  reported previously. Compared with the wild type, the cuticle membrane of wax2  stems weighed 20.2% less, and when viewed using electron microscopy, it was 36.4%  thicker, less opaque, and structurally disorganized. The total wax amount on wax2  leaves and stems was reduced by >78% and showed proportional deficiencies in the  aldehydes, alkanes, secondary alcohols, and ketones, with increased acids,  primary alcohols, and esters. Besides altered cuticle membranes, wax2 displayed  postgenital fusion between aerial organs (especially in flower buds), reduced  fertility under low humidity, increased epidermal permeability, and a reduction  in stomatal index on adaxial and abaxial leaf surfaces. Thus, wax2 reveals a  potential role for the cuticle as a suppressor of postgenital fusion and  epidermal diffusion and as a mediator of both fertility and the development of  epidermal architecture (via effects on stomatal index). The cloned WAX2 gene  (verified by three independent allelic insertion mutants with identical  phenotypes) codes for a predicted 632-amino acid integral membrane protein with a  molecular mass of 72.3 kD and a theoretical pI of 8.78. WAX2 has six  transmembrane domains, a His-rich diiron binding region at the N-terminal region,  and a large soluble C-terminal domain. The N-terminal portion of WAX2 is  homologous with members of the sterol desaturase family, whereas the C terminus  of WAX2 is most similar to members of the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase  family. WAX2 has 32% identity to CER1, a protein required for wax production but  not for cuticle membrane production. Based on these analyses, we predict that  WAX2 has a metabolic function associated with both cuticle membrane and wax  synthesis. These studies provide new insight into the genetics and biochemistry  of plant cuticle production and elucidate new associations between the cuticle  and diverse aspects of plant development.', '2003 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.010926', 'Jenks']

Insertional mutagenesis: !identifies! wax2 mutant 
wax2: !has alterations in! cuticle membrane & cuticular waxes 
cuticle membrane: !weighs less and is thicker, less opaque, structurally disorganized in! wax2 
total wax amount: !reduced by! >78% in wax2 
wax2: !displays! postgenital fusion, reduced fertility, increased epidermal permeability, reduction in stomatal index 
WAX2 gene: !codes for! 632-amino acid integral membrane protein 
WAX2: !has homology with! sterol desaturase & short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase families 
WAX2: !has 32% identity to! CER1 
WAX2: !has metabolic function associated with! cuticle membrane & wax synthesis