['12748181', 'ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase catalyzes the first and limiting step in starch  biosynthesis and is allosterically regulated by the levels of 3-phosphoglycerate  and phosphate in plants. ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylases from plants are  heterotetramers composed of two types of subunits (small and large). In this  study, the six Arabidopsis thaliana genes coding for ADP-glucose  pyrophosphorylase isoforms (two small and four large subunits) have been cloned  and expressed in an Escherichia coli mutant deficient in ADP-glucose  pyrophosphorylase activity. The co-expression of the small subunit APS1 with the  different Arabidopsis large subunits (APL1, APL2, APL3, and APL4) resulted in  heterotetramers with different regulatory and kinetic properties. Heterotetramers  composed of APS1 and APL1 showed the highest sensitivity to the allosteric  effectors as well as the highest apparent affinity for the substrates  (glucose-1-phosphate and ATP), whereas heterotetramers formed by APS1 and APL2  showed the lower response to allosteric effectors and the lower affinity for the  substrates. No activity was detected for the second gene coding for a small  subunit isoform (APS2) annotated in the Arabidopsis genome. This lack of activity  is possibly due to the absence of essential amino acids involved in catalysis  and/or in the binding of glucose-1-phosphate and 3-phosphoglycerate. Kinetic and  regulatory properties of the different heterotetramers, together with sequence  analysis has allowed us to make a distinction between sink and source enzymes,  because the combination of different large subunits would provide a high  plasticity to ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase activity and regulation. This is the  first experimental data concerning the role that all the ADP-glucose  pyrophosphorylase isoforms play in a single plant species. This phenomenon could  have an important role in vivo, because different large subunits would confer  distinct regulatory properties to ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase according to the  necessities for starch synthesis in a given tissue.', '2003 Aug 1', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M304280200', 'Romero']

ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !catalyzes! starch biosynthesis 
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !allosterically regulated by! 3-phosphoglycerate and phosphate 
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !composed of! two types of subunits 
Arabidopsis thaliana genes: !code for! ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase isoforms 
APS1: !co-expresses with! different Arabidopsis large subunits 
heterotetramers: !show! different regulatory and kinetic properties 
APS2: !lacks activity due to! absence of essential amino acids 
different large subunits: !confer distinct regulatory properties to! ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase