['12740438', 'The gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA) shunt is a metabolic pathway that bypasses two  steps of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and it is present in both prokaryotes and  eukaryotes. In plants the pathway is composed of the calcium/calmodulin-regulated  cytosolic enzyme glutamate decarboxylase and the mitochondrial enzymes GABA  transaminase and succinic-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH). The activity of the  GABA shunt in plants is rapidly enhanced in response to various biotic and  abiotic stresses. However the physiological role of this pathway remains obscure.  To elucidate its role in plants, we analyzed Arabidopsis T-DNA knockout mutants  of SSADH, the ultimate enzyme of the pathway. Four alleles of the ssadh mutation  were isolated, and these exhibited a similar phenotype. When exposed to white  light (100 micromol of photons per m2 per s), they appear dwarfed with necrotic  lesions. Detailed spectrum analysis revealed that UV-B has the most adverse  effect on the mutant phenotype, whereas photosynthetic active range light has a  very little effect. The ssadh mutants are also sensitive to heat, as they develop  necrosis when submitted to such stress. Moreover, both UV and heat cause a rapid  increase in the levels of hydrogen peroxide in the ssadh mutants, which is  associated with enhanced cell death. Surprisingly, our study also shows that  trichomes are hypersensitive to stresses in ssadh mutants. Our work establishes a  role for the GABA shunt in preventing the accumulation of reactive oxygen  intermediates and cell death, which appears to be essential for plant defense  against environmental stress.', '2003 May 27', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1037532100', 'Fromm']

GABA shunt: !bypasses! 2 steps of tricarboxylic acid cycle 
calcium/calmodulin-regulated enzyme: !regulates! GABA shunt 
GABA shunt: !enhanced by! biotic & abiotic stresses 
ssadh mutation: !causes! dwarfing & necrotic lesions 
UV-B: !most adverse effect on! ssadh mutant phenotype 
heat: !causes! necrosis in ssadh mutants 
hydrogen peroxide: !increases in! ssadh mutants 
trichomes: !hypersensitive to! stresses in ssadh mutants 
GABA shunt: !prevents accumulation of! reactive oxygen intermediates