['12787249', 'Metal homeostasis is critical for the survival of living organisms, and metal  transporters play central roles in maintaining metal homeostasis in the living  cells. We have investigated the function of a metal transporter of the NRAMP  family, AtNRAMP3, in Arabidopsis thaliana. A previous study showed that AtNRAMP3  expression is upregulated by iron (Fe) starvation and that AtNRAMP3 protein can  transport Fe. In the present study, we used AtNRAMP3 promoter beta-glucoronidase  (GUS) fusions to show that AtNRAMP3 is expressed in the vascular bundles of  roots, stems, and leaves under Fe-sufficient conditions. This suggests a function  in long-distance metal transport within the plant. Under Fe-starvation  conditions, the GUS activity driven by the AtNRAMP3 promoter is upregulated  without any change in the expression pattern. We analyze the impact of AtNRAMP3  disruption and overexpression on metal accumulation in plants. Under  Fe-sufficient conditions, AtNRAMP3 overexpression or disruption does not lead to  any change in the plant metal content. Upon Fe starvation, AtNRAMP3 disruption  leads to increased accumulation of manganese (Mn) and zinc (Zn) in the roots,  whereas AtNRAMP3 overexpression downregulates Mn accumulation. In addition,  overexpression of AtNRAMP3 downregulates the expression of the primary Fe uptake  transporter IRT1 and of the root ferric chelate reductase FRO2. Expression of  AtNRAMP3::GFP fusion protein in onion cells or Arabidopsis protoplasts shows that  AtNRAMP3 protein localizes to the vacuolar membrane. To account for the results  presented, we propose that AtNRAMP3 influences metal accumulation and IRT1 and  FRO2 gene expression by mobilizing vacuolar metal pools to the cytosol.', '2003 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01760.x', 'Barbier-Brygoo']

AtNRAMP3: !upregulates! Fe-starvation 
AtNRAMP3: !localizes to! vacuolar membrane 
AtNRAMP3: !influences! metal accumulation 
AtNRAMP3: !downregulates! Mn accumulation 
AtNRAMP3: !downregulates! IRT1 expression 
AtNRAMP3: !downregulates! FRO2 expression