['12805621', 'In wild-type Arabidopsis, levels of ASN1 mRNA and asparagine (Asn) are tightly  regulated by environmental factors and metabolites. Because Asn serves as an  important nitrogen storage and transport compound used to allocate nitrogen  resources between source and sink organs, we tested whether overexpression of the  major expressed gene for Asn synthetase, ASN1, would lead to changes in nitrogen  status in the ultimate storage organ for metabolites-seeds. Transgenic  Arabidopsis constitutively overexpressing ASN1 under the cauliflower mosaic virus  35S promoter were constructed (35S-ASN1). In seeds of the 35S-ASN1 lines, three  observations support the notion that the nitrogen status was enhanced: (a)  elevations of soluble seed protein contents, (b) elevations of total protein  contents from acid-hydrolyzed seeds, and (c) higher tolerance of young seedlings  when grown on nitrogen-limiting media. Besides quantitative differences, changes  in the relative composition of the seed amino acid were also observed. The change  in seed nitrogen status was accompanied by an increase of total free amino acids  (mainly Asn) allocated to flowers and developing siliques. In 35S-ASN1 lines,  sink tissues such as flowers and developing siliques exhibit a higher level of  free Asn than source tissues such as leaves and stems, despite significantly  higher levels of ASN1 mRNA observed in the source tissues. This was at least  partially due to an enhanced transport of Asn from source to sink via the phloem,  as demonstrated by the increased levels of Asn in phloem exudates of the 35S-ASN1  plants.', '2003 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.020123', 'Coruzzi']

ASN1: !synthesizes! Asn 
35S-ASN1: !enhances! nitrogen status 
35S-ASN1: !increases! soluble seed protein content 
35S-ASN1: !increases! total protein content 
35S-ASN1: !increases! tolerance of young seedlings 
35S-ASN1: !changes! relative composition of seed amino acid 
35S-ASN1: !increases! free amino acids in flowers and siliques 
35S-ASN1: !increases! Asn in phloem exudates