['12805588', 'In a recent bioinformatic analysis, we predicted the presence of multiple  families of cell surface glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins  (GAPs) in Arabidopsis (G.H.H. Borner, D.J. Sherrier, T.J. Stevens, I.T. Arkin, P.  Dupree [2002] Plant Physiol 129: 486-499). A number of publications have since  demonstrated the importance of predicted GAPs in diverse physiological processes  including root development, cell wall integrity, and adhesion. However, direct  experimental evidence for their GPI anchoring is mostly lacking. Here, we present  the first, to our knowledge, large-scale proteomic identification of plant GAPs.  Triton X-114 phase partitioning and sensitivity to phosphatidylinositol-specific  phospholipase C were used to prepare GAP-rich fractions from Arabidopsis callus  cells. Two-dimensional fluorescence difference gel electrophoresis and  one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  demonstrated the existence of a large number of phospholipase C-sensitive  Arabidopsis proteins. Using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, 30  GAPs were identified, including six beta-1,3 glucanases, five phytocyanins, four  fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins, four receptor-like proteins, two  Hedgehog-interacting-like proteins, two putative glycerophosphodiesterases, a  lipid transfer-like protein, a COBRA-like protein, SKU5, and SKS1. These results  validate our previous bioinformatic analysis of the Arabidopsis protein database.  Using the confirmed GAPs from the proteomic analysis to train the search  algorithm, as well as improved genomic annotation, an updated in silico screen  yielded 64 new candidates, raising the total to 248 predicted GAPs in  Arabidopsis.', '2003 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.021170', 'Dupree']

GAPs: !affect! physiological processes 
GAPs: !identified by! proteomic analysis 
GAPs: !predicted by! bioinformatic analysis 
GAPs: !validated by! proteomic analysis 
GAPs: !updated by! in silico screen