['12805607', 'Phytoene synthase catalyzes the dimerization of two molecules of geranylgeranyl  pyrophosphate to phytoene and has been shown to be rate limiting for the  synthesis of carotenoids. To elucidate if the capacity to produce phytoene is  limiting also in the seed of Arabidopsis (Wassilewskija), a gene coding for an  endogenous phytoene synthase was cloned and coupled to a seed-specific promoter,  and the effects of the overexpression were examined. The resulting transgenic  plants produced darker seeds, and extracts from the seed of five overexpressing  plants had a 43-fold average increase of beta-carotene and a total average amount  of beta-carotene of approximately 260 microg g-1 fresh weight. Lutein,  violaxanthin, and chlorophyll were significantly increased, whereas the levels of  zeaxanthin only increased by a factor 1.1. In addition, substantial levels of  lycopene and alpha-carotene were produced in the seeds, whereas only trace  amounts were found in the control plants. Seeds from the transgenic plants  exhibited delayed germination, and the degree of delay was positively correlated  with the increased levels of carotenoids. The abscisic acid levels followed the  increase of the carotenoids, and plants having the highest carotenoid levels also  had the highest abscisic acid content. Addition of gibberellic acid to the growth  medium only partly restored germination of the transgenic seeds.', '2003 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.102.017053', 'Hoglund']

Phytoene synthase: !catalyzes! dimerization 
Geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate: !dimerizes to! phytoene 
Gene coding for phytoene synthase: !cloned and coupled to! seed-specific promoter 
Transgenic plants: !produce! darker seeds 
Extracts from transgenic plants: !have 43-fold increase of! beta-carotene 
Lutein, violaxanthin, chlorophyll: !significantly increased! in transgenic plants 
Zeaxanthin: !increased by factor 1.1! in transgenic plants 
Lycopene, alpha-carotene: !produced in! transgenic plants 
Transgenic seeds: !exhibit delayed germination! 
Carotenoid levels: !positively correlated with! degree of delay 
Abscisic acid levels: !follow increase of! carotenoids 
Gibberellic acid: !partly restores germination of! transgenic seeds