['12815071', 'The Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins MEDEA, FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT ENDOSPERM, and  FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT SEED2 regulate seed development in Arabidopsis by  controlling embryo and endosperm proliferation. All three of these FIS-class  proteins are likely subunits of a multiprotein PcG complex, which epigenetically  regulates downstream target genes that were previously unknown. Here we show that  the MADS-box gene PHERES1 (PHE1) is commonly deregulated in the fis-class  mutants. PHE1 belongs to the evolutionarily ancient type I class of MADS-box  proteins that have not yet been assigned any function in plants. Both MEDEA and  FIE directly associate with the promoter region of PHE1, suggesting that PHE1  expression is epigenetically regulated by PcG proteins. PHE1 is expressed  transiently after fertilization in both the embryo and the endosperm; however, it  remains up-regulated in the fis mutants, consistent with the proposed function of  the FIS genes as transcriptional repressors. Reduced expression levels of PHE1 in  medea mutant seeds can suppress medea seed abortion, indicating a key role of  PHE1 repression in seed development. PHE1 expression in a hypomethylated medea  mutant background resembles the wild-type expression pattern and is associated  with rescue of the medea seed-abortion phenotype. In summary, our results  demonstrate that seed abortion in the medea mutant is largely mediated by  deregulated expression of the type I MADS-box gene PHE1.', '2003 Jun 15', 'Genes Dev', '10.1101/gad.257403', 'Grossniklaus']

MEDEA: !regulates! seed development 
FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT ENDOSPERM: !regulates! seed development 
FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT SEED2: !regulates! seed development 
PcG proteins: !epigenetically regulate! downstream target genes 
PHE1: !deregulated in! fis-class mutants 
MEDEA: !associates with! PHE1 promoter region 
FIE: !associates with! PHE1 promoter region 
PHE1: !expressed transiently after fertilization! in embryo and endosperm 
fis mutants: !up-regulate! PHE1 expression 
MEDEA: !represses! PHE1 expression 
medea mutant: !suppressed by! reduced PHE1 expression 
medea mutant: !rescued by! hypomethylated PHE1 expression