['12834403', 'LRR-extensins (LRX) form a family of structural cell wall proteins containing a  receptor-like domain. The functional analysis of Arabidopsis LRX1 has shown that  it is involved in cell morphogenesis of root hairs. In this work, we have studied  LRX2, a paralog of LRX1. LRX2 expression is mainly found in roots and is  responsive to factors promoting or repressing root hair formation. The function  of LRX1 and LRX2 was tested by the expression of a truncated LRX2 and different  LRX1/LRX2 chimaeric proteins. Using complementation of the lrx1 phenotype as the  parameter for protein function, our experiments indicate that LRX1 and LRX2 are  functionally similar but show differences in their activity. Genetic analysis  revealed that single lrx2 mutants do not show any defect in root hair  morphogenesis, but synergistically interact with the lrx1 mutation. lrx1/lrx2  double mutants have a significantly enhanced lrx1 phenotype, resulting in  frequent rupture of the root hairs soon after their initiation. Analysis of the  root hair cell wall ultrastructure by transmission electron microscopy (TEM)  revealed the formation of osmophilic aggregates within the wall, as well as local  disintegration of the wall structure in the double mutant, but not in wild-type  plants. Our results indicate that LRX1 and LRX2 have overlapping functions in  root hair formation, and that they likely regulate cell morphogenesis by  promoting proper development of the cell wall.', '2003 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01784.x', 'Ringli']

LRR-extensins (LRX): !form! family of structural cell wall proteins 
LRX1: !involved in! cell morphogenesis of root hairs 
LRX2: !responsive to! factors promoting or repressing root hair formation 
LRX1/LRX2 chimaeric proteins: !tested for! function 
lrx1 phenotype: !used as parameter for! protein function 
lrx1/lrx2 double mutants: !have enhanced! lrx1 phenotype 
TEM: !revealed! formation of osmophilic aggregates within the wall 
LRX1/LRX2: !regulate! cell morphogenesis by promoting proper development of the cell wall