['12848426', 'With the aim to characterize plant and viral factors involved in the molecular  interactions between plants and potyviruses, a Lettuce mosaic virus  (LMV)-Arabidopsis thaliana pathosystem was developed. Screening of Arabidopsis  accessions with LMV isolates indicated the existence of a large variability in  the outcome of the interaction, allowing the classification of Arabidopsis  accessions into seven susceptibility groups. Using a reverse genetic approach,  the genome-linked protein of LMV, a multifunctional protein shown to be involved  in viral genome amplification and movement of potyviruses, was established as the  viral determinant responsible for the ability to overcome the resistance of the  Niederzenz accession to LMV-0. Preliminary genetic analyses from F2 and  recombinant inbred lines available between susceptible and resistant Arabidopsis  accessions revealed the existence of at least three resistance phenotypes to LMV  with different genetic bases. One dominant resistance gene, designated LLM1,  involved in blocking the replication or cell-to-cell movement of the LMV-0  isolate in the Columbia accession, was mapped to chromosome I and shown to be  linked to the marker nga280. At the same time, genetic analyses of segregating F2  populations were consistent with the restriction of the systemic movement of the  LMV-AF199 isolate in Columbia being controlled by two dominant genes and with the  complete resistance to all tested LMV isolates of the Cape Verde islands (Cvi)  accession being conferred by a single recessive resistance gene. Sequencing of  the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E genes from the different  LMV-resistant Arabidopsis accessions showed that these factors are not directly  involved in the characterized resistance phenotypes.', '2003 Jul', 'Mol Plant Microbe Interact', '10.1094/MPMI.2003.16.7.608', 'Candresse']

LMV: !overcomes! Niederzenz accession
LLM1: !blocks! LMV-0 replication/movement
LLM1: !mapped to! chromosome I
2 dominant genes: !restrict! LMV-AF199 systemic movement
single recessive gene: !confer! complete resistance to all LMV isolates