['12883010', 'In yeasts and mammals, PEX10 encodes an integral membrane protein with a C3HC4  RING finger motif in its C-terminal domain and is required for peroxisome  biogenesis and matrix protein import. In humans, its dysfunction in peroxisome  biogenesis leads to severe Zellweger Syndrome and infantile Refsum disease. Here  we show that dysfunction of a homologous gene in Arabidopsis leads to lethality  at the heart stage of embryogenesis, impairing the biogenesis of peroxisomes,  lipid bodies, and protein bodies. In a T-DNA insertion mutant disrupting the  fourth exon of the AthPEX10 gene, ultrastructural analyses fail to detect  peroxisomes characteristic for wild-type embryogenesis. Storage triacyl  glycerides are not assembled into lipid bodies (oil bodies; oleosomes) surrounded  by the phospholipid-protein monolayer membrane. Instead, the dysfunctional  monolayer membranes, which derive from the bilayer membrane of the endoplasmic  reticulum, accumulate in the cytosol. Concomitantly the transfer of the storage  proteins from their site of synthesis at the endoplasmic reticulum to the  vacuoles is disturbed. The mutant can be rescued by transformation with wild-type  AthPEX10 cDNA. Transformants of wild-type Hansenula polymorpha cells with the  AthPEX10 cDNA did produce the encoded protein without targeting it to  peroxisomes. Additionally, the cDNA could not complement a Hansenula pex10 mutant  unable to form peroxisomes. The ultrastructural knockout phenotype of AthPEX10p  suggests that this protein in Arabidopsis is essential for peroxisome, oleosome,  and protein transport vesicle formation.', '2003 Aug 5', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1633697100', 'Gietl']

PEX10: !encodes! integral membrane protein 
PEX10: !required for! peroxisome biogenesis 
PEX10: !dysfunction leads to! Zellweger Syndrome 
AthPEX10: !disrupts! fourth exon 
AthPEX10: !impairs! biogenesis of peroxisomes 
AthPEX10: !disturbs! transfer of storage proteins 
AthPEX10: !essential for! peroxisome, oleosome, and protein transport vesicle formation