['12897246', 'Recently, a novel family of methyltransferases was identified in plants. Some  members of this newly discovered and recently characterized methyltransferase  family catalyze the formation of small-molecule methyl esters using  S-adenosyl-L-Met (SAM) as a methyl donor and carboxylic acid-bearing substrates  as methyl acceptors. These enzymes include SAMT (SAM:salicylic acid carboxyl  methyltransferase), BAMT (SAM:benzoic acid carboxyl methyltransferase), and JMT  (SAM:jasmonic acid carboxyl methyltransferase). Moreover, other members of this  family of plant methyltransferases have been found to catalyze the N-methylation  of caffeine precursors. The 3.0-A crystal structure of Clarkia breweri SAMT in  complex with the substrate salicylic acid and the demethylated product  S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine reveals a protein structure that possesses a helical  active site capping domain and a unique dimerization interface. In addition, the  chemical determinants responsible for the selection of salicylic acid demonstrate  the structural basis for facile variations of substrate selectivity among  functionally characterized plant carboxyl-directed and nitrogen-directed  methyltransferases and a growing set of related proteins that have yet to be  examined biochemically. Using the three-dimensional structure of SAMT as a guide,  we examined the substrate specificity of SAMT by site-directed mutagenesis and  activity assays against 12 carboxyl-containing small molecules. Moreover, the  utility of structural information for the functional characterization of this  large family of plant methyltransferases was demonstrated by the discovery of an  Arabidopsis methyltransferase that is specific for the carboxyl-bearing  phytohormone indole-3-acetic acid.', '2003 Aug', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.014548', 'Noel']

SAMT: !catalyzes! formation of small-molecule methyl esters 
SAMT: !structurally possesses! helical active site capping domain 
BAMT: !catalyzes! N-methylation of caffeine precursors 
JMT: !catalyzes! N-methylation of jasmonic acid carboxyl 
SAMT: !reveals! unique dimerization interface 
SAMT: !selects! salicylic acid 
mutagenesis: !examines! substrate specificity of SAMT 
Arabidopsis methyltransferase: !specific for! carboxyl-bearing phytohormone indole-3-acetic acid