['12913177', 'In a differential screening between Arabidopsis plants pretreated with the  resistance-inducer beta-aminobutyric acid and untreated control plants, we have  identified a gene encoding a novel lipase-like protein, PRLIP1. The abundance of  PRLIP1 mRNAs in Arabidopsis leaves was up-regulated by application of  beta-aminobutyric acid, salicylic acid (SA), and ethylene as well as by various  pathogens. Induction of PRLIP1 depended on a functioning SA and ethylene signal  transduction pathway but was independent of jasmonate signaling. This novel  pathogenesis-related (PR) gene of Arabidopsis belongs to a gene family consisting  of six (PRLIP1, PRLIP2, PRLIP4, PRLIP5, PRLIP6, and PRLIP7) closely related  members in tandem position on chromosome 5. Among these genes, PRLIP2 also was  induced in leaves by SA and infections by pathogens but on a much lower level  than PRLIP1. The PRLIP1 family showed a tissue-specific expression pattern. Both  PRLIP1 and PRLIP2 were specifically expressed in leaves and siliques, PRLIP1  additionally in stems and flowers. The expression of PRLIP6 and PRLIP4 was root  specific, whereas mRNA of PRLIP5 and PRLIP7 were not detected in any of these  tissues. The more distantly related genes PRLIP3, PRLIP9, and PRLIP8 were found  on chromosomes 2, 4, and 5, respectively. The expression level of PRLIP3 was  checked and found constitutive during the different stress conditions tested. The  PRLIP1 gene was overexpressed in Escherichia coli, and the resulting PRLIP1  protein showed esterase activity on p-nitrophenyl-butyrate and allowed the growth  of the bacteria on lipidic substrates such as Tween20 or Tween80.', '2003 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.025312', 'Mauch-Mani']

PRLIP1: !up-regulated by! beta-aminobutyric acid, salicylic acid (SA), ethylene, pathogens
PRLIP1: !belongs to! gene family
PRLIP2: !induced in leaves by! SA, infections
PRLIP1: !specifically expressed in! leaves, siliques, stems, flowers
PRLIP6, PRLIP4: !specifically expressed in! roots
PRLIP5, PRLIP7: !not detected in! any tissues
PRLIP3, PRLIP9, PRLIP8: !found on! chromosomes 2, 4, 5
PRLIP3: !constitutive during! different stress conditions
PRLIP1: !overexpressed in! Escherichia coli
PRLIP1 protein: !showed esterase activity on! p-nitrophenyl-butyrate
PRLIP1 protein: !allowed growth of bacteria on! lipidic substrates