['12912986', 'N-Myristoylation is an irreversible modification that affects the membrane  binding properties of crucial cytoplasmic proteins from signal transduction  cascades. We characterized the two putative N-myristoyltransferases of  Arabidopsis thaliana as a means of investigating the entire N-myristoylation  proteome (N-myristoylome) in a higher eukaryote. AtNMT1 compensated for the nmt1  defect in yeast, whereas AtNMT2 and chimeras of the two genes did not. Only  AtNMT1 modified known N-myristoylated proteins in vitro. AtNMT1 is therefore  responsible for the A. thaliana N-myristoylome, whereas AtNMT2 does not seem to  have usual myristoylation activity. We began with the whole set of  N-myristoylated G proteins in the A. thaliana proteome. We then used a  reiterative approach, based on the in vitro N-myristoylation of more than 60  different polypeptides, to determine the substrate specificity of AtNMT1. We  found that the positive charge on residue 7 of the substrate was particularly  important in substrate recognition. The A. thaliana N-myristoylome consists of  437 proteins, accounting for 1.7% of the complete proteome. We demonstrated the  N-myristoylation of several unexpected protein families, including innate  immunity proteins, thioredoxins, components of the protein degradation pathway,  transcription factors, and a crucial regulatory enzyme of glycolysis. The role of  N-myristoylation is discussed in each case; in particular, this process may  underlie the "guard" hypothesis of innate immunity.', '2003 Oct 31', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M307321200', 'Meinnel']

N-Myristoylation: !affects! Membrane binding properties 
AtNMT1: !compensates for! nmt1 defect in yeast 
AtNMT1: !modifies! Known N-myristoylated proteins 
AtNMT2: !does not have! Usual myristoylation activity 
Positive charge on residue 7: !important in! Substrate recognition 
A. thaliana N-myristoylome: !consists of! 437 proteins 
N-myristoylation: !underlies! "Guard" hypothesis of innate immunity