['12913179', 'The ADH2 gene codes for the Arabidopsis glutathione-dependent formaldehyde  dehydrogenase (FALDH), an enzyme involved in formaldehyde metabolism in  eukaryotes. In the present work, we have investigated the potential role of FALDH  in detoxification of exogenous formaldehyde. We have generated a yeast  (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) mutant strain (sfa1Delta) by in vivo deletion of the  SFA1 gene that codes for the endogenous FALDH. Overexpression of Arabidopsis  FALDH in this mutant confers high resistance to formaldehyde added exogenously,  which demonstrates the functional conservation of the enzyme through evolution  and supports its essential role in formaldehyde metabolism. To investigate the  role of the enzyme in plants, we have generated Arabidopsis transgenic lines with  modified levels of FALDH. Plants overexpressing the enzyme show a 25% increase in  their efficiency to take up exogenous formaldehyde, whereas plants with reduced  levels of FALDH (due to either a cosuppression phenotype or to the expression of  an antisense construct) show a marked slower rate and reduced ability for  formaldehyde detoxification as compared with the wild-type Arabidopsis. These  results show that the capacity to take up and detoxify high concentrations of  formaldehyde is proportionally related to the FALDH activity in the plant,  revealing the essential role of this enzyme in formaldehyde detoxification.', '2003 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.022277', 'Martinez']

ADH2 gene: !codes for! FALDH enzyme 
FALDH enzyme: !involved in! formaldehyde metabolism 
SFA1 gene: !codes for! endogenous FALDH 
yeast mutant strain: !generated by! in vivo deletion of SFA1 gene 
Arabidopsis FALDH: !overexpressed in! yeast mutant strain 
Arabidopsis transgenic lines: !generated with! modified levels of FALDH 
plants overexpressing enzyme: !show! increased efficiency to take up exogenous formaldehyde 
plants with reduced FALDH: !show! slower rate and reduced ability for formaldehyde detoxification 
FALDH activity: !reveals essential role of! enzyme in formaldehyde detoxification