['12913158', 'The Arabidopsis genome contains a family of NDR1/HIN1-like (NHL) genes that show  homology to the nonrace-specific disease resistance (NDR1) and the tobacco  (Nicotiana tabacum) harpin-induced (HIN1) genes. NHL3 is a pathogen-responsive  member of this NHL gene family that is potentially involved in defense. In  independent transgenic NHL3-overexpressing plant lines, a clear correlation  between increased resistance to virulent Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000  and enhanced NHL3 transcript levels was seen. These transgenic plants did not  show enhanced pathogenesis-related gene expression or reactive oxygen species  accumulation. Biochemical and localization experiments were performed to assist  elucidation of how NHL3 may confer enhanced disease resistance. Gene constructs  expressing amino-terminal c-myc-tagged or carboxyl-terminal hemagglutinin epitope  (HA)-tagged NHL3 demonstrated membrane localization in transiently transformed  tobacco leaves. Stable Arabidopsis transformants containing the NHL3-HA construct  corroborated the findings observed in tobacco. The detected immunoreactive  proteins were 10 kD larger than the calculated size and could be partially  accounted for by the glycosylation state. However, the expected size was not  attained with deglycosylation, suggesting possibly additional posttranslational  modification. Detergent treatment, but not chemicals used to strip  membrane-associated proteins, could displace the immunoreactive signal from  microsomal fractions, showing that NHL3 is tightly membrane associated.  Furthermore, immunofluorescence and immunogold labeling, coupled with two-phase  partitioning techniques, revealed plasma membrane localization of NHL3-HA. This  subcellular localization of NHL3 positions it at an initial contact site to  pathogens and may be important in facilitating interception of pathogen-derived  signals.', '2003 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.020438', 'Lee']

NHL3: !correlates with! resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000
NHL3: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
NHL3: !is modified by! glycosylation 
NHL3: !is displaced by! detergent treatment