['12937173', "The human Werner syndrome protein (hWRN-p) possessing DNA helicase and  exonuclease activities is essential for genome stability. Plants have no  homologue of this bifunctional protein, but surprisingly the Arabidopsis genome  contains a small open reading frame (ORF) (AtWRNexo) with homology to the  exonuclease domain of hWRN-p. Expression of this ORF in Escherichia coli revealed  an exonuclease activity for AtWRN-exo-p with similarities but also some  significant differences to hWRN-p. The protein digests recessed strands of DNA  duplexes in the 3' --> 5' direction but hardly single-stranded DNA or blunt-ended  duplexes. In contrast to the Werner exonuclease, AtWRNexo-p is also able to  digest 3'-protruding strands. DNA with recessed 3'-PO4 and 3'-OH termini is  degraded to a similar extent. AtWRNexo-p hydrolyzes the 3'-recessed strand  termini of duplexes containing mismatched bases. AtWRNexo-p needs the divalent  cation Mg2+ for activity, which can be replaced by Mn2+. Apurinic sites,  cholesterol adducts, and oxidative DNA damage (such as 8-oxoadenine and  8-oxoguanine) inhibit or block the enzyme. Other DNA modifications, including  uracil, hypoxanthine and ethenoadenine, did not inhibit AtWRNexo-p. A mutation of  a conserved residue within the exonuclease domain (E135A) completely abolished  the exonucleolytic activity. Our results indicate that a type of WRN-like  exonuclease activity seems to be a common feature of the DNA metabolism of  animals and plants.", '2003 Nov 7', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M303891200', 'Puchta']

hWRN-p: !possesses! DNA helicase and exonuclease activities 
AtWRNexo-p: !has homology to! exonuclease domain of hWRN-p 
AtWRNexo-p: !digests! recessed strands of DNA duplexes 
AtWRNexo-p: !hydrolyzes! 3'-recessed strand termini of duplexes containing mismatched bases 
Mg2+: !can be replaced by! Mn2+ 
Apurinic sites, cholesterol adducts, oxidative DNA damage: !inhibit or block! AtWRNexo-p 
E135A mutation: !abolishes! exonucleolytic activity