['12947042', 'Malate plays a central role in plant metabolism. It is an intermediate in the  Krebs and glyoxylate cycles, it is the store for CO2 in C4 and crassulacean acid  metabolism plants, it protects plants from aluminum toxicity, it is essential for  maintaining the osmotic pressure and charge balance, and it is therefore involved  in regulation of stomatal aperture. To fulfil many of these roles, malate has to  be accumulated within the large central vacuole. Many unsuccessful efforts have  been made in the past to identify the vacuolar malate transporter; here, we  describe the identification of the vacuolar malate transporter [A. thaliana  tonoplast dicarboxylate transporter (AttDT)]. This transporter exhibits highest  sequence similarity to the human sodium/dicarboxylate cotransporter. Independent  T-DNA [portion of the Ti (tumor-inducing) plasmid that is transferred to plant  cells] Arabidopsis mutants exhibit substantially reduced levels of leaf malate,  but respire exogenously applied [14C]malate faster than the WT. An AttDT-GFP  fusion protein was localized to vacuole. Vacuoles isolated from Arabidopsis WT  leaves exhibited carbonylcyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone and citrate inhibitable  malate transport, which was not stimulated by sodium. Vacuoles isolated from  mutant plants import [14C]-malate at strongly reduced rates, confirming that this  protein is the vacuolar malate transporter.', '2003 Sep 16', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1832002100', 'Neuhaus']

Malate: !plays a role in! Plant Metabolism 
Krebs Cycle: !involves! Malate 
Glyoxylate Cycle: !involves! Malate 
C4 Plants: !store! CO2 
Crassulacean Acid Metabolism Plants: !store! CO2 
Aluminum Toxicity: !protected from by! Malate 
Osmotic Pressure: !maintained by! Malate 
Charge Balance: !maintained by! Malate 
Vacuole: !accumulates! Malate 
AttDT: !identifies! Vacuolar Malate Transporter 
T-DNA Mutants: !exhibit reduced levels of! Leaf Malate 
AttDT-GFP Fusion Protein: !localized to! Vacuole 
WT Vacuoles: !exhibit! Malate Transport 
Mutant Vacuoles: !import! [14C]-Malate at Reduced Rates