['12940955', 'The anthocyanin and proanthocyanidin (PA) biosynthetic pathways share common  intermediates until leucocyanidin, which may be used by leucoanthocyanidin  dioxygenase (LDOX) to produce anthocyanin, or the enzyme leucoanthocyanidin  reductase (LAR) to produce catechin, a precursor of PA. The Arabidopsis mutant  tannin deficient seed 4 (tds4-1) has a reduced PA level and altered pattern PA  accumulation. We identified the TDS4 gene as LDOX by complementation of the  tds4-1 mutation either with a cosmid encoding LDOX or a 35S:LDOX construct.  Independent Arabidopsis lines with a T-DNA insertion in the LDOX gene had a  similar phenotype, and one was allelic to tds4-1. The seed phenotype of ban tds4  double mutants showed that LDOX precedes BANYULS (BAN) in the PA pathway,  confirming recent biochemical characterisation of BAN as an anthocyanidin  reductase. Double mutant analysis was also used to order the other TDS genes.  Analysis of the PA intermediates in tds4-1 revealed three  dimethylaminocinnamaldehyde (DMACA) reacting compounds that accumulated in  extracts from developing seeds. Analysis of Arabidopsis PA and its precursors  indicates that Arabidopsis, unlike many other plants, exclusively uses the  epicatechin and not the catechin pathway to PA. Transmission electron microscopy  (TEM) showed that the pattern observed when seeds of tds4 were stained with DMACA  was a result of the accumulation of PA intermediates in the cytoplasm of  endothelial cells. Fluorescent marker dyes were used to show that tds4  endothelial cells had multiple small vacuoles, instead of a large central vacuole  as observed in the wild types (WT). These results show that in addition to its  established role in the formation of anthocyanin, LDOX is also part of the PA  biosynthesis pathway.', '2003 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01834.x', 'Ashton']

LDOX: !produces! anthocyanin 
LDOX: !precedes! BANYULS 
TDS4: !allelic to! tds4-1 
tds4: !accumulates! PA intermediates 
tds4: !has multiple small vacuoles! instead of large central vacuole