['12940951', 'Verticillium dahliae Klebahn is a soil-borne fungal pathogen causing vascular  diseases. The pathogen penetrates the host through the roots, spreads through the  xylem, and systemically colonizes both resistant and susceptible genotypes. To  elucidate the genetic and molecular bases of plant-Verticillium interactions, we  have developed a pathosystem utilizing Arabidopsis thaliana and an isolate of V.  dahliae pathogenic to both cruciferous and non-cruciferous crops. Relative  tolerance (based on symptom severity) but no immunity was found in a survey of  Arabidopsis ecotypes. Anthocyanin accumulation, stunting, and chlorosis were  common symptoms. Specific responses of the more susceptible ecotype Columbia were  induction of early flowering and dying. The more tolerant ecotype C-24 was  characterized by pathogen-induced delay of transition to flowering and mild  chlorosis symptoms. Genetic analysis indicated that a single dominant locus,  Verticillium dahliae-tolerance (VET1), likely functioning also as a negative  regulator of the transition to flowering, was able to convey increased tolerance.  VET1 was mapped on chromosome IV. The differential symptom responses observed  between ecotypes were not correlated with different rates of fungal tissue  colonization or with differential transcript accumulation of PR-1 and PDF1.2  defense genes whose activation was not detected during the Arabidopsis-V. dahliae  interaction. Impairment in salicylic acid (SA)- or jasmonic acid (JA)-dependent  signaling did not cause hypersensitivity to the fungal infection, whereas  ethylene insensitivity led to reduced chlorosis and ABA deficiency to reduced  anthocyanin accumulation. The results of this study clearly indicated that the  ability of V. dahliae to induce disease symptoms is also connected to the genetic  control of development and life span in Arabidopsis.', '2003 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01830.x', 'Bressan']

Verticillium dahliae Klebahn: !causes! vascular diseases
Arabidopsis thaliana: !surveyed for! relative tolerance
Columbia ecotype: !characterized by! induction of early flowering and dying
C-24 ecotype: !characterized by! pathogen-induced delay of transition to flowering and mild chlorosis symptoms
VET1 locus: !conveys! increased tolerance
PR-1 and PDF1.2 defense genes: !not activated during! Arabidopsis-V. dahliae interaction
SA- or JA-dependent signaling: !impairment does not cause! hypersensitivity to fungal infection
ethylene insensitivity: !leads to! reduced chlorosis
ABA deficiency: !leads to! reduced anthocyanin accumulation