['12954621', 'The Arabidopsis sucrose transporter AtSUC2 is expressed in the companion cells of  the phloem (specialized vascular tissue) and is essential for the long distance  transport of carbohydrates within the plant. A variety of glucosides are known to  inhibit sucrose uptake into yeast expressing AtSUC2; however, it remains unknown  whether glucosides other than sucrose could serve as transported substrates. By  expression of AtSUC2 in Xenopus oocytes and two-electrode voltage clamping, we  have tested the ability of AtSUC2 to transport a range of physiological and  synthetic glucosides. Sucrose induced inward currents with a K0.5 of 1.44 mM at  pH 5 and a membrane potential of -137 mV. Of the 24 additional sugars tested, 8  glucosides induced large inward currents allowing kinetic analysis. These  glucosides were maltose, arbutin (hydroquinone-beta-D-glucoside), salicin  (2-(hydroxymethyl)phenyl-beta-D-glucoside), alpha-phenylglucoside,  beta-phenylglucoside, alpha-paranitrophenylglucoside,  beta-paranitrophenylglucoside, and paranitrophenyl-beta-thioglucoside. In  addition, turanose and alpha-methylglucoside induced small but significant inward  currents indicating that they were transported by At-SUC2. The results indicate  that AtSUC2 is not highly selective for alpha-over beta-glucosides and may  function in transporting glucosides besides sucrose into the phloem, and the  results provide insight into the structural requirements for transport by AtSUC2.', '2003 Nov 7', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M308490200', 'Ward']

AtSUC2: !expresses in! companion cells 
AtSUC2: !transports! sucrose 
AtSUC2: !inhibits! yeast uptake 
AtSUC2: !induces! inward currents 
AtSUC2: !transports! maltose 
AtSUC2: !transports! arbutin 
AtSUC2: !transports! salicin 
AtSUC2: !transports! alpha-phenylglucoside 
AtSUC2: !transports! beta-phenylglucoside 
AtSUC2: !transports! alpha-paranitrophenylglucoside 
AtSUC2: !transports! beta-paranitrophenylglucoside 
AtSUC2: !transports! paranitrophenyl-beta-thioglucoside 
AtSUC2: !transports! turanose 
AtSUC2: !transports! alpha-methylglucoside