['12953116', 'Mitochondria fulfill a wide range of metabolic functions in addition to the  synthesis of ATP and contain a diverse array of proteins to perform these  functions. Here, we present the unexpected discovery of the presence of the  enzymes of glycolysis in a mitochondrial fraction of Arabidopsis cells. Proteomic  analyses of this mitochondrial fraction revealed the presence of 7 of the 10  enzymes that constitute the glycolytic pathway. Four of these enzymes  (glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase, aldolase, phosphoglycerate mutase, and  enolase) were also identified in an intermembrane space/outer mitochondrial  membrane fraction. Enzyme activity assays confirmed that the entire glycolytic  pathway was present in preparations of isolated Arabidopsis mitochondria, and the  sensitivity of these activities to protease treatments indicated that the  glycolytic enzymes are present on the outside of the mitochondrion. The  association of glycolytic enzymes with mitochondria was confirmed in vivo by the  expression of enolase- and aldolase-yellow fluorescent protein fusions in  Arabidopsis protoplasts. The yellow fluorescent protein fluorescence signal  showed that these two fusion proteins are present throughout the cytosol but are  also concentrated in punctate regions that colocalized with the  mitochondrion-specific probe Mitotracker Red. Furthermore, when supplied with  appropriate cofactors, isolated, intact mitochondria were capable of the  metabolism of (13)C-glucose to (13)C-labeled intermediates of the trichloroacetic  acid cycle, suggesting that the complete glycolytic sequence is present and  active in this subcellular fraction. On the basis of these data, we propose that  the entire glycolytic pathway is associated with plant mitochondria by attachment  to the cytosolic face of the outer mitochondrial membrane and that this  microcompartmentation of glycolysis allows pyruvate to be provided directly to  the mitochondrion, where it is used as a respiratory substrate.', '2003 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.012500', 'Sweetlove']

Enzymes of glycolysis: !localize to! mitochondrial fraction 
Glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase: !localize to! intermembrane space/outer mitochondrial membrane 
Enzyme activity assays: !confirm! presence of entire glycolytic pathway in Arabidopsis mitochondria 
Enolase- and aldolase-yellow fluorescent protein fusions: !express! in Arabidopsis protoplasts 
Yellow fluorescent protein fluorescence signal: !colocalize with! Mitotracker Red 
Isolated, intact mitochondria: !metabolize! (13)C-glucose to (13)C-labeled intermediates of trichloroacetic acid cycle 
Glycolytic pathway: !associated with! plant mitochondria by attachment to cytosolic face of outer mitochondrial membrane