['13129917', 'Plants directly assimilate minerals from the environment and thus are key for  acquisition of metals by all subsequent consumers. Limited bio-availability of  copper, zinc and iron in soil decreases both the agronomic productivity and the  nutrient quality of crops. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying  metal homeostasis in plants is a prerequisite to optimizing plant yield and metal  nutrient content. To absorb and maintain a balance of potentially toxic metal  ions, plants utilize poorly understood mechanisms involving a large number of  membrane transporters and metal binding proteins with overlapping substrate  specificities and complex regulation. To better understand the function and the  integrated regulation, we analyzed in Arabidopsis the expression patterns in  roots and in leaves of 53 genes coding for known or potential metal transporters,  in response to copper, zinc, and iron deficiencies in Arabidopsis. Comparative  analysis of gene expression profiles revealed specific transcriptional regulation  by metals of the genes contrasting with the known wide substrate specificities of  the encoded transporters. Our analysis suggested novel transport roles for  several gene products and we used functional complementation of yeast mutants to  correlate specific regulation by metals with transport activity. We demonstrate  that two ZIP genes, ZIP2 and ZIP4, are involved in copper transport. We also  present evidence that AtOPT3, a member of the oligopeptide transporter gene  family with significant similarities to the maize iron-phytosiderophore  transporter YS1, is regulated by metals and heterologous expression AtOPT3 can  rescue yeast mutants deficient in metal transport.', '2003 Nov 28', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M309338200', 'Vulpe']

Gene: !affects! Metal homeostasis 
Gene: !regulates! Transcription 
Gene: !localizes to! Roots and leaves 
Gene: !interacts with! Membrane transporters 
Gene: !enhances! Copper transport 
Gene: !represses! Iron-phytosiderophore transporter 
Gene: !synthesizes! Metal binding proteins