['1373374', 'The promoters of a variety of plant genes are characterized by the presence of a  G-box (CCACGTGG) or closely related DNA motifs. These genes often exhibit quite  diverse expression characteristics and in many cases the G-box sequence has been  demonstrated to be essential for expression. The G-box of the Arabidopsis rbcS-1A  gene is bound by a protein, GBF, identified in plant nuclear extracts. Here we  report the isolation of three Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA clones encoding GBF  proteins referred to as GBF1, GBF2 and GBF3. GBF1 and GBF2 mRNA is present in  light and dark grown leaves as well as in roots. In contrast, GBF3 mRNA is found  mainly in dark grown leaves and in roots. The deduced amino acid sequences of the  three cDNAs indicate that each encodes a basic/leucine zipper protein. In  addition, all three proteins are characterized by an N-terminal proline-rich  domain. Homodimers of the three proteins specifically recognize the G-box motif,  with GBF1 and GBF3 binding symmetrically to this palindromic sequence. In  contrast, GBF2 binds to the symmetrical G-box sequence in such a way that the  juxtaposition of the protein and the DNA element is clearly asymmetric and hence  distinct from that observed for the other two proteins. The fact that GBF1, GBF2  and GBF3 possess both distinct DNA binding properties and expression  characteristics prompt us to entertain the notion that these proteins may  individually mediate distinct subclasses of expression properties assigned to the  G-box. Furthermore, we demonstrate that GBF1, GBF2 and GBF3 heterodimerize and  these heterodimers also interact with the G-box, suggesting a potential mechanism  for generating additional diversity from these GBF proteins.', '1992 Apr', 'EMBO J', '10.1002/j.1460-2075.1992.tb05170.x', 'Cashmore']

G-box: !bound by! GBF 
GBF1/2/3: !binds to! G-box 
GBF1/2/3: !expressed in! light/dark grown leaves/roots 
GBF1/2/3: !recognizes! G-box motif 
GBF1/2/3: !heterodimerize! with each other 
GBF1/2/3: !interact with! G-box