['14508009', 'Tocopherols are lipid-soluble compounds synthesized only by photosynthetic  eukaryotes and oxygenic cyanobacteria. The pathway and enzymes for tocopherol  synthesis are homologous in cyanobacteria and plants except for  2-methyl-6-phytyl-1,4-benzoquinone/2-methyl-6-solanyl-1,4-benzoquinone  methyltransferase (MPBQ/MSBQ MT), which catalyzes a key methylation step in both  tocopherol and plastoquinone (PQ) synthesis. Using a combined genomic, genetic,  and biochemical approach, we isolated and characterized the VTE3 (vitamin E  defective) locus, which encodes MPBQ/MSBQ MT in Arabidopsis. The phenotypes of  vte3 mutants are consistent with the disruption of MPBQ/MSBQ MT activity to  varying extents. The ethyl methanesulfonate-derived vte3-1 allele alters  tocopherol composition but has little impact on PQ levels, whereas the null  vte3-2 allele is deficient in PQ and alpha- and gamma-tocopherols. In vitro  enzyme assays confirmed that VTE3 is the plant functional equivalent of the  previously characterized MPBQ/MSBQ MT (Sll0418) from Synechocystis sp PCC6803,  although the two proteins are highly divergent in primary sequence. Sll0418  orthologs are present in all fully sequenced cyanobacterial genomes,  Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana but absent  from vascular and nonvascular plant databases. VTE3 orthologs are present in all  vascular and nonvascular plant databases and in C. reinhardtii but absent from  cyanobacterial genomes. Intriguingly, the only prokaryotic genomes that contain  VTE3-like sequences are those of two species of archea, suggesting that, in  contrast to all other enzymes of the plant tocopherol pathway, the evolutionary  origin of VTE3 may have been archeal rather than cyanobacterial. In vivo analyses  of vte3 mutants and the corresponding homozygous Synechocystis sp PCC6803  sll0418::aphII mutant revealed important differences in enzyme redundancy, the  regulation of tocopherol synthesis, and the integration of tocopherol and PQ  biosynthesis in cyanobacteria and plants.', '2003 Oct', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.013656', 'DellaPenna']

Tocopherols: !synthesized by! photosynthetic eukaryotes and oxygenic cyanobacteria 
VTE3: !encodes! MPBQ/MSBQ MT 
vte3 mutants: !disrupt! MPBQ/MSBQ MT activity 
VTE3: !present in! vascular and nonvascular plant databases 
Sll0418: !present in! all fully sequenced cyanobacterial genomes 
VTE3: !absent from! cyanobacterial genomes 
VTE3-like sequences: !present in! two species of archea 
vte3 mutants: !reveal differences in! enzyme redundancy, regulation of tocopherol synthesis, and integration of tocopherol and PQ biosynthesis