['14522871', 'When cultured on media containing the plant growth regulator auxin, hypocotyl  explants of Arabidopsis thaliana generate adventitious roots. As a first step to  investigate the genetic basis of adventitious organogenesis in plants, we  isolated nine temperature-sensitive mutants defective in various stages in the  formation of adventitious roots: five root initiation defective (rid1 to rid5)  mutants failed to initiate the formation of root primordia; in one root  primordium defective (rpd1) mutant, the development of root primordia was  arrested; three root growth defective (rgd1, rgd2, and rgd3) mutants were  defective in root growth after the establishment of the root apical meristem. The  temperature sensitivity of callus formation and lateral root formation revealed  further distinctions between the isolated mutants. The rid1 mutant was  specifically defective in the reinitiation of cell proliferation from hypocotyl  explants, while the rid2 mutant was also defective in the reinitiation of cell  proliferation from root explants. These two mutants also exhibited abnormalities  in the formation of the root apical meristem when lateral roots were induced at  the restrictive temperature. The rgd1 and rgd2 mutants were deficient in root and  callus growth, whereas the rgd3 mutation specifically affected root growth. The  rid5 mutant required higher auxin concentrations for rooting at the restrictive  temperature, implying a deficiency in auxin signaling. The rid5 phenotype was  found to result from a mutation in the MOR1/GEM1 gene encoding a  microtubule-associated protein. These findings about the rid5 mutant suggest a  possible function of the microtubule system in auxin response.', '2003 Dec', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.00794', 'Sugiyama']

rid1: !defective in! reinitiation of cell proliferation 
rid2: !defective in! reinitiation of cell proliferation 
rid5: !defective in! auxin signaling 
MOR1/GEM1: !encodes! microtubule-associated protein 
microtubule system: !involved in! auxin response