['14561401', 'BACKGROUND: Shoots of all land plants have a radial pattern that can be  considered to have an adaxial (central)-abaxial (peripheral) polarity. In  Arabidopsis, gain-of-function alleles of PHAVOLUTA and PHABULOSA, members of the  class III HD-ZIP gene family, result in adaxialization of lateral organs.  Conversely, loss-of-function alleles of the KANADI genes cause an adaxialization  of lateral organs. Thus, the class III HD-ZIP and KANADI genes comprise a genetic  system that patterns abaxial-adaxial polarity in lateral organs produced from the  apical meristem. RESULTS: We show that gain-of-function alleles of REVOLUTA,  another member of the class III HD-ZIP gene family, are characterized by  adaxialized lateral organs and alterations in the radial patterning of vascular  bundles in the stem. The gain-of-function phenotype can be obtained by changing  only the REVOLUTA mRNA sequence and without changing the protein sequence; this  finding indicates that this phenotype is likely mediated through an interference  with microRNA binding. Loss of KANADI activity results in similar alterations in  vascular patterning as compared to REVOLUTA gain-of-function alleles.  Simultaneous loss-of-function of PHABULOSA, PHAVOLUTA, and REVOLUTA abaxializes  cotyledons, abolishes the formation of the primary apical meristem, and in severe  cases, eliminates bilateral symmetry; these phenotypes implicate these three  genes in radial patterning of both embryonic and postembryonic growth.  CONCLUSIONS: Based on complementary vascular and leaf phenotypes of class III  HD-ZIP and KANADI mutants, we propose that a common genetic program dependent  upon miRNAs governs adaxial-abaxial patterning of leaves and radial patterning of  stems in the angiosperm shoot. This finding implies that a common patterning  mechanism is shared between apical and vascular meristems.', '2003 Oct 14', 'Curr Biol', '10.1016/j.cub.2003.09.035', 'Bowman']

PHAVOLUTA: !affects! adaxialization 
PHABULOSA: !affects! adaxialization 
REVOLUTA: !affects! adaxialization 
KANADI: !affects! adaxialization 
microRNA: !interacts with! REVOLUTA 
PHAVOLUTA: !patterns! abaxial-adaxial polarity 
PHABULOSA: !patterns! abaxial-adaxial polarity 
REVOLUTA: !patterns! abaxial-adaxial polarity 
KANADI: !patterns! abaxial-adaxial polarity 
PHAVOLUTA: !patterns! radial patterning 
PHABULOSA: !patterns! radial patterning 
REVOLUTA: !patterns! radial patterning 
KANADI: !patterns! radial patterning