['14563930', 'To identify new components in the phytochrome (phy) signaling network in  Arabidopsis, we used a sensitized genetic screen for deetiolation-defective  seedlings. Two allelic mutants were isolated that exhibited reduced sensitivity  to both continuous red and far-red light, suggesting involvement in both phyA and  phyB signaling. The molecular lesions responsible for the phenotype were shown to  be mutations in the Arabidopsis PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR7 (PRR7) gene. PRR7 is a  member of a small gene family in Arabidopsis previously suggested to be involved  in circadian rhythms. A PRR7-beta-glucuronidase fusion protein localized to the  nucleus, implying a possible function in the regulation of photoresponsive gene  expression. Consistent with this suggestion, prr7 seedlings were partially  defective in the regulation of the rapidly light-induced genes CIRCADIAN CLOCK  ASSOCIATED1 (CCA1) and LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY), observable as a premature  increase in expression level during the second peak of the biphasic induction  profile that is elicited upon initial exposure of dark-grown seedlings to light.  A similar 3- to 6-h coordinated advance in peak free-running expression of CCA1,  LHY, and TIMING-OF-CAB1, which are considered to encode the molecular components  of the circadian oscillator in Arabidopsis, was observed in entrained fully green  prr7 seedlings compared with wild-type seedlings. Collectively, these data  suggest that PRR7 functions as a signaling intermediate in the  phytochrome-regulated gene expression responsible for both seedling deetiolation  and phasing of the circadian clock in response to light.', '2003 Nov', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.015065', 'Quail']

phy: !regulates! PRR7
PRR7: !localizes to! nucleus
PRR7: !affects! CCA1
PRR7: !affects! LHY
PRR7: !affects! TIMING-OF-CAB1
CCA1: !synthesizes! molecular components of circadian oscillator
LHY: !synthesizes! molecular components of circadian oscillator
TIMING-OF-CAB1: !synthesizes! molecular components of circadian oscillator