['14576286', 'The Arabidopsis cell wall-associated kinase (WAK) and WAK-like kinase (WAKL)  family of receptor-like kinase genes encodes transmembrane proteins with a  cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinase domain and an extracellular region containing  epidermal growth factor-like repeats. Previous studies have suggested that some  WAK members are involved in plant defense and heavy metal responses, whereas  others are required for cell elongation and plant development. The WAK/WAKL gene  family consists of 26 members in Arabidopsis and can be divided into four groups.  Here, we describe the characterization of group 2 members that are composed of a  cluster of seven tandemly arrayed WAKL genes. The predicted WAKL proteins are  highly similar in their cytoplasmic region but are more divergent in their  predicted extracellular ligand-binding region. WAKL7 encodes a truncated WAKL  isoform that is predicted to be secreted from the cytoplasm. Ratios of  nonsynonymous to synonymous substitutions suggest that the extracellular region  is subject to diversifying selection. Comparison of the WAKL and WAK gene  clusters suggests that they arose independently. Protein gel-blot and  immunolocalization analyses suggest that WAKL6 is associated with the cell wall.  Histochemical analyses of WAKL promoters fused with the beta-glucuronidase  reporter gene have shown that the expressions of WAKL members are developmentally  regulated and tissue specific. Unlike WAK members whose expressions were found  predominately in green tissues, WAKL genes are highly expressed in roots and  flowers. The expression of WAKL5 and WAKL7 can be induced by wounding stress and  by the salicylic acid analog 2,6-dichloroisonicotinic acid in an nonexpressor of  pathogenesis-related gene 1-dependent manner, suggesting that they, like some WAK  members, are wound inducible and can be defined as pathogenesis-related genes.', '2003 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.028530', 'He']

WAK/WAKL: !encode! transmembrane proteins 
WAK/WAKL: !involved in! plant defense and heavy metal responses 
WAK/WAKL: !divided into! four groups 
WAKL7: !encodes! truncated WAKL isoform 
WAKL6: !associated with! cell wall 
WAKL: !expressed in! roots and flowers 
WAKL5/7: !induced by! wounding stress and 2,6-dichloroisonicotinic acid