['14720124', 'Screening a cDNA expression library with a radiolabelled calmodulin (CaM) probe  led to the isolation of AtCaMRLK, a receptor-like kinase (RLK) of Arabidopsis  thaliana. AtCaMRLK polypeptide sequence shows a modular organization consisting  of the four distinctive domains characteristic of receptor kinases: an amino  terminal signal sequence, a domain containing seven leucine-rich repeats, a  single putative membrane-spanning segment and a protein kinase domain. Using  truncated versions of the protein and a synthetic peptide, we demonstrated that a  region of 23 amino acids, located near the kinase domain of AtCaMRLK, binds CaM  in a calcium-dependent manner. Real-time binding experiments showed that AtCaMRLK  interacted in vitro with AtCaM1, a canonical CaM, but not with AtCaM8, a  divergent isoform of the Ca2+ sensor. The bacterially expressed kinase domain of  the protein was able to autophosphorylate and to phosphorylate the myelin basic  protein, using Mn2+ preferentially to Mg2+ as an ion activator. Site-directed  mutagenesis of the conserved lysine residue (Lys423) to alanine, in the kinase  subdomain II, resulted in a complete loss of kinase activity. CaM had no  influence on the autophosphorylation activity of AtCaMRLK. AtCaMRLK was expressed  in reproductive and vegetative tissues of A. thaliana, except in leaves.  Disruption in the AtCaMRLK coding sequence by insertion of a DsG transposable  element in an Arabidopsis mutant did not generate a discernible phenotype. The  CaM-binding motif of AtCaMRLK was found to be conserved in several other members  of the plant RLK family, suggesting a role for Ca2+/CaM in the regulation of  RLK-mediated pathways.', '2004 May 1', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BJ20031045', 'Ranty']

AtCaMRLK: !binds! CaM 
AtCaMRLK: !interacts with! AtCaM1 
AtCaMRLK: !autophosphorylates! using Mn2+ 
AtCaMRLK: !phosphorylates! myelin basic protein 
Lys423: !regulates! kinase activity 
AtCaMRLK: !expressed in! reproductive and vegetative tissues 
AtCaMRLK: !not expressed in! leaves 
AtCaMRLK: !disruption of! coding sequence !does not generate! phenotype 
AtCaMRLK: !conserved motif in! other RLK family members