['14729910', 'Systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is a broad-spectrum resistance mechanism in  plants that is activated in naive organs after exposure of another organ to a  necrotizing pathogen. The organs manifesting SAR exhibit an increase in levels of  salicylic acid (SA) and expression of the PATHOGENESIS-RELATED1 (PR1) gene. SA  signaling is required for the manifestation of SAR. We demonstrate here that the  Arabidopsis thaliana suppressor of fatty acid desaturase deficiency1 (sfd1)  mutation compromises the SAR-conferred enhanced resistance to Pseudomonas  syringae pv maculicola. In addition, the sfd1 mutation diminished the  SAR-associated accumulation of elevated levels of SA and PR1 gene transcript in  the distal leaves of plants previously exposed to an avirulent pathogen. However,  the basal resistance to virulent and avirulent strains of P. syringae and the  accumulation of elevated levels of SA and PR1 gene transcript in the  pathogen-inoculated leaves of sfd1 were not compromised. Furthermore, the  application of the SA functional analog benzothiadiazole enhanced disease  resistance in the sfd1 mutant plants. SFD1 encodes a putative dihydroxyacetone  phosphate (DHAP) reductase, which complemented the glycerol-3-phosphate  auxotrophy of the DHAP reductase-deficient Escherichia coli gpsA mutant. Plastid  glycerolipid composition was altered in the sfd1 mutant plant, suggesting that  SFD1 is involved in lipid metabolism and that an SFD1 product lipid(s) is  important for the activation of SAR.', '2004 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.016907', 'Shah']

Systemic acquired resistance: !activated by! salicylic acid 
salicylic acid: !manifests in! PATHOGENESIS-RELATED1 gene 
suppressor of fatty acid desaturase deficiency1 mutation: !compromises! SAR-conferred enhanced resistance 
suppressor of fatty acid desaturase deficiency1 mutation: !diminishes! SAR-associated accumulation of SA and PR1 gene transcript 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate reductase: !encoded by! SFD1 
SFD1: !involved in! lipid metabolism 
SFD1 product lipid(s): !important for! activation of SAR