['14745009', 'Of 17 genes annotated in the Arabidopsis genome database as cinnamyl alcohol  dehydrogenase (CAD) homologues, an in silico analysis revealed that 8 genes were  misannotated. Of the remaining nine, six were catalytically competent for  NADPH-dependent reduction of p-coumaryl, caffeyl, coniferyl, 5-hydroxyconiferyl,  and sinapyl aldehydes, whereas three displayed very low activity and only at very  high substrate concentrations. Of the nine putative CADs, two (AtCAD5 and AtCAD4)  had the highest activity and homology (approximately 83% similarity) relative to  bona fide CADs from other species. AtCAD5 used all five substrates effectively,  whereas AtCAD4 (of lower overall catalytic capacity) poorly used sinapyl  aldehyde; the corresponding 270-fold decrease in k(enz) resulted from higher K(m)  and lower k(cat) values, respectively. No CAD homologue displayed a specific  requirement for sinapyl aldehyde, which was in direct contrast with unfounded  claims for a so-called sinapyl alcohol dehydrogenase in angiosperms. AtCAD2, 3,  as well as AtCAD7 and 8 (highest homology to sinapyl alcohol dehydrogenase) were  catalytically less active overall by at least an order of magnitude, due to  increased K(m) and lower k(cat) values. Accordingly, alternative and/or  bifunctional metabolic roles of these proteins in plant defense cannot be ruled  out. Comprehensive analyses of lignified tissues of various Arabidopsis knockout  mutants (for AtCAD5, 6, and 9) at different stages of growth/development  indicated the presence of functionally redundant CAD metabolic networks.  Moreover, disruption of AtCAD5 expression had only a small effect on either  overall lignin amounts deposited, or on syringyl-guaiacyl compositions, despite  being the most catalytically active form in vitro.', '2004 Feb 10', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0307987100', 'Lewis']

AtCAD5: !catalytically active for! 5 substrates 
AtCAD4: !catalytically active for! 4 substrates 
AtCAD2, 3, 7, 8: !catalytically less active for! all substrates 
AtCAD5: !has highest activity and homology! relative to other species 
AtCAD4: !poorly uses sinapyl aldehyde! due to higher K(m) and lower k(cat) values 
AtCAD5: !disruption of expression has small effect on lignin amounts! deposited or syringyl-guaiacyl compositions