['14745019', 'It is not known how plants synthesize the p-aminobenzoate (PABA) moiety of  folates. In Escherichia coli, PABA is made from chorismate in two steps. First,  the PabA and PabB proteins interact to catalyze transfer of the amide nitrogen of  glutamine to chorismate, forming 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate (ADC). The PabC  protein then mediates elimination of pyruvate and aromatization to give PABA.  Fungi, actinomycetes, and Plasmodium spp. also synthesize PABA but have proteins  comprising fused domains homologous to PabA and PabB. These bipartite proteins  are commonly called "PABA synthases," although it is unclear whether they produce  PABA or ADC. Genomic approaches identified Arabidopsis and tomato cDNAs encoding  bipartite proteins containing fused PabA and PabB domains, plus a putative  chloroplast targeting peptide. These cDNAs encode functional enzymes, as  demonstrated by complementation of an E. coli pabA pabB double mutant and a yeast  PABA-synthase deletant. The partially purified recombinant Arabidopsis protein  did not produce PABA unless the E. coli PabC enzyme was added, indicating that it  forms ADC, not PABA. The enzyme behaved as a monomer in size-exclusion  chromatography and was not inhibited by physiological concentrations of PABA, its  glucose ester, or folates. When the putative targeting peptide was fused to GFP  and expressed in protoplasts, the fusion protein appeared only in chloroplasts,  indicating that PABA synthesis is plastidial. In the pericarp of tomato fruit,  the PabA-PabB mRNA level fell drastically as ripening advanced, but there was no  fall in total PABA content, which stayed between 0.7 and 2.3 nmol.g(-1) fresh  weight.', '2004 Feb 10', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0308331100', 'Hanson']

PabA: !interacts with! PabB 
PabC: !mediates! elimination of pyruvate 
fused domains: !homologous to! PabA and PabB 
putative targeting peptide: !fused to! GFP 
GFP: !expressed in! protoplasts 
PabA-PabB mRNA: !falls drastically as! ripening advances