['14756317', 'We characterized the Arabidopsis orthologue of the human nuclear import receptor  transportin1 (TRN1). Like the human receptor, Arabidopsis TRN1 recognizes nuclear  import signals on proteins that are different from the classical basic nuclear  localization signals. The M9 domain of human heterogeneous nuclear  ribonucleoprotein A1 (hnRNP A1) is the prototype of such signals. We show that  AtTRN1 binds to similar domains in hnRNP-like proteins from plants. AtTRN1 also  interacts with human hnRNP A1 and with yeast Nab2p, two classical import cargo  proteins of transportin in these organisms. Like all nuclear transport receptors  of the importin-beta family, AtTRN1 binds to the regulatory GTPase Ran from  Arabidopsis. We demonstrated that the amino terminus of AtTRN1 is necessary for  this interaction. Recombinant AtTRN1 conferred nuclear import of fluorescently  labelled BSA-M9 peptide conjugates in permeabilized HeLa cells, functionally  replacing human TRN1 in these in vitro nuclear import assays. We identified three  plant substrate proteins that interact with AtTRN1 and contain M9-like domains: a  novel Arabidopsis hnRNP that shows high similarity to human hnRNP A1 and two  small RNA-binding proteins from Arabidopsis, AtGRP7 and AtGRP8. Nuclear import  activity of the M9-like domains of these plant proteins was demonstrated in vivo  by their ability to confer partial nuclear re-localisation of a GFP fusion  protein containing a nuclear export signal. In addition, fluorescently labelled  AtGRP7 was specifically imported into nuclei of permeabilized HeLa cells by  Arabidopsis AtTRN1 and human TRN1. These results suggest that the  transportin-mediated nuclear import pathway is highly conserved between man,  yeast and plants.', '2003 Sep', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/B:PLAN.0000009288.46713.1f', 'Merkle']

TRN1: !recognizes! nuclear import signals 
hnRNP A1: !binds to! AtTRN1 
AtTRN1: !interacts with! human hnRNP A1 
AtTRN1: !interacts with! yeast Nab2p 
AtTRN1: !binds to! GTPase Ran 
AtTRN1: !conferred nuclear import of! BSA-M9 peptide conjugates 
AtGRP7: !interacts with! AtTRN1 
AtGRP8: !interacts with! AtTRN1 
AtGRP7: !imported into nuclei of! permeabilized HeLa cells 
AtTRN1: !imports! AtGRP7