['14766747', 'Sarcosine oxidase (SOX) is known as a peroxisomal enzyme in mammals and as a  sarcosine-inducible enzyme in soil bacteria. Its presence in plants was  unsuspected until the Arabidopsis genome was found to encode a protein (AtSOX)  with approximately 33% sequence identity to mammalian and bacterial SOXs. When  overexpressed in Escherichia coli, AtSOX enhanced growth on sarcosine as sole  nitrogen source, showing that it has SOX activity in vivo, and the recombinant  protein catalyzed the oxidation of sarcosine to glycine, formaldehyde, and H(2)  O(2) in vitro. AtSOX also attacked other N-methyl amino acids and, like mammalian  SOXs, catalyzed the oxidation of l-pipecolate to  Delta(1)-piperideine-6-carboxylate. Like bacterial monomeric SOXs, AtSOX was  active as a monomer, contained FAD covalently bound to a cysteine residue near  the C terminus, and was not stimulated by tetrahydrofolate. Although AtSOX lacks  a typical peroxisome-targeting signal, in vitro assays established that it is  imported into peroxisomes. Quantitation of mRNA showed that AtSOX is expressed at  a low level throughout the plant and is not sarcosine-inducible. Consistent with  a low level of AtSOX expression, Arabidopsis plantlets slowly metabolized  supplied [(14)C]sarcosine to glycine and serine. Gas chromatography-mass  spectrometry analysis revealed low levels of pipecolate but almost no sarcosine  in wild type Arabidopsis and showed that pipecolate but not sarcosine accumulated  6-fold when AtSOX expression was suppressed by RNA interference. Moreover, the  pipecolate catabolite alpha-aminoadipate decreased 30-fold in RNA interference  plants. These data indicate that pipecolate is the endogenous substrate for SOX  in plants and that plants can utilize exogenous sarcosine opportunistically,  sarcosine being a common soil metabolite.', '2004 Apr 23', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M400071200', 'Hanson']

Sarcosine oxidase (SOX): !catalyzes! oxidation of sarcosine 
AtSOX: !enhances! growth on sarcosine 
AtSOX: !attacks! other N-methyl amino acids 
AtSOX: !contains! FAD covalently bound to a cysteine residue 
AtSOX: !imported into! peroxisomes 
AtSOX: !expressed at! low level throughout the plant 
AtSOX: !not sarcosine-inducible 
RNA interference: !suppresses! AtSOX expression 
Wild type Arabidopsis: !contains! low levels of pipecolate 
RNA interference plants: !accumulate! pipecolate 
RNA interference plants: !decrease! alpha-aminoadipate