['14764908', 'Lipoic acid-dependent pathways of alpha-keto acid oxidation by mitochondria were  investigated in pea (Pisum sativum), rice (Oryza sativa), and Arabidopsis.  Proteins containing covalently bound lipoic acid were identified on isoelectric  focusing/sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis separations of  mitochondrial proteins by the use of antibodies raised to this cofactor. All  these proteins were identified by tandem mass spectrometry. Lipoic  acid-containing acyltransferases from pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and  alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex were identified from all three species.  In addition, acyltransferases from the branched-chain dehydrogenase complex were  identified in both Arabidopsis and rice mitochondria. The substrate-dependent  reduction of NAD(+) was analyzed by spectrophotometry using specific alpha-keto  acids. Pyruvate- and alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent reactions were measured in all  three species. Activity of the branched-chain dehydrogenase complex was only  measurable in Arabidopsis mitochondria using substrates that represented the  alpha-keto acids derived by deamination of branched-chain amino acids (Val  [valine], leucine, and isoleucine). The rate of branched-chain amino acid- and  alpha-keto acid-dependent oxygen consumption by intact Arabidopsis mitochondria  was highest with Val and the Val-derived alpha-keto acid, alpha-ketoisovaleric  acid. Sequencing of peptides derived from trypsination of Arabidopsis  mitochondrial proteins revealed the presence of many of the enzymes required for  the oxidation of all three branched-chain amino acids. The potential role of  branched-chain amino acid catabolism as an oxidative phosphorylation energy  source or as a detoxification pathway during plant stress is discussed.', '2004 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.035675', 'Millar']

Lipoic acid: !binds to! mitochondrial proteins 
Proteins: !identified by! tandem mass spectrometry 
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex: !contains! lipoic acid-containing acyltransferases 
Alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex: !contains! lipoic acid-containing acyltransferases 
Branched-chain dehydrogenase complex: !contains! acyltransferases 
NAD(+): !reduced by! specific alpha-keto acids 
Oxygen consumption: !highest with! Val and alpha-ketoisovaleric acid 
Enzymes: !required for! oxidation of branched-chain amino acids