['14871310', 'The Arabidopsis FERTILIZATION-INDEPENDENT ENDOSPERM (FIE) polycomb group (PcG)  protein, a WD40 homologue of Drosophila extra sex comb (ESC), regulates endosperm  and embryo development and represses flowering during embryo and seedling  development. As fie alleles are not transmitted maternally, homozygous mutant  plants cannot be obtained. To study FIE function during the entire plant life  cycle, we used Arabidopsis FIE co-suppressed plants. Low FIE level in these  plants produced dramatic morphological aberrations, including loss of apical  dominance, curled leaves, early flowering and homeotic conversion of leaves,  flower organs and ovules into carpel-like structures. These morphological  aberrations are similar to those exhibited by plants overexpressing AGAMOUS (AG)  or CURLY LEAF (clf) mutants. Furthermore, the aberrant leaf morphology of  FIE-silenced and clf plants correlates with de-repression of the class I  KNOTTED-like homeobox (KNOX) genes including KNOTTED-like from Arabidopsis  thaliana 2 (KNAT2) and SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM), whereas BREVIPEDICELLUS (BP) was  upregulated in FIE-silenced plants, but not in the clf mutant. Thus, FIE is  essential for the control of shoot and leaf development. Yeast two-hybrid and  pull-down assays demonstrate that FIE interacts with CLF. Collectively, the  morphological characteristics, together with the molecular and biochemical data  presented in this work, strongly suggest that in plants, as in mammals and  insects, PcG proteins control expression of homeobox genes. Our findings  demonstrate that the versatility of the plant FIE function, which is derived from  association with different SET (SU (VAR)3-9, E (Z), Trithorax) domain PcG  proteins, results in differential regulation of gene expression throughout the  plant life cycle.', '2004 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313x.2003.01996.x', 'Ohad']

FIE: !regulates! endosperm and embryo development
FIE: !represses! flowering
FIE: !produces! morphological aberrations
FIE: !correlates with! de-repression of KNOX genes
CLF: !interacts with! FIE
FIE: !controls expression of! homeobox genes