['14963126', 'We have identified a cellular factor that interacts with the virus genome-linked  proteins (VPgs) of a diverse range of potyviruses. The factor, called Potyvirus  VPg-interacting protein (PVIP), is a plant-specific protein with homologues in  all the species examined, i.e., pea, Arabidopsis thaliana, and Nicotiana  benthamiana. The sequence of PVIP does not identify a specific function, although  the existence of a "PHD finger" domain may implicate the protein in  transcriptional control through chromatin remodeling. Deletion analysis using the  yeast two-hybrid system showed that the determinants of the interaction lay close  to the N terminus of VPg; indeed, the N-terminal 16 amino acids were shown to be  both necessary and sufficient for the interaction with at least one PVIP protein.  From a sequence comparison of different potyvirus VPg proteins, a specific amino  acid at position 12 was directly implicated in the interaction. This part of VPg  is distinct from regions associated with other functional roles of VPg. Through  mutation of Turnip mosaic virus (TuMV) at VPg position 12, we showed that the  interaction with PVIP affected systemic symptoms in infected plants. This  resulted from reduced cell-to-cell and systemic movement more than reduced virus  replication, as visualized by comparing green fluorescent protein-tagged  wild-type and mutant viruses. Furthermore, by using RNA interference of PVIP in  Arabidopsis, we showed that reduced expression of PVIP genes reduced  susceptibility to TuMV infection. We conclude that PVIP functions as an ancillary  factor to support potyvirus movement in plants.', '2004 Mar', 'J Virol', '10.1128/jvi.78.5.2301-2309.2004', 'Maule']

PVIP: !interacts with! VPgs 
VPg: !contains! amino acid at position 12 
PVIP: !affects! systemic symptoms in infected plants 
PVIP: !reduces! susceptibility to TuMV infection 
TuMV: !visualized by! green fluorescent protein-tagged wild-type and mutant viruses 
PVIP: !supports! potyvirus movement in plants