['14976237', 'Lysophosphatidyl acyltransferase (LPAAT) is a pivotal enzyme controlling the  metabolic flow of lysophosphatidic acid into different phosphatidic acids in  diverse tissues. A search of the Arabidopsis genome database revealed five genes  that could encode LPAAT-like proteins. We identified one of them, LPAAT1, to be  the lone gene that encodes the plastid LPAAT. LPAAT1 could functionally  complement a bacterial mutant that has defective LPAAT. Bacteria transformed with  LPAAT1 produced LPAAT that had in vitro enzyme activity much higher on  16:0-coenzyme A than on 18:1-coenzyme A in the presence of 18:1-lysophosphatidic  acid. LPAAT1 transcript was present in diverse organs, with the highest level in  green leaves. A mutant having a T-DNA inserted into LPAAT1 was identified. The  heterozygous mutant has no overt phenotype, and its leaf acyl composition is  similar to that of the wild type. Selfing of a heterozygous mutant produced  normal-sized and shrunken seeds in the Mendelian ratio of 3:1, and the shrunken  seeds could not germinate. The shrunken seeds apparently were homozygous of the  T-DNA-inserted LPAAT1, and development of the embryo within them was arrested at  the heart-torpedo stage. This embryo lethality could be rescued by transformation  of the heterozygous mutant with a 35S:LPAAT1 construct. The current findings of  embryo death in the homozygous knockout mutant of the plastid LPAAT contrasts  with earlier findings of a normal phenotype in the homozygous mutant deficient of  the plastid glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase; both mutations block the  synthesis of plastid phosphatidic acid. Reasons for the discrepancy between the  contrasting phenotypes of the two mutants are discussed.', '2004 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.035832', 'Huang']

LPAAT1: !encodes! plastid LPAAT 
LPAAT1: !complements! bacterial mutant 
LPAAT1: !synthesizes! LPAAT 
LPAAT1: !localizes to! diverse organs 
T-DNA: !inserted into! LPAAT1 
35S:LPAAT1: !rescues! embryo lethality