['14977588', 'Purine nucleotides are essential components to sustain plant growth and  development. In plants they are either synthesized "de novo" during the process  of purine biosynthesis or are recycled from purine bases and purine nucleosides  throughout the salvage pathway. Comparison between animals, microorganisms and  Arabidopsis, the first plant species with a completely sequenced genome, shows  that plants principally use the same biochemical steps to synthesize purine  nucleotides and possess all the essential genes and enzymes. Here we report on  the cloning and molecular analysis of the complete purine biosynthesis pathway in  plants, and the in planta functional analysis of PRPP  (5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophoshate) amidotransferase (ATase), catalyzing the first  committed step of the "de novo" purine biosynthesis. The cloning of the genes  involved in the purine biosynthesis pathway was attained by a screening strategy  with heterologous cDNA probes and by using S. cerevisiae mutants for  complementation. Southern hybridization showed a complex genomic organization for  these genes in solanaceous species and their organ- and developmental specific  expression was analyzed by Northern hybridization. The specific role of ATase for  plant growth and development was analyzed in transgenic tobacco plants exhibiting  a reduced ATase activity and in an Arabidopsis T-DNA mutant (atd2) deficient for  ATase2. The transgenic tobacco plants as well as the Arabidopsis mutant exhibit a  specific and comparable phenotype, which is characterized by strong growth  retardation and severe chlorosis in leaves. The formation of white leaves, but  green cotyledons is a characteristic trait of the Arabidopsis atd2 mutant.', '2004 May 1', 'Front Biosci', '10.2741/1344', 'Boldt']

Purine nucleotides: !essential for! plant growth and development 
PRPP amidotransferase: !catalyzes! first committed step of "de novo" purine biosynthesis 
cDNA probes: !used to! clone genes involved in purine biosynthesis pathway 
S. cerevisiae mutants: !complemented by! cloning genes involved in purine biosynthesis pathway 
genes: !complexly organized! in solanaceous species 
genes: !organ- and developmentally expressed! in Northern hybridization 
ATase: !role analyzed! in transgenic tobacco plants and Arabidopsis T-DNA mutant 
transgenic tobacco plants: !exhibit! strong growth retardation and severe chlorosis in leaves 
Arabidopsis atd2 mutant: !exhibit! white leaves, but green cotyledons