['14983000', 'The pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate  synthase (ACS; EC 4.4.1.14), catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the ethylene  biosynthetic pathway in plants. The Arabidopsis genome encodes nine ACS  polypeptides that form eight functional (ACS2, ACS4-9, ACS11) and one  nonfunctional (ACS1) homodimers. Because the enzyme is a homodimer with shared  active sites, the question arises whether the various polypeptides can form  functional heterodimers. Intermolecular complementation experiments in  Escherichia coli by coexpressing the K278A and Y92A mutants of different  polypeptides show that all of them have the capacity to heterodimerize. However,  functional heterodimers are formed only among gene family members that belong to  one or the other of the two phylogenetic branches. ACS7 is an exception to this  rule, which forms functional heterodimers with some members of both branches when  it provides the wt K278 residue. ACS1, the nonfunctional polypeptide as a  homodimer, can also form functional heterodimers with members of its phylogenetic  branch when its partners provide the wt K278 residue. The ACS gene family  products can potentially form 45 homo- and heterodimers of which 25 are  functional. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation and biochemical coaffinity  purification assays show that the inactivity of certain heterodimers is not due  to the absence of heterodimerization but rather to structural restraint(s) that  prevents the shared active sites from being functional. We propose that  functional heterodimerization enhances the isozyme diversity of the ACS gene  family and provides physiological versatility by being able to operate in a broad  gradient of S-adenosylmethionine concentration in various cells/tissues during  plant growth and development. Nonfunctional heterodimerization may also play a  regulatory role during the plant life cycle.', '2004 Feb 24', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0308515101', 'Theologis']

ACS: !heterodimerizes with! ACS2-11
ACS1: !heterodimerizes with! ACS2-11
ACS7: !heterodimerizes with! ACS2-11 & members of both phylogenetic branches
ACS: !enhances! isozyme diversity & physiological versatility
ACS: !regulates! plant life cycle