['15034145', 'The organization of the pre-mRNA splicing machinery has been extensively studied  in mammalian and yeast cells and far less is known in living plant cells and  different cell types of an intact organism. Here, we report on the expression,  organization, and dynamics of pre-mRNA splicing factors (SR33, SR1/atSRp34, and  atSRp30) under control of their endogenous promoters in Arabidopsis. Distinct  tissue-specific expression patterns were observed, and differences in the  distribution of these proteins within nuclei of different cell types were  identified. These factors localized in a cell type-dependent speckled pattern as  well as being diffusely distributed throughout the nucleoplasm. Electron  microscopic analysis has revealed that these speckles correspond to  interchromatin granule clusters. Time-lapse microscopy revealed that speckles  move within a constrained nuclear space, and their organization is altered during  the cell cycle. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching analysis revealed a  rapid exchange rate of splicing factors in nuclear speckles. The dynamic  organization of plant speckles is closely related to the transcriptional activity  of the cells. The organization and dynamic behavior of speckles in Arabidopsis  cell nuclei provides significant insight into understanding the functional  compartmentalization of the nucleus and its relationship to chromatin  organization within various cell types of a single organism.', '2004 Jun', 'Mol Biol Cell', '10.1091/mbc.e04-02-0100', 'Spector']

SR33: !localizes to! Interchromatin granule clusters 
SR1/atSRp34: !localizes to! Interchromatin granule clusters 
atSRp30: !localizes to! Interchromatin granule clusters 
SR33: !moves within! Constrained nuclear space 
SR1/atSRp34: !moves within! Constrained nuclear space 
atSRp30: !moves within! Constrained nuclear space 
SR33: !exchange rate of! Rapid 
SR1/atSRp34: !exchange rate of! Rapid 
atSRp30: !exchange rate of! Rapid 
Speckles: !related to! Transcriptional activity