['15047903', 'SCF complexes are the largest and best studied family of E3 ubiquitin protein  ligases that facilitate the ubiquitylation of proteins targeted for degradation.  The SCF core components Skp1, Cul1, and Rbx1 serve in multiple SCF complexes  involving different substrate-specific F-box proteins that are involved in  diverse processes including cell cycle and development. In Arabidopsis, mutations  in the F-box gene UNUSUAL FLORAL ORGANS (UFO) result in a number of defects in  flower development. However, functions of the core components Cul1 and Rbx1 in  flower development are poorly understood. In this study we analyzed floral  phenotypes caused by altering function of Cul1 or Rbx1, as well as the effects of  mutations in ASK1 and ASK2. Plants homozygous for a point mutation in the AtCUL1  gene showed reduced floral organ number and several defects in each of the four  whorls. Similarly, plants with reduced AtRbx1 expression due to RNA interference  also exhibited floral morphological defects. In addition, compared to the ask1  mutant, plants homozygous for ask1 and heterozygous for ask2 displayed enhanced  reduction of B function, as well as other novel defects of flower development,  including carpelloid sepals and an inhibition of petal development. Genetic  analyses demonstrate that AGAMOUS (AG) is required for the novel phenotypes  observed in the first and second whorls. Furthermore, the genetic interaction  between UFO and AtCUL1 supports the idea that UFO regulates multiple aspects of  flower development as a part of SCF complexes. These results suggest that SCF  complexes regulate several aspects of floral development in Arabidopsis.', '2004 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.031971', 'Ma']

Skp1: !forms! SCF complexes 
Cul1: !facilitates! ubiquitylation 
Rbx1: !facilitates! ubiquitylation 
UFO: !regulates! flower development 
AtCUL1: !affects! floral organ number 
AtRbx1: !affects! floral morphological defects 
ASK1: !interacts with! ASK2 
AG: !required for! novel phenotypes