['15064385', 'Signaling events during abscisic acid (ABA) or methyl jasmonate (MJ)-induced  stomatal closure were examined in Arabidopsis wild type, ABA-insensitive  (ost1-2), and MJ-insensitive mutants (jar1-1) in order to examine a crosstalk  between ABA and MJ signal transduction. Some of the experiments were performed on  epidermal strips of Pisum sativum. Stomata of jar1-1 mutant plants are  insensitive to MJ but are able to close in response to ABA. However, their  sensitivity to ABA is less than that of wild-type plants. Reciprocally, the  stomata of ost1-2 are insensitive to ABA but are able to close in response to MJ  to a lesser extent compared to wild-type plants. Both MJ and ABA promote H(2)O(2)  production in wild-type guard cells, while exogenous application of diphenylene  iodonium (DPI) chloride, an inhibitor of NAD(P)H oxidases, results in the  suppression of ABA- and MJ-induced stomatal closure. ABA elevates H(2)O(2)  production in wild-type and jar1-1 guard cells but not in ost1-2, whereas MJ  induces H(2)O(2) production in both wild-type and ost1-2 guard cells, but not in  jar1-1. MJ-induced stomatal closing is suppressed in the NAD(P)H oxidase double  mutant atrbohD/F and in the outward potassium channel mutant gork1. Furthermore,  MJ induces alkalization in guard cell cytosol, and MJ-induced stomatal closing is  inhibited by butyrate. Analyses of the kinetics of cytosolic pH changes and  reactive oxygen species (ROS) production show that the alkalization of cytoplasm  precedes ROS production during the stomatal response to both ABA and MJ. Our  results further indicate that JAR1, as OST1, functions upstream of ROS produced  by NAD(P)H oxidases and that the cytoplasmic alkalization precedes ROS production  during MJ or ABA signal transduction in guard cells.', '2004 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.032250', 'Vavasseur']

ABA: !induces! H2O2 production 
MJ: !induces! H2O2 production 
DPI: !inhibits! ABA- and MJ-induced stomatal closure 
atrbohD/F: !inhibits! MJ-induced stomatal closing 
gork1: !inhibits! MJ-induced stomatal closing 
butyrate: !inhibits! MJ-induced stomatal closing 
cytosolic pH: !changes before! ROS production