['15100400', 'Arabidopsis thaliana has eight genes encoding members of the type 1(B) heavy  metal-transporting subfamily of the P-type ATPases. Three of these transporters,  HMA2, HMA3, and HMA4, are closely related to each other and are most similar in  sequence to the divalent heavy metal cation transporters of prokaryotes. To  determine the function of these transporters in metal homeostasis, we have  identified and characterized mutants affected in each. Whereas the individual  mutants exhibited no apparent phenotype, hma2 hma4 double mutants had a  nutritional deficiency phenotype that could be compensated for by increasing the  level of Zn, but not Cu or Co, in the growth medium. Levels of Zn, but not other  essential elements, in the shoot tissues of a hma2 hma4 double mutant and, to a  lesser extent, of a hma4 single mutant were decreased compared with the wild  type. Together, these observations indicate a primary role for HMA2 and HMA4 in  essential Zn homeostasis. HMA2promoter- and HMA4promoter-reporter gene constructs  provide evidence that HMA2 and HMA4 expression is predominantly in the vascular  tissues of roots, stems, and leaves. In addition, expression of the genes in  developing anthers was confirmed by RT-PCR and was consistent with a male-sterile  phenotype in the double mutant. HMA2 appears to be localized to the plasma  membrane, as indicated by protein gel blot analysis of membrane fractions using  isoform-specific antibodies and by the visualization of an HMA2-green fluorescent  protein fusion by confocal microscopy. These observations are consistent with a  role for HMA2 and HMA4 in Zn translocation. hma2 and hma4 mutations both  conferred increased sensitivity to Cd in a phytochelatin-deficient mutant  background, suggesting that they may also influence Cd detoxification.', '2004 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.020487', 'Cobbett']

HMA2: !affects! Zn homeostasis 
HMA2: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
HMA4: !affects! Zn homeostasis 
HMA4: !localizes to! vascular tissues 
HMA2: !enhances! Cd detoxification 
HMA4: !enhances! Cd detoxification