['15126639', 'Chloroplast division is mediated by the coordinated action of a  prokaryote-derived division system(s) and a host eukaryote-derived membrane  fission system(s). The evolutionary conserved prokaryote-derived system comprises  several nucleus-encoded proteins, two of which are thought to control division  site placement at the midpoint of the organelle: a stromal ATPase MinD and a  topological specificity factor MinE. Here, we show that arc11, one of 12  recessive accumulation and replication of chloroplasts (arc) mutants in  Arabidopsis, contains highly elongated and multiple-arrayed chloroplasts in  developing green tissues. Genomic sequence analysis revealed that arc11 contains  a missense mutation in alpha-helix 11 of the chloroplast-targeted AtMinD1  changing an Ala at position 296 to Gly (A296G). Introduction of wild-type AtMinD1  restores the chloroplast division defects of arc11 and quantitative RT-PCR  analysis showed that the degree of complementation was highly dependent on  transgene expression levels. Overexpression of the mutant ARC11/AtMinD1 in  transgenic plants results in the inhibition of chloroplast division, showing that  the mutant protein has retained its division inhibition activity. However, in  contrast to the defined and punctate intraplastidic localization patterns of an  AtMinD1-YFP fusion protein, the single A296G point mutation in ARC11/AtMinD1  results in aberrant localization patterns inside chloroplasts. We further show  that AtMinD1 is capable of forming homodimers and that this dimerization capacity  is abolished by the A296G mutation in ARC11/AtMinD1. Our data show that arc11 is  a loss-of-function mutant of AtMinD1 and suggest that the formation of functional  AtMinD1 homodimers is paramount for appropriate AtMinD1 localization, ultimately  ensuring correct division machinery placement and chloroplast division in plants.', '2004 May 1', 'J Cell Sci', '10.1242/jcs.01092', 'Moller']

MinD: !controls! Chloroplast division
AtMinD1: !localizes to! Chloroplasts
AtMinD1: !forms! Homodimers
A296G mutation: !abolishes! AtMinD1 dimerization
ARC11/AtMinD1: !inhibits! Chloroplast division