['15122033', 'Phosphorus (P) acquisition and partitioning are essential for plant homeostasis.  P is available for plant uptake when in its inorganic form (H2PO4-, or Pi), but  Pi is often limiting in soils. Plants secrete acid phosphatases (APases) into the  apoplastic space, which may be important for obtaining Pi from organic P sources;  however, the relative importance of these enzymes for plant P nutrition has yet  to be determined. We demonstrate that the root-associated APase pool is increased  in Arabidopsis when Pi is limiting and document five APase isoforms secreted from  Arabidopsis roots. Previously, we presented the identification of the phosphatase  under-producer (pup) mutants, which have decreased in vivo root APase staining  when grown under low P conditions. Here, we present the characterization of one  of these, pup3, and further studies with pup1. pup3 has 49%, 38%, and 37% less  specific APase activity in exudates, roots, and shoots, respectively.  Root-associated APase activity is decreased by 16% in pup1 and 25% in pup3,  regardless of P treatment. Two APase activity isoforms are reduced in pup3  exudates, and root and shoot isoforms are also affected. One of the two exudate  isoforms is recognized by a polyclonal antibody raised to an Arabidopsis purple  APase recombinant protein (AtPAP12); however, AtPAP12 transcript levels are  unaffected in the mutant. The pup3 mutation was mapped to 68.4 +/- 6.0  centimorgans on chromosome 5. Although P concentrations were not altered in pup1  and pup3 tissues when grown in nutrient solution in which Pi was the sole source  of P, the mutants had 10% (pup1) and 17% (pup3) lower shoot P concentrations when  grown in a peat-vermiculite mix in which the majority of the total P was present  as organic P. Therefore, the pup defects, which include secreted APases, are  functionally important for plant P nutrition.', '2004 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.036459', 'Guiltinan']

Phosphorus: !essential for! plant homeostasis 
Plants: !secrete! acid phosphatases 
pup mutants: !have decreased! root APase staining 
pup3: !mapped to! chromosome 5 
pup1/pup3: !have lower! shoot P concentrations 
pup defects: !include! secreted APases 
APase isoforms: !secreted from! Arabidopsis roots 
AtPAP12: !recognized by! polyclonal antibody 
AtPAP12 transcript: !unaffected in! pup mutant