['15136745', 'DNA gyrase is the bacterial DNA topoisomerase (topo) that supercoils DNA by using  the free energy of ATP hydrolysis. The enzyme, an A(2)B(2) tetramer encoded by  the gyrA and gyrB genes, catalyses topological changes in DNA during replication  and transcription, and is the only topo that is able to introduce negative  supercoils. Gyrase is essential in bacteria and apparently absent from eukaryotes  and is, consequently, an important target for antibacterial agents (e.g.,  quinolones and coumarins). We have identified four putative gyrase genes in the  model plant Arabidopsis thaliana; one gyrA and three gyrB homologues. DNA gyrase  protein A (GyrA) has a dual translational initiation site targeting the mature  protein to both chloroplasts and mitochondria, and there are individual targeting  sequences for two of the DNA gyrase protein B (GyrB) homologues. N-terminal  fusions of the organellar targeting sequences to GFPs support the hypothesis that  one enzyme is targeted to the chloroplast and another to the mitochondrion, which  correlates with supercoiling activity in isolated organelles. Treatment of  seedlings and cultured cells with gyrase-specific drugs leads to growth  inhibition. Knockout of A. thaliana gyrA is embryo-lethal whereas knockouts in  the gyrB genes lead to seedling-lethal phenotypes or severely stunted growth and  development. The A. thaliana genes have been cloned in Escherichia coli and found  to complement gyrase temperature-sensitive strains. This report confirms the  existence of DNA gyrase in eukaryotes and has important implications for drug  targeting, organelle replication, and the evolution of topos in plants.', '2004 May 18', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0400836101', 'Maxwell']

DNA gyrase: !encoded by! gyrA and gyrB genes 
GyrA: !localizes to! chloroplasts and mitochondria 
GyrB: !localizes to! chloroplast and mitochondrion 
GyrA and GyrB: !essential for! bacterial DNA topoisomerase 
GyrA and GyrB: !absent from! eukaryotes 
GyrA and GyrB: !targeted by! antibacterial agents 
GyrA and GyrB: !identified in! Arabidopsis thaliana 
GyrA: !embryo-lethal! knockout 
GyrB: !seedling-lethal! knockout 
GyrA and GyrB: !complement! temperature-sensitive strains