['15144379', 'Cytokinin is an adenine derivative plant hormone that generally regulates plant  cell division and differentiation in conjunction with auxin. We report that a  major cue for the negative regulation of sulfur acquisition is executed by  cytokinin response 1 (CRE1)/wooden leg (WOL)/Arabidopsis histidine kinase 4  (AHK4) cytokinin receptor in Arabidopsis root. We constructed a green fluorescent  protein (GFP) reporter system that generally displays the expression of the  high-affinity sulfate transporter SULTR1;2 in Arabidopsis roots. GFP under the  control of SULTR1;2 promoter showed typical sulfur responses that correlate with  the changes in SULTR1;2 mRNA levels; accumulation of GFP was induced by sulfur  limitation (-S), but was repressed in the presence of reduced sulfur compounds.  Among the plant hormones tested, cytokinin significantly downregulated the  expression of SULTR1;2. SULTR1;1 conducting sulfate uptake in sultr1;2 mutant was  similarly downregulated by cytokinin. Downregulation of SULTR1;1 and SULTR1;2 by  cytokinin correlated with the decrease in sulfate uptake activities in roots. The  effect of cytokinin on sulfate uptake was moderated in the cre1-1 mutant,  providing genetic evidence for involvement of CRE1/WOL/AHK4 in the negative  regulation of high-affinity sulfate transporters. These data demonstrated the  physiological importance of the cytokinin-dependent regulatory pathway in  acquisition of sulfate in roots. Our results suggested that two different modes  of regulation, represented as the -S induction and the cytokinin-dependent  repression of sulfate transporters, independently control the uptake of sulfate  in Arabidopsis roots.', '2004 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02079.x', 'Takahashi']

Cytokinin: !regulates! Cell division and differentiation 
CRE1/WOL/AHK4: !downregulates! SULTR1;2 
SULTR1;2: !induces! GFP 
Sulfur: !induces! GFP 
Cytokinin: !downregulates! SULTR1;1 
Cytokinin: !downregulates! SULTR1;2 
CRE1/WOL/AHK4: !moderates! Cytokinin effect 
-S: !induces! GFP 
Cytokinin: !represses! Sulfate uptake