['15159625', 'Cytosolic acyl-CoA-binding proteins (ACBP) bind long-chain acyl-CoAs and act as  intracellular acyl-CoA transporters and maintain acyl-CoA pools. Arabidopsis  thaliana ACBP2 shows conservation at the acyl-CoA-binding domain to cytosolic  ACBPs but is distinct by the presence of an N-terminal transmembrane domain and  C-terminal ankyrin repeats. The function of the acyl-CoA-binding domain in ACBP2  has been confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis and four conserved residues  crucial for palmitoyl-CoA binding have been identified. Results from ACBP2:GFP  fusions transiently expressed in onion epidermal cells have demonstrated that the  transmembrane domain functions in plasma membrane targeting, suggesting that  ACBP2 transfers acyl-CoA esters to this membrane. In this study, we investigated  the significance of its ankyrin repeats in mediating protein-protein interactions  by yeast two-hybrid analysis and in vitro protein-binding assays; we showed that  ACBP2 interacts with the A. thaliana ethylene-responsive element-binding protein  AtEBP via its ankyrin repeats. This interaction was lacking in yeast two-hybrid  analysis upon removal of the ankyrin repeats. When the subcellular localizations  of ACBP2 and AtEBP were further investigated using autofluorescent protein  fusions in transient expression by agroinfiltration of tobacco leaves, the  DsRed:ACBP2 fusion protein was localized to the plasma membrane while the  GFP:AtEBP fusion protein was targeted to the nucleus and plasma membrane.  Co-expression of DsRed:ACBP2 and GFP:AtEBP showed a common localization of both  proteins at the plasma membrane, suggesting that ACBP2 likely interacts with  AtEBP at the plasma membrane.', '2004 Jan', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/B:PLAN.0000028790.75090.ab', 'Chye']

ACBP2: !binds! long-chain acyl-CoAs 
ACBP2: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
ACBP2: !interacts with! AtEBP 
AtEBP: !localizes to! nucleus and plasma membrane 
ACBP2: !enhances! AtEBP localization to plasma membrane