['15159623', 'Plant glutathione S -transferases (GSTs) are a large group of multifunctional  proteins that are induced by diverse stimuli. Using proteomic approaches we  identified 20 GSTs at the protein level in Arabidopsis cell culture with a  combination of GST antibody detection, LC-MS/MS analysis of 23-30 kDa proteins  and glutathione-affinity chromatography. GSTs identified were from phi, tau,  theta, zeta and DHAR sub-sections of the GST superfamily of 53 members. We have  uncovered preliminary evidence for post-translational modifications of plant GSTs  and show that phosphorylation is unlikely to be responsible. Detailed analysis of  GST expression in response to treatment with 0.01-1 mM of the plant defence  signal salicylic acid (SA) uncovered some interesting features. Firstly, GSTs  appear to display class-specific concentration-dependent SA induction profiles  highlighting differences between the large, plant specific phi and tau classes.  Secondly, different members of the same class, while sharing similar SA dose  responses, may display differences in terms of magnitude and timing of induction,  further highlighting the breadth of GST gene regulation. Thirdly, closely related  members of the same class ( GSTF6 and GSTF7 ), arising via tandem duplication,  may be regulated differently in terms of basal expression levels and also  magnitude of induction raising questions about the role of subfunctionalisation  within this family. Our results reveal that GSTs exhibit class specific responses  to SA treatment suggesting that several mechanisms are acting to induce GSTs upon  SA treatment and hinting at class-specific functions for this large and  important, yet still relatively elusive gene family.', '2004 Jan', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/B:PLAN.0000028786.57439.b3', 'Millar']

GSTs: !induced by! diverse stimuli 
GSTs: !identified with! proteomic approaches 
GSTs: !modified by! post-translational modifications 
GSTs: !respond to! SA treatment 
GSTF6/7: !regulated differently! in terms of basal expression levels