['15165863', 'Dihydroneopterin aldolase (DHNA) catalyses a retroaldol reaction yielding  6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin, a biosynthetic precursor of the vitamin,  tetrahydrofolate. The enzyme is a potential target for antimicrobial and  anti-parasite chemotherapy. A gene specifying a dihydroneopterin aldolase from  Arabidopsis thaliana was expressed in a recombinant Escherichia coli strain. The  recombinant protein was purified to apparent homogeneity and crystallised using  polyethylenglycol as the precipitating agent. The crystal structure was solved by  X-ray diffraction analysis at 2.2A resolution. The enzyme forms a D(4)-symmetric  homooctamer. Each polypeptide chain is folded into a single domain comprising an  antiparallel four-stranded beta-sheet and two long alpha-helices. Four monomers  are arranged in a tetrameric ring, and two of these rings form a hollow cylinder.  Well defined purine derivatives are found at all eight topologically equivalent  active sites. The subunit fold of the enzyme is related to substructures of  dihydroneopterin triphosphate epimerase, GTP cyclohydrolase I, and  pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase, which are all involved in the biosynthesis of  pteridine type cofactors, and to urate oxidase, although some members of that  superfamily have no detectable sequence similarity. Due to structural and  mechanistical differences of DHNA in comparison with class I and class II  aldolases, a new aldolase class is proposed.', '2004 Jun 11', 'J Mol Biol', '10.1016/j.jmb.2004.04.034', 'Fischer']

Dihydroneopterin aldolase: !catalyses! retroaldol reaction 
Arabidopsis thaliana gene: !specifies! dihydroneopterin aldolase 
Recombinant Escherichia coli strain: !expresses! Arabidopsis thaliana gene 
Recombinant protein: !purified to! apparent homogeneity 
Polyethylenglycol: !crystallised using! recombinant protein 
X-ray diffraction analysis: !solved! crystal structure 
Enzyme: !forms! D(4)-symmetric homooctamer 
Polypeptide chain: !folded into! single domain 
Four monomers: !arranged in! tetrameric ring 
Two rings: !form! hollow cylinder 
Purine derivatives: !found at! active sites 
Subunit fold: !related to! dihydroneopterin triphosphate epimerase, GTP cyclohydrolase I, pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase, urate oxidase 
DHNA: !proposed as! new aldolase class