['15173561', 'The Arabidopsis Shrunken Seed 1 (SSE1) gene encodes a homolog of the peroxisome  biogenesis factor Pex16p, and a loss-of-function mutation in this gene alters  seed storage composition. Two lines of evidence support a function for SSE1 in  peroxisome biogenesis: the peroxisomal localization of a green fluorescent  protein-SSE1 fusion protein and the lack of normal peroxisomes in sse1 mutant  embryos. The green fluorescent protein-SSE1 colocalizes with the red fluorescent  protein (RFP)-labeled peroxisomal markers RFP-peroxisome targeting signal 1 and  peroxisome targeting signal 2-RFP in transgenic Arabidopsis. Each peroxisomal  marker exhibits a normal punctate peroxisomal distribution in the wild type but  not the sse1 mutant embryos. Further studies reported here were designed toward  understanding carbon metabolism in the sse1 mutant. A time course study of  dissected embryos revealed a dramatic rate decrease in oil accumulation and an  increase in starch accumulation. Introduction of starch synthesis mutations into  the sse1 background did not restore oil biosynthesis. This finding demonstrated  that reduction in oil content in sse1 is not caused by increased carbon flow to  starch. To identify the blocked steps in the sse1 oil deposition pathway,  developing sse1 seeds were supplied radiolabeled oil synthesis precursors. The  ability of sse1 to incorporate oleic acid, but not pyruvate or acetate, into  triacylglycerol indicated a defect in the fatty acid biosynthetic pathway in this  mutant. Taken together, the results point to a possible role for peroxisomes in  the net synthesis of fatty acids in addition to their established function in  lipid catabolism. Other possible interpretations of the results are discussed.', '2004 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.103.036772', 'Goodman']

SSE1: !encodes! Pex16p
SSE1: !alters! seed storage composition
GFP-SSE1: !localizes to! RFP-peroxisome targeting signal 1 
GFP-SSE1: !localizes to! peroxisome targeting signal 2-RFP
sse1 mutant embryos: !lack! normal peroxisomes
sse1 mutant: !reduces! oil accumulation
sse1 mutant: !increases! starch accumulation
sse1 mutant: !blocks! fatty acid biosynthetic pathway