['15181206', 'Sulfurtransferases (Str) comprise a group of enzymes widely distributed in  archaea, eubacteria, and eukaryota which catalyze the transfer of a sulfur atom  from suitable sulfur donors to nucleophilic sulfur acceptors. In all organisms  analyzed to date, small gene families encoding Str proteins have been identified.  The gene products were localized to different compartments of the cells. Our  interest concerns the localization of Str proteins encoded in the nuclear genome  of Arabidopsis. Computer-based prediction methods revealed localization in  different compartments of the cell for six putative AtStrs. Several methods were  used to determine the localization of the AtStr proteins experimentally. For  AtStr1, a mitochondrial localization was demonstrated by immunodetection in the  proteome of isolated mitochondria resolved by one- and two-dimensional gel  electrophoresis and subsequent blotting. The respective mature AtStr1 protein was  identified by mass spectrometry sequencing. The same result was obtained by  transient expression of fusion constructs with the green fluorescent protein in  Arabidopsis protoplasts, whereas AtStr2 was exclusively localized to the  cytoplasm by this method. Three members of the single-domain AtStr were localized  in the chloroplasts as demonstrated by transient expression of green fluorescent  protein fusions in protoplasts and stomata, whereas the single-domain AtStr18 was  shown to be cytoplasmic. The remarkable subcellular distribution of AtStr15 was  additionally analyzed by transmission electron immunomicroscopy using a  monospecific antibody against green fluorescent protein, indicating an attachment  to the thylakoid membrane. The knowledge of the intracellular localization of the  members of this multiprotein family will help elucidate their specific functions  in the organism.', '2004 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.040121', 'Papenbrock']

AtStr1: !localizes to! mitochondria 
AtStr2: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
AtStr3-15: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
AtStr18: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
AtStr15: !attaches to! thylakoid membrane