['15180996', 'In plants, glutathione accumulates in response to different stress stimuli as a  protective mechanism, but only limited biochemical information is available on  the plant enzymes that synthesize glutathione. Glutamatecysteine ligase (GCL)  catalyzes the first step in glutathione biosynthesis and plays an important role  in regulating the intracellular redox environment. Because the putative  Arabidopsis thaliana GCL (AtGCL) displays no significant homology to the GCL from  bacteria and other eukaryotes, the identity of this protein as a GCL has been  debated. We have purified AtGCL from an Escherichia coli expression system and  demonstrated that the recombinant enzyme catalyzes the ATP-dependent formation of  gamma-glutamylcysteine from glutamate (Km = 9.1 mm) and cysteine (Km = 2.7 mm).  Glutathione feedback inhibits AtGCL (Ki approximately 1.0 mm). As with other GCL,  buthionine sulfoximine and cystamine inactivate the Arabidopsis enzyme but with  inactivation rates much slower than those of the mammalian, bacterial, and  nematode enzymes. The slower inactivation rates observed with AtGCL suggest that  the active site differs structurally from that of other GCL. Global fitting  analysis of initial velocity data indicates that a random terreactant mechanism  with a preferred binding order best describes the kinetic mechanism of AtGCL.  Unlike the mammalian GCL, which consists of a catalytic subunit and a regulatory  subunit, AtGCL functions and is regulated as a monomeric protein. In response to  redox environment, AtGCL undergoes a reversible conformational change that  modulates the enzymatic activity of the monomer. These results explain the  reported posttranslational change in AtGCL activity in response to oxidative  stress.', '2004 Aug 6', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M405127200', 'Chen']

GCL: !synthesizes! glutathione 
glutathione: !inhibits! GCL 
buthionine sulfoximine: !inactivates! AtGCL 
cystamine: !inactivates! AtGCL 
AtGCL: !undergoes! conformational change 
redox environment: !modulates! AtGCL activity