['15231834', 'U-box proteins, as well as other proteins involved in regulated protein  degradation, are apparently over-represented in Arabidopsis compared with other  model eukaryotes. The Arabidopsis protein AtPUB14 contains a typical U-box domain  followed by an Armadillo repeat region, a domain organization that is frequently  found in plant U-box proteins. In vitro ubiquitination assays demonstrated that  AtPUB14 functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase with specific E2  ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes. The structure of the AtPUB14 U-box domain was  determined by NMR spectroscopy. It adopts the betabetaalphabeta fold of the  Prp19p U-box and RING finger domains. In these proteins, conserved hydrophobic  residues form a putative E2-binding cleft. By contrast, they contain no common  polar E2 binding site motif. Two hydrophobic cores stabilize the AtPUB14 U-box  fold, and hydrogen bonds and salt bridges interconnect the residues corresponding  to zinc ion-coordinating residues in RING domains. Residues from a C-terminal  alpha-helix interact with the core domain and contribute to stabilization. The  Prp19p U-box lacks a corresponding C-terminal alpha-helix. Chemical shift  analysis suggested that aromatic residues exposed at the N terminus and the  C-terminal alpha-helix of the AtPUB14 U-box participate in dimerization. Thus,  AtPUB14 may form a biologically relevant dimer. This is the first plant U-box  structure to be determined, and it provides a model for studies of the many plant  U-box proteins and their interactions. Structural insight into these interactions  is important, because ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation is a prevalent  regulatory mechanism in plants.', '2004 Sep 17', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M405057200', 'Skriver']

AtPUB14: !functions as! E3 ubiquitin ligase 
AtPUB14: !adopts! betabetaalphabeta fold 
AtPUB14: !stabilized by! two hydrophobic cores 
AtPUB14: !interconnects! hydrogen bonds and salt bridges 
AtPUB14: !participates in! dimerization 
AtPUB14: !provides model for! studies of plant U-box proteins 
U-box proteins: !over-represented in! Arabidopsis 
U-box proteins: !frequently found in! plants 
U-box proteins: !regulate! protein degradation