['15234990', "All members of the sulphotransferase (SOT, EC 2.8.2.-) protein family use  3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulphate (PAPS) as the sulphuryl donor and transfer  the sulphonate group to an appropriate hydroxyl group of several classes of  substrates. These enzymes have highly conserved domains and can be found in  eubacteria and eukaryotes. In mammals, sulphate conjugation catalysed by SOTs  constitutes an important reaction in the transformation of xenobiotics, and in  the modulation of the biological activity of steroid hormones and  neurotransmitters. In plants, sulphate-conjugation reactions seem to play an  important role in plant growth, development, and adaptation to stress. To date  only a few plant SOTs have been characterized in detail. The flavonol 3- and  4'-SOTs from Flaveria species (Asteraceae), which catalyse the sulphonation of  flavonol aglycones and flavonol 3-sulphates, respectively, were the first plant  SOTs for which cDNA clones were isolated. The plasma membrane associated gallic  acid SOT of Mimosa pudica L. pulvini cells may be intrinsic to signalling events  that modify the seismonastic response. In Brassica napus L. a SOT catalyses the  O-sulphonation of brassinosteroids and thereby abolishes specifically the  biological activity of 24-epibrassinolide. The fully sequenced genome of  Arabidopsis thaliana Heynh. contains in total 18 genes that are likely to encode  SOT proteins based on sequence similarities of the translated products with an  average identity of 51.1%. So far only one SOT from A. thaliana (At5g07000) was  functionally characterized: the protein was shown to catalyse the sulphonation of  12-hydroxyjasmonate and thereby inactivate excess jasmonic acid in plants. The  substrates and, therefore, the physiological roles of SOTs are very diverse. By  using the numerous informative databases and methods available for the model  plant A. thaliana, the elucidation of the functional role of the SOT protein  family will be accelerated.", '2004 Aug', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erh183', 'Papenbrock']

SOT: !catalyses! Sulphonation 
SOT: !inactivates! Jasmonic acid 
SOT: !modulates! Biological activity of steroid hormones 
SOT: !constitutes! Transformation of xenobiotics 
SOT: !plays role in! Plant growth and development 
SOT: !found in! Eubacteria and eukaryotes