['15247388', 'Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) control cell cycle progression through timely  coordinated phosphorylation events. Two kinesin-like proteins that interact with  CDKA;1 were identified and designated KCA1 and KCA2. They are 81% identical and  have a similar three-partite domain organization. The N-terminal domain contains  an ATP and microtubule-binding site typical for kinesin motors. A green  fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion of the N-terminal domain of KCA1 decorated  microtubules in Bright Yellow-2 cells, demonstrating microtubule-binding  activity. During cytokinesis the full-length GFP-fusion protein accumulated at  the midline of young and mature expanding phragmoplasts. Two-hybrid analysis and  coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that coiled-coil structures of the  central stalk were responsible for homo- and heterodimerization of KCA1 and KCA2.  By western-blot analysis, high molecular mass KCA molecules were detected in  extracts from Bright Yellow-2 cells overproducing the full-length GFP fusion.  Treatment of these cultures with the phosphatase inhibitor vanadate caused an  accumulation of these KCA molecules. In addition to dimerization, interactions  within the C-terminally located tail domain were revealed, indicating that the  tail could fold onto itself. The tail domains of KCA1 and KCA2 contained two  adjacent putative CDKA;1 phosphorylation sites, one of which is conserved in KCA  homologs from other plant species. Site-directed mutagenesis of the conserved  phosphorylation sites in KCA1 resulted in a reduced binding with CDKA;1 and  abolished intramolecular tail interactions. The data show that phosphorylation of  the CDKA;1 site provokes a conformational change in the structure of KCA with  implications in folding and dimerization.', '2004 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.044818', 'Geelen']

CDKs: !control! Cell cycle progression 
KCA1/2: !interact with! CDKA;1 
KCA1/2: !bind to! Microtubules 
KCA1/2: !accumulate at! Midline of phragmoplasts 
KCA1/2: !dimerize! Homodimers and heterodimers 
KCA1/2: !interact within! C-terminal tail domain 
KCA1/2: !contain! Putative CDKA;1 phosphorylation sites 
Phosphorylation: !causes! Conformational change in KCA structure