['15258265', 'Despite its importance in a variety of plant defense responses, our understanding  of how jasmonic acid (JA) functions at the biochemical level is limited. Several  amino acid conjugates of JA were tested for their ability to complement the  JA-insensitive Arabidopsis thaliana mutant jar1-1. Unlike free JA, JA-Ile  inhibited root growth in jar1-1 to the same extent as in the wild type, whereas  JA-Val, JA-Leu, and JA-Phe were ineffective inhibitors in both genotypes.  Thin-layer chromatography and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS)  analysis of products produced in vitro by recombinant JAR1 demonstrated that this  enzyme forms JA-amido conjugates with several amino acids, including JA-Ile.  JA-Val, -Leu, -Ile, and -Phe were each quantified in Arabidopsis seedlings by  GC-MS. JA-Ile was found at 29.6 pmole g(-1) fresh weight (FW) in the wild type  but was more than sevenfold lower in two jar1 alleles. JA-Leu, -Val, and -Phe  were present at only low levels in both genotypes. Expression of wild-type JAR1  in transgenic jar1-1 plants restored sensitivity to JA and elevated JA-Ile to the  same level as in the wild type. The ethylene precursor  1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) conjugated to JA was also found in  plant tissue at 18.4 pmole g(-1) FW. JA-ACC was determined not be an effective  jasmonate root inhibitor, and surprisingly, was twofold higher in the mutants  than in the wild type. This suggests that another JA-conjugating enzyme(s) is  present in Arabidopsis. Synthesis of JA-ACC might provide a mechanism to  coregulate the availability of JA and ACC for conversion to the active hormones  JA-Ile and ethylene, respectively. We conclude that JAR1 is a JA-amino synthetase  that is required to activate JA for optimal signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant  hormone activation by conjugation to amino acids and the enzymes involved in  their formation were previously unknown.', '2004 Aug', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.023549', 'Tiryaki']

JAR1: !synthesizes! JA-Ile 
JA-Ile: !inhibits! root growth 
JAR1: !expresses in! transgenic jar1-1 plants 
JA-ACC: !synthesizes! JAR1 
JA-ACC: !coregulates! JA and ACC 
JA-Ile: !elevates! in wild type 
JA-ACC: !elevates! in jar1 mutants