['15266054', 'A long-term goal of Arabidopsis research is to define the minimal gene set needed  to produce a viable plant with a normal phenotype under diverse conditions. This  will require both forward and reverse genetics along with novel strategies to  characterize multigene families and redundant biochemical pathways. Here we  describe an initial dataset of 250 EMB genes required for normal embryo  development in Arabidopsis. This represents the first large-scale dataset of  essential genes in a flowering plant. When compared with 550 genes with other  knockout phenotypes, EMB genes are enriched for basal cellular functions,  deficient in transcription factors and signaling components, have fewer paralogs,  and are more likely to have counterparts among essential genes of yeast  (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and worm (Caenorhabditis elegans). EMB genes also  represent a valuable source of plant-specific proteins with unknown functions  required for growth and development. Analyzing such unknowns is a central  objective of genomics efforts worldwide. We focus here on 34 confirmed EMB genes  with unknown functions, demonstrate that expression of these genes is not  embryo-specific, validate a strategy for identifying interacting proteins through  complementation with epitope-tagged proteins, and discuss the value of EMB genes  in identifying novel proteins associated with important plant processes. Based on  sequence comparison with essential genes in other model eukaryotes, we identify  244 candidate EMB genes without paralogs that represent promising targets for  reverse genetics. These candidates should facilitate the recovery of additional  genes required for seed development.', '2004 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.045179', 'Meinke']

Gene: !affects! Embryo development 
Gene: !enriched for! Basal cellular functions 
Gene: !deficient in! Transcription factors 
Gene: !interacts with! Epitope-tagged proteins 
Gene: !has fewer! Paralogs 
Gene: !compared with! Essential genes of yeast and worm