['15266056', 'Using a transgene-based screening, we previously isolated several Arabidopsis  mutants defective in protein import into chloroplasts. Positional cloning of one  of the loci, CIA1, revealed that CIA1 encodes Gln phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate  amidotransferase 2 (ATase2), one of the three ATase isozymes responsible for the  first committed step of de novo purine biosynthesis. The cia1 mutant had normal  green cotyledons but small and albino/pale-green mosaic leaves. Adding AMP, but  not cytokinin or NADH, to plant liquid cultures partially complemented the mutant  phenotypes. Both ATase1 and ATase2 were localized to chloroplasts. Overexpression  of ATase1 fully complemented the ATase2-deficient phenotypes. A T-DNA insertion  knockout mutant of the ATase1 gene was also obtained. The mutant was  indistinguishable from the wild type. A double mutant of cia1/ATase1-knockout had  the same phenotype as cia1, suggesting at least partial gene redundancy between  ATase1 and ATase2. Characterizations of the cia1 mutant revealed that mutant  leaves had slightly smaller cell size but only half the cell number of wild-type  leaves. This phenotype confirms the role of de novo purine biosynthesis in cell  division. Chloroplasts isolated from the cia1 mutant imported proteins at an  efficiency less than 50% that of wild-type chloroplasts. Adding ATP and GTP to  isolated mutant chloroplasts could not restore the import efficiency. We conclude  that de novo purine biosynthesis is not only important for cell division, but  also for chloroplast biogenesis.', '2004 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.040956', 'Li']

CIA1: !encodes! ATase2 
ATase1: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
ATase1: !overexpression of! complements ATase2-deficient phenotypes 
ATase1: !knockout of! indistinguishable from wild type 
cia1/ATase1 double mutant: !has same phenotype as! cia1 
de novo purine biosynthesis: !important for! cell division & chloroplast biogenesis 
cia1 mutant: !has reduced! protein import efficiency