['15272001', 'The aim of this research was to test the role of the glyoxylate cycle enzyme  malate synthase (MLS) in lipid utilization, gluconeogenesis, and seedling growth  in Arabidopsis. We hypothesized that in the absence of MLS, succinate produced by  isocitrate lyase (ICL) could still feed into the tricarboxylic acid cycle,  whereas glyoxylate could be converted to sugars using enzymes of the  photorespiratory pathway. To test this hypothesis we isolated knock-out mls  mutants and studied their growth and metabolism in comparison to wild type and  icl mutant seedlings. In contrast to icl seedlings, which grow slowly and are  unable to convert lipid into sugars (Eastmond, P. J., Germain, V., Lange, P. R.,  Bryce, J. H., Smith, S. M. & Graham, I. A. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.  97, 5669-5674), mls seedlings grow faster, use their lipid more rapidly, and are  better able to establish as plantlets. Transcriptome and metabolome analyses show  that icl seedlings exhibit many features characteristic of carbohydrate  starvation, whereas mls seedlings differ relatively little from wild type. In the  light mls seedlings generate more sugars than icl seedlings, and when fed with  [14C]acetate, 14C-labeling of sugars is three times greater than in icl seedlings  and more than half that in wild type seedlings. The mls seedlings also accumulate  more glycine and serine than icl or wild type seedlings, consistent with a  diversion of glyoxylate into these intermediates of the photorespiratory pathway.  We conclude that, in contrast to bacteria and fungi in which MLS is essential for  gluconeogenesis from acetate or fatty acids, MLS is partially dispensable for  lipid utilization and gluconeogenesis in Arabidopsis seedlings.', '2004 Oct 8', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M407380200', 'Smith']

malate synthase (MLS): !affects! lipid utilization, gluconeogenesis, and seedling growth 
isocitrate lyase (ICL): !affects! lipid utilization, gluconeogenesis, and seedling growth 
mls mutants: !differ from! wild type 
icl mutants: !differ from! wild type 
mls seedlings: !grow faster than! icl seedlings 
mls seedlings: !convert lipid into sugars better than! icl seedlings 
mls seedlings: !generate more sugars than! icl seedlings 
mls seedlings: !accumulate more glycine and serine than! icl or wild type seedlings