['15277688', 'In higher plants, very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) are the main constituents  of hydrophobic polymers that prevent dessication at the leaf surface and provide  stability to pollen grains. Of the 21 genes encoding VLCFA elongases (VLCFAEs)  from Arabidopsis thaliana, 17 were expressed heterologously in Saccharomyces  cerevisiae. Six VLCFAEs, including three known elongases (FAE1, KCS1, and KCS2)  and three previously uncharacterized gene products (encoded by At5g43760,  At1g04220, and At1g25450) were found to be enzymatically active with endogenous  yeast fatty acid substrates and to some extent with externally supplied  unsaturated substrates. The spectrum of VLCFAs accumulated in expressing yeast  strains was determined by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. Marked  specificity was found among elongases tested with respect to their elongation  products, which encompassed saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids 20-30  carbon atoms in length. The active VLCFAEs revealed highly distinct patterns of  differential sensitivity to oxyacetamides, chloroacetanilides, and other  compounds tested, whereas yeast endogenous VLCFA production, which involves its  unrelated elongase (ELO) in sphingolipid synthesis, was unaffected. Several  compounds inhibited more than one VLCFAE, and some inhibited all six active  enzymes. These findings pinpoint VLCFAEs as the target of the widely used K(3)  class herbicides, which have been in commercial use for 50 years, provide  important clues as to why spontaneous resistance to this class is rare, and point  to complex patterns of substrate specificity and product spectrum among members  of the Arabidopsis VLCFAE family.', '2004 Aug 10', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0404600101', 'Tietjen']

VLCFAEs: !synthesize! VLCFAs 
VLCFAEs: !inhibited by! K(3) class herbicides 
VLCFAEs: !have distinct! substrate specificity 
VLCFAEs: !produce! monounsaturated fatty acids 
ELO: !synthesizes! sphingolipids 
ELO: !unaffected by! K(3) class herbicides