['15292241', 'Calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinases play an important role in protein  phosphorylation in eukaryotes. However, not much is known about  calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein phosphorylation and its role in signal  transduction in plants. By using a protein-protein interaction-based approach, we  have isolated a novel plant-specific calmodulin-binding receptor-like cytoplasmic  kinase (CRCK1) from Arabidopsis thaliana, as well as its ortholog from Medicago  sativa (alfalfa). CRCK1 does not show high homology to  calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases in animals. In contrast, it shows  high homology in the kinase domain to serine/threonine receptor-like kinases in  plants. However, it contains neither a transmembrane domain nor an extracellular  domain. Calmodulin binds to CRCK1 in a calcium-dependent manner with an affinity  of approximately 20.5 nm. The calmodulin-binding site in CRCK1 is located in  amino acids 160-183, which overlap subdomain II of the kinase domain. CRCK1  undergoes autophosphorylation in the presence of Mg2+ at the threonine  residue(s). The Km and Vmax values of CRCK1 for ATP are 1 microm and 33.6  pmol/mg/min, respectively. Calcium/calmodulin stimulates the kinase activity of  CRCK1, which increases the Vmax of CRCK1 approximately 9-fold. The expression of  CRCK1 is increased in response to stresses such as cold and salt and stress  molecules such as abscisic acid and hydrogen peroxide. These results indicate the  presence of a calcium/calmodulin-regulated receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase in  plants. Furthermore, these results also suggest that calcium/calmodulin-regulated  protein phosphorylation involving CRCK1 plays a role in stress signal  transduction in plants.', '2004 Oct 8', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M402830200', 'Poovaiah']

Calcium/calmodulin: !binds to! CRCK1 
CRCK1: !autophosphorylates! in presence of Mg2+ 
Calcium/calmodulin: !stimulates kinase activity of! CRCK1 
Stresses: !increase expression of! CRCK1 
CRCK1: !plays role in! stress signal transduction