['15319484', 'Related to Ubiquitin (RUB)/Nedd8 is a ubiquitin-like protein that covalently  attaches to cullins, a subunit of the SCF (for Skp, Cdc53p/Cul1, and F-box  protein) complex, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, and has been shown to be required for  robust function of the complex. The effects of reducing protein levels for two  Rub proteins, RUB1 and RUB2, were characterized in Arabidopsis thaliana. T-DNA  insertional null lines homozygous at a single RUB-encoding locus were analyzed  and found to have a wild-type phenotype. A double mutant was never recovered.  More than one-quarter of the progeny from the self-fertilization of plants with a  single functional RUB-encoding gene died as embryos at the two-cell stage.  Outcrosses demonstrated reduced inheritance of the null allele from both the male  and female parent. Hemigglutinin-tagged forms of RUB1 and RUB2 conjugate to the  same cullin protein, CUL1, and produce the same conjugation pattern. To further  understand the function of the RUB proteins, a construct designed to produce a  double-stranded RUB1 mRNA was introduced into plants, and three lines with  reduced levels of RUB1- and RUB2-encoding mRNA and RUB1/2 protein content were  analyzed in detail. Mature plants were severely dwarfed, seedlings were  insensitive to auxin in root assays, and dark-grown seedlings had a partial  triple-response phenotype that was suppressed when seedlings were grown on  ethylene perception or synthesis inhibitors. The dsrub lines produced threefold  to fivefold more ethylene than the wild type. This study illustrates that RUB1  and RUB2 are genetically and biochemically redundant and demonstrates that RUB1/2  proteins are essential for early embryonic cell divisions and that they regulate  diverse processes.', '2004 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.024943', 'Callis']

RUB1/2: !attach to! CUL1 
RUB1/2: !required for! SCF complex 
RUB1/2: !inherited from! male/female parent 
RUB1/2: !conjugate to! CUL1 
RUB1/2: !regulate! diverse processes 
RUB1/2: !produce! ethylene