['15319479', 'The interface between plants and the environment plays a dual role as a  protective barrier as well as a medium for the exchange of gases, water, and  nutrients. The primary aerial plant surfaces are covered by a cuticle, acting as  the essential permeability barrier toward the atmosphere. It is a heterogeneous  layer composed mainly of lipids, namely cutin and intracuticular wax with  epicuticular waxes deposited on the surface. We identified an Arabidopsis  thaliana activation tag gain-of-function mutant shine (shn) that displayed a  brilliant, shiny green leaf surface with increased cuticular wax compared with  the leaves of wild-type plants. The gene responsible for the phenotype encodes  one member of a clade of three proteins of undisclosed function, belonging to the  plant-specific family of AP2/EREBP transcription factors. Overexpression of all  three SHN clade genes conferred a phenotype similar to that of the original shn  mutant. Biochemically, such plants were altered in wax composition (very long  fatty acid derivatives). Total cuticular wax levels were increased sixfold in shn  compared with the wild type, mainly because of a ninefold increase in alkanes  that comprised approximately half of the total waxes in the mutant. Chlorophyll  leaching assays and fresh weight loss experiments indicated that overexpression  of the SHN genes increased cuticle permeability, probably because of changes in  its ultrastructure. Likewise, SHN gene overexpression altered leaf and petal  epidermal cell structure, trichome number, and branching as well as the stomatal  index. Interestingly, SHN overexpressors displayed significant drought tolerance  and recovery, probably related to the reduced stomatal density. Expression  analysis using promoter-beta-glucuronidase fusions of the SHN genes provides  evidence for the role of the SHN clade in plant protective layers, such as those  formed during abscission, dehiscence, wounding, tissue strengthening, and the  cuticle. We propose that these diverse functions are mediated by regulating  metabolism of lipid and/or cell wall components.', '2004 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.022897', 'Pereira']

Gene: !encodes! Protein 
Protein: !belongs to! AP2/EREBP transcription factor family 
Mutant: !displays! Increased cuticular wax 
SHN clade genes: !overexpression of! Phenotype similar to shn mutant 
SHN clade genes: !overexpression of! Altered wax composition 
SHN clade genes: !overexpression of! Increased cuticle permeability 
SHN clade genes: !overexpression of! Altered leaf and petal epidermal cell structure 
SHN clade genes: !overexpression of! Increased drought tolerance 
SHN clade genes: !regulate! Metabolism of lipid and/or cell wall components