['15347786', "The spontaneous and deleterious conversion of l-asparaginyl and l-aspartyl  protein residues to l-iso-Asp or d-Asp occurs as proteins age and is accelerated  under stressful conditions. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis L. Heynh.) contains two  genes (At3g48330 and At5g50240) encoding protein-l-isoaspartate methyltransferase  (EC 2.1.1.77; PIMT), an enzyme capable of correcting this damage. The gene  located on chromosome 5 (PIMT2) produces two proteins differing by three amino  acids through alternative 3' splice site selection in the first intron.  Recombinant protein from both splicing variants has PIMT activity. Subcellular  localization using cell fractionation followed by immunoblot detection, as well  as confocal visualization of PIMT:GFP fusions, demonstrated that PIMT1 is  cytosolic while a canonical nuclear localization signal, present in PIMT2psi and  the shorter PIMT2omega, is functional. Multiplex reverse transcription-PCR was  used to establish PIMT1 and PIMT2 transcript presence and abundance, relative to  beta-TUBULIN, in various tissues and under a variety of stresses imposed on seeds  and seedlings. PIMT1 transcript is constitutively present but can increase, along  with PIMT2, in developing seeds presumably in response to increasing endogenous  abscisic acid (ABA). Transcript from PIMT2 also increases in establishing  seedlings due to exogenous ABA and applied stress presumably through an  ABA-dependent pathway. Furthermore, cleaved amplified polymorphic sequences from  PIMT2 amplicons determined that ABA preferentially enhances the production of  PIMT2omega transcript in leaves and possibly in tissues other than germinating  seeds.", '2004 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.046094', 'Downie']

At3g48330: !encodes! protein-l-isoaspartate methyltransferase 
PIMT2: !produces! two proteins 
PIMT1: !localizes to! cytosol 
PIMT2psi/PIMT2omega: !contain! canonical nuclear localization signal 
PIMT1/PIMT2: !present in! various tissues 
ABA: !enhances! PIMT2omega transcript production