['15347787', 'A combined bioinformatic and experimental approach is being used to uncover the  functions of a novel family of cation/H(+) exchanger (CHX) genes in plants using  Arabidopsis as a model. The predicted protein (85-95 kD) of 28 AtCHX genes after  revision consists of an amino-terminal domain with 10 to 12 transmembrane spans  (approximately 440 residues) and a hydrophilic domain of approximately 360  residues at the carboxyl end, which is proposed to have regulatory roles. The  hydrophobic, but not the hydrophilic, domain of plant CHX is remarkably similar  to monovalent cation/proton antiporter-2 (CPA2) proteins, especially yeast  (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) KHA1 and Synechocystis NhaS4. Reports of characterized  fungal and prokaryotic CPA2 indicate that they have various transport modes,  including K(+)/H(+) (KHA1), Na(+)/H(+)-K(+) (GerN) antiport, and ligand-gated ion  channel (KefC). The expression pattern of AtCHX genes was determined by reverse  transcription PCR, promoter-driven beta-glucuronidase expression in transgenic  plants, and Affymetrix ATH1 genome arrays. Results show that 18 genes are  specifically or preferentially expressed in the male gametophyte, and six genes  are highly expressed in sporophytic tissues. Microarray data revealed that  several AtCHX genes were developmentally regulated during microgametogenesis. An  exciting idea is that CHX proteins allow osmotic adjustment and K(+) homeostasis  as mature pollen desiccates and then rehydrates at germination. The multiplicity  of CHX-like genes is conserved in higher plants but is not found in animals. Only  17 genes, OsCHX01 to OsCHX17, were identified in rice (Oryza sativa) subsp.  japonica, suggesting diversification of CHX in Arabidopsis. These results reveal  a novel CHX gene family in flowering plants with potential functions in pollen  development, germination, and tube growth.', '2004 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.046003', 'Hirschi']

AtCHX genes: !consist of! amino-terminal domain, hydrophilic domain 
AtCHX genes: !similar to! monovalent cation/proton antiporter-2 proteins 
AtCHX genes: !express in! male gametophyte, sporophytic tissues 
AtCHX genes: !regulated during! microgametogenesis 
AtCHX genes: !allow osmotic adjustment and K(+)! homeostasis 
AtCHX genes: !diversified in! Arabidopsis 
OsCHX genes: !identified in! rice subsp. japonica