['15361141', 'Within the flower, microsporogenesis represents a major sink for nitrogen, but  knowledge on how the imported nitrogen is transferred from the anther cell layers  to developing pollen is lacking. Here, we provide information on characterization  of a transporter (AtLHT2) that might play an important role in partitioning of  amino acids for microspore development. Biochemical analysis in yeast showed that  AtLHT2 transports proline and aspartate with high affinity. However, other  neutral and acidic amino acids act as strong competitors for proline and  aspartate uptake indicating that AtLHT2 generally transports uncharged and  negatively charged amino acids. Comparison of the apparent K(m) values of AtLHT2  with previously characterized amino acid transporters clearly demonstrated that  AtLHT2 represents a novel high-affinity system for neutral and acidic amino  acids. Northern blot analysis showed strong expression of the amino acid  transporter in flower buds. Cellular expression could be resolved by using RNA in  situ hybridization and in situ RT-PCR methods, which localized AtLHT2  specifically to the tapetum tissue of the anthers. Developing pollen grains are  symplasmically isolated from the sporophytic tissue and rely on the nutrients and  other compounds secreted from the tapetum cells. Thus, the functional  characterization of AtLHT2, together with our expression and localization  studies, strongly suggest that in Arabidopsis flowers, AtLHT2 has a critical  function in import of neutral and acidic amino acids into the tapetum cells for  synthesis of compounds important for microspore structure and in transfer of  organic nitrogen to the locule for pollen development.', '2004 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02186.x', 'Tegeder']

AtLHT2: !transports! proline and aspartate 
AtLHT2: !competes with! other neutral and acidic amino acids 
AtLHT2: !expresses in! flower buds 
AtLHT2: !localizes to! tapetum tissue of anthers 
AtLHT2: !has critical function in! import of neutral and acidic amino acids