Two membrane-bound, ascorbate-dependent b-type cytochromes were identified in etiolated bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) hypocotyls. Following solubilization of microsomal membranes and anion-exchange chromatography at pH 8.0, two major cytochrome peaks (P-I and P-II) were separated. Both cytochromes were reduced by ascorbate and re-oxidized by monodehydroascorbate, but P-I reduction by ascorbate was higher and saturated at far lower concentrations of ascorbate with respect to P-II. The alpha-band was symmetrically centered at 561 nm in P-I, but it was asymmetric in P-II with a maximum at 562 nm and shoulder at 557 nm. Ascorbate reduction of P-II, but not P-I, was inhibited by diethyl pyrocarbonate. Reduced P-II but not P-I was readily oxidized by certain ferric chelates, including FeEDTA and Fe-nitrilotriacetic acid. Purified P-I, associated with the plasma membrane, showed up as a 63-kDa glycosylated protein during sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and behaved as a monomer of about 70 kDa during size-exclusion chromatography. P-I identified with a previously purified ascorbate-dependent b-type cytochrome of bean hypocotyl plasma membranes. Partially purified P-II, on the other hand, correlated with a heme-protein of 27 kDa in SDS-PAGE gels, was dimeric (60 kDa) during size-exclusion chromatography, and was associated with the tonoplast marker V-ATPase in sucrose gradients. The sequence of a peptide of 11 residues obtained by tryptic digestion of P-II was found to be identical to a segment of a putative cytochrome b561 of Zea mays and highly conserved in other related plant sequences, including that of Arabidopsis thaliana cytochrome b561-1 (CAA18169). The biochemical features fully support the assignment of P-II cytochrome to the family of cytochrome b561, ascorbate-dependent (CYBASC) cytochromes, which also includes cytochrome b561 of animal chromaffin granules. The presence of a cytochrome reducing ferric chelates on the tonoplast is consistent with the role of plant vacuoles in iron homeostasis.

Two membrane-bound, ascorbate-dependent b-type cytochromes: P-I !localizes to! plasma membrane; P-II !localizes to! tonoplast. 
P-I !synthesizes! 63-kDa glycosylated protein; P-II !synthesizes! 27-kDa heme-protein. 
P-I !enhances! ascorbate reduction; P-II !represses! ascorbate reduction. 
P-I !interacts with! monodehydroascorbate; P-II !interacts with! ferric chelates. 
P-II !affects! iron homeostasis.