Sorbitol is a primary end-product of photosynthesis in apple (Malus domestica Borkh.) and many other tree fruit species of the Rosaceae family. Sorbitol synthesis shares a common hexose phosphate pool with sucrose synthesis in the cytosol. In this study, 'Greensleeves' apple was transformed with a cDNA encoding aldose 6-phosphate reductase (A6PR, EC 1.1.1.200) in the antisense orientation. Antisense expression of A6PR decreased A6PR activity in mature leaves to approximately 15-30% of the untransformed control. The antisense plants had lower concentrations of sorbitol but higher concentrations of sucrose and starch in mature leaves at both dusk and predawn. (14)CO(2) pulse-chase labeling at ambient CO(2) demonstrated that partitioning of the newly fixed carbon to starch was significantly increased, whereas that to sucrose remained unchanged in the antisense lines with decreased sorbitol synthesis. Total activities of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (EC 4.1.1.39), sucrose-phosphate synthase (EC 2.4.1.14), and ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (EC 2.7.7.27) were not significantly altered in the antisense lines, whereas both stromal and cytosolic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (EC 3.1.3.11) activities were higher in the antisense lines with 15% of the control A6PR activity. Concentrations of glucose 6-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate (F6P) were higher in the antisense plants than in the control, but the 3-phosphoglycerate concentration was lower in the antisense plants with 15% of the control A6PR activity. Fructose 2, 6-bisphosphate concentration increased in the antisense plants, but not to the extent expected from the increase in F6P, comparing sucrose-synthesizing species. There was no significant difference in CO(2) assimilation in response to photon flux density or intercellular CO(2) concentration. We concluded that cytosolic FBPase activity in vivo was down-regulated and starch synthesis was up-regulated in response to decreased sorbitol synthesis. As a result, CO(2) assimilation in source leaves was sustained at both ambient CO(2) and saturating CO(2).

A6PR: !affects! Sorbitol synthesis 
A6PR: !decreases! Activity in mature leaves 
Sorbitol: !decreases! In antisense plants 
Sucrose: !increases! In antisense plants 
Starch: !increases! In antisense plants 
Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase: !unchanged! In antisense lines 
Sucrose-phosphate synthase: !unchanged! In antisense lines 
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !unchanged! In antisense lines 
Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase: !increases! In antisense lines 
Glucose 6-phosphate: !increases! In antisense plants 
Fructose 6-phosphate: !increases! In antisense plants 
3-phosphoglycerate: !decreases! In antisense plants 
Fructose 2, 6-bisphosphate: !increases! In antisense plants 
CO(2) assimilation: !sust