['15447654', 'The circadian timing system involves an autoregulatory transcription/translation  feedback loop that incorporates a diverse array of factors to maintain a 24-h  periodicity. In Arabidopsis a novel F-box protein, ZEITLUPE (ZTL), plays an  important role in the control of the free-running period of the circadian clock.  As a class, F-box proteins are well-established components of the  Skp/Cullin/F-box (SCF) class of E3 ubiquitin ligases that link the target  substrates to the core ubiquitinating activity of the ligase complex via direct  association with the Skp protein. Here we identify and characterize the SCFZTL  complex in detail. Yeast two-hybrid tests demonstrate the sufficiency and  necessity of the F-box domain for Arabidopsis Skp-like protein (ASK) interactions  and the dispensability of the unique N-terminal LOV domain in this association.  Co-immunoprecipitation of full-length (FL) ZTL with the three known core  components of SCF complexes (ASK1, AtCUL1 and AtRBX1) demonstrates that ZTL can  assemble into an SCF complex in vivo. F-box-containing truncated versions of ZTL  (LOV-F and F-kelch) can complex with SCF components in vivo, whereas stably  expressed LOV or kelch domains alone cannot. Stable expression of F-box-mutated  FL ZTL eliminates the shortened period caused by mild ZTL overexpression and also  abolishes ASK1 interaction in vivo. Reduced levels of the core SCF component  AtRBX1 phenocopy the long period phenotype of ztl loss-of-function mutations,  demonstrating the functional significance of the SCFZTL complex. Taken together,  our data establish SCFZTL as an essential SCF class E3 ligase controlling  circadian period in plants.', '2004 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02207.x', 'Somers']

ZTL: !interacts with! ASK 
ZTL: !assembles into! SCF complex 
LOV domain: !dispensable for! ASK interaction 
FL ZTL: !complexes with! SCF components 
F-box-mutated FL ZTL: !eliminates! shortened period 
AtRBX1: !phenocopies! long period phenotype of ztl loss-of-function mutations