['15469500', 'Dynamic networks of protein-protein interactions regulate numerous cellular  processes and determine the ability to respond appropriately to environmental  stimuli. However, the investigation of protein complex formation in living plant  cells by methods such as fluorescence resonance energy transfer has remained  experimentally difficult, time consuming and requires sophisticated technical  equipment. Here, we report the implementation of a bimolecular fluorescence  complementation (BiFC) technique for visualization of protein-protein  interactions in plant cells. This approach relies on the formation of a  fluorescent complex by two non-fluorescent fragments of the yellow fluorescent  protein brought together by association of interacting proteins fused to these  fragments (Hu et al., 2002). To enable BiFC analyses in plant cells, we generated  different complementary sets of expression vectors, which enable protein  interaction studies in transiently or stably transformed cells. These vectors  were used to investigate and visualize homodimerization of the basic leucine  zipper (bZIP) transcription factor bZIP63 and the zinc finger protein lesion  simulating disease 1 (LSD1) from Arabidopsis as well as the dimer formation of  the tobacco 14-3-3 protein T14-3c. The interaction analyses of these model  proteins established the feasibility of BiFC analyses for efficient visualization  of structurally distinct proteins in different cellular compartments. Our  investigations revealed a remarkable signal fluorescence intensity of interacting  protein complexes as well as a high reproducibility and technical simplicity of  the method in different plant systems. Consequently, the BiFC approach should  significantly facilitate the visualization of the subcellular sites of protein  interactions under conditions that closely reflect the normal physiological  environment.', '2004 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02219.x', 'Kudla']

bZIP63: !interacts with! LSD1 
T14-3c: !interacts with! T14-3c 
BiFC: !visualizes! protein interactions 
BiFC: !facilitates! visualization of subcellular sites