['15480787', 'Transport of nucleotide-sugars across the Golgi membrane is required for the  lumenal synthesis of a variety of essential cell surface components, and is  mediated by nucleotide sugar transporters (NSTs) which are members of the large  drug/metabolite superfamily of transporters. Despite the importance of these  proteins in plants, so far only two have been described, GONST1 and AtUTr1 from  Arabidopsis thaliana. In this work, our aim was to identify further Golgi  nucleotide-sugar transporters from Arabidopsis. On the basis of their sequence  similarity to GONST1, we found four additional proteins, which we named GONST2,  3, 4 and 5. These putative NSTs were grouped into three clades: GONST2 with  GONST1; GONST3 with GONST4; and GONST5 with six further uncharacterized proteins.  Transient expression in tobacco cells of a member of each clade, fused to the  Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP), suggested that all these putative NSTs are  localised in the Golgi. To obtain evidence for nucleotide sugar transport  activity, we expressed these proteins, together with the previously characterised  GONST1, in a GDP-mannose transport-defective yeast mutant (vrg4-2). We tested the  transformants for rescue of two phenotypes associated with this mutation:  sensitivity to hygromycin B and reduced glycosylation of extracellular chitinase.  GONST1 and GONST2 complemented both phenotypes, indicating that GONST2, like the  previously characterized GONST1, is a GDP-mannose transporter. GONST3, 4 and 5  also rescued the antibiotic sensitivity, but not the chitinase glycosylation  defect, suggesting that they can also transport GDP-mannose across the yeast  Golgi membrane but with a lower efficiency. RT-PCR and analysis of Affymetrix  data revealed partially overlapping patterns of expression of GONST1-5 in a  variety of organs. Because of the differences in ability to rescue the vrg4 - 2  phenotype, and the different expression patterns in plant organs, we speculate  that GONST1 and GONST2 are both GDP-mannose transporters, whereas GONST3, GONST4  and GONST5 may transport other nucleotide-sugars in planta.', '2004 Nov', 'Mol Genet Genomics', '10.1007/s00438-004-1071-z', 'Dupree']

GONST1: !transports! GDP-mannose 
GONST2: !transports! GDP-mannose 
GONST3: !transports! GDP-mannose 
GONST4: !transports! GDP-mannose 
GONST5: !transports! other nucleotide-sugars 
GONST1: !localizes to! Golgi 
GONST2: !localizes to! Golgi 
GONST3: !localizes to! Golgi 
GONST4: !localizes to! Golgi 
GONST5: !localizes to! Golgi 
GONST1: !enhances! glycosylation of extracellular chitinase 
GONST2: !enhances! glycosylation of extracellular chitinase 
GONST1: !represses! sensitivity to hygromycin B 
GONST2: !represses! sensitivity to hygromycin B 
GONST3: !represses! sensitivity to hygromycin B 
GONST4: !represses