['15489296', 'MSH4, a meiosis-specific member of the MutS-homolog family of genes, is required  for normal levels of recombination and fertility in budding yeast, mouse, and  Caenorhabditis elegans. In this paper, we report the identification and  characterization of the Arabidopsis homolog of MSH4 (AtMSH4). We demonstrate that  AtMSH4 expression can only be detected in floral tissues, consistent with a role  in reproduction. Immunofluorescence studies indicate that its expression is  limited to early meiotic prophase I, preceding the synapsis of homologous  chromosomes. A T-DNA insertional mutant (Atmsh4) exhibited normal vegetative  growth but a severe reduction in fertility, consistent with a meiotic defect;  this was confirmed by cytological analysis of meiosis. RNAi-induced  down-regulation of the MSH4 gene resulted in a similar fertility and meiotic  phenotype. We demonstrate that prophase I chromosome synapsis is delayed and may  be incomplete in Atmsh4, and metaphase I chiasma frequency is greatly reduced to  approximately 15% of wild type, leading to univalence and nondisjunction. We show  that these residual chiasmata are randomly distributed among cells and  chromosomes. These features of chiasma frequency and distribution in Atmsh4 show  close parallels to MSH4-independent crossovers in budding yeast that have been  proposed to originate by a separate pathway. Furthermore, the characteristics of  the MSH4-independent chiasmata in the Atmsh4 mutant closely parallel those of  second-pathway crossovers that have been postulated from Arabidopsis crossover  analysis and mathematical modeling. Taken together, this evidence strongly  indicates that Arabidopsis possesses two crossover pathways.', '2004 Oct 15', 'Genes Dev', '10.1101/gad.317504', 'Jones']

MSH4: !required for! normal levels of recombination and fertility
AtMSH4: !localizes to! early meiotic prophase I
Atmsh4: !exhibits! severe reduction in fertility
Atmsh4: !delays! prophase I chromosome synapsis
Atmsh4: !reduces! metaphase I chiasma frequency
Arabidopsis: !possesses! two crossover pathways