Genetic control of seed dormancy in barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) has mostly been described in terms of quantitative variation. Although some molecular markers for dormancy QTL have been identified, the corresponding genes involved in the regulation of the process have not been cloned. Induced barley mutants may constitute useful material to study the physiology and genetics of seed dormancy. The objective of this study was to identify the genetic control of this trait in a mutant (TL43) produced in the barley cv. Triumph. This mutant was selected for reduced dormancy and reduced sensitivity to abscisic acid (ABA). Two sets of F6 barley lines were selected for high and low levels of dormancy from a cross between the original dormant parent and the sodium azide-induced non-dormant TL43 mutant. Unexpectedly, given the near-isogenic nature of these two genotypes, polymorphism was detected for an SSR located in the centromeric region of chromosome 6(6H) out of a total of 92 molecular markers evenly distributed along the genome. Fortunately, upon three cycles of intensive divergent selection, every dormant and non-dormant F5 line consistently showed the genotype for this region identical to Triumph and TL43, respectively. Based on the mutagenic effect presumably attributed to sodium azide, mostly single point mutations, it cannot be clearly established if such extensive genomic variation on chromosome 6(6H) is due to the mutagenic treatment or may be an introgression from an unknown source. The means that could originate such heterogeneity are discussed; however, regardless of its origin, this genomic region shows a strong association with the expression of seed dormancy and provides an additional genetic locus for further studies of the mechanistic basis of this complex trait. In addition, since TL43 shows reduced sensitivity to ABA, the response to this hormone was determined on the F6 seed from the two sets of selected F5 lines. The results confirmed that the initial level of dormancy in the seed lot is the most important factor in determining ABA sensitivity.

Genetic control: !affects! Seed dormancy 
Mutant TL43: !selected for! Reduced dormancy & ABA sensitivity 
SSR marker: !localizes to! Chromosome 6(6H) 
Sodium azide: !induces! Mutagenic effect 
Dormancy level: !determines! ABA sensitivity