['15500471', 'Three Botrytis-susceptible mutants bos2, bos3, and bos4 which define independent  and novel genetic loci required for Arabidopsis resistance to Botrytis cinerea  were isolated. The bos2 mutant is susceptible to B. cinerea but retains wild-type  levels of resistance to other pathogens tested, indicative of a defect in a  response pathway more specific to B. cinerea. The bos3 and bos4 mutants also show  increased susceptibility to Alternaria brassicicola, another necrotrophic  pathogen, suggesting a broader role for these loci in resistance. bos4 shows the  broadest range of effects on resistance, being more susceptible to avirulent  strain of Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato. Interestingly, bos3 is more resistant  than wild-type plants to virulent strains of the biotrophic pathogen Peronospora  parasitica and the bacterial pathogen P. syringae pv. tomato. The Pathogenesis  Related gene 1 (PR-1), a molecular marker of the salicylic acid (SA)-dependent  resistance pathway, shows a wild-type pattern of expression in bos2, while in  bos3 this gene was expressed at elevated levels, both constitutively and in  response to pathogen challenge. In bos4 plants, PR-1 expression was reduced  compared with wild type in response to B. cinerea and SA. In bos3, the mutant  most susceptible to B. cinerea and with the highest expression of PR-1, removal  of SA resulted in reduced PR-1 expression but no change to the B. cinerea  response. Expression of the plant defensin gene PDF1-2 was generally lower in bos  mutants compared with wild-type plants, with a particularly strong reduction in  bos3. Production of the phytoalexin camalexin is another well-characterized plant  defense response. The bos2 and bos4 mutants accumulate reduced levels of  camalexin whereas bos3 accumulates significantly higher levels of camalexin than  wild-type plants in response to B. cinerea. The BOS2, BOS3, and BOS4 loci may  affect camalexin levels and responsiveness to ethylene and jasmonate. The three  new mutants appear to mediate disease responses through mechanisms independent of  the previously described BOS1 gene. Based on the differences in the phenotypes of  the bos mutants, it appears that they affect different points in defense response  pathways.', '2004 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02232.x', 'Mengiste']

BOS2: !affects! B. cinerea response
BOS3: !affects! A. brassicicola response
BOS4: !affects! P. syringae pv. tomato response
PR-1: !enhances! B. cinerea response
PDF1-2: !represses! B. cinerea response
camalexin: !synthesizes! B. cinerea response
BOS2: !localizes to! SA-dependent resistance pathway
BOS3: !interacts with! SA-dependent resistance pathway
BOS4: !interacts with! SA-dependent resistance pathway