Salinity greatly reduces the leaf cross-sectional area of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) during its development, which may lead to variation in the architectural properties of growing leaves that would result in a change in leaf physiological functions. Our objective was to characterize the effect of salinity on the spatial distribution of the cross-sectional area and the anatomy of large and small veins of a growing wheat leaf. Spring wheat was grown in a growth chamber in soils with or without 120 mM NaCl. Leaf 4 in both treatments was harvested 2-3 days after its emergence and then cut into five transverse segments. Examination of the transverse sections revealed that salinity significantly reduced the cross-sectional area, width, and radii of both epidermal and mesophyll cells along the leaf axis. Reduction in the cross-sectional area and width occurred mainly at the leaf base, indicating that these reductions occur during the period of leaf initiation. The reduction in cross-sectional area was attributed to a decrease in the size of the vein segments and a reduced number of medium and small veins. The thickness of the leaf was also reduced under the 120 mM NaCl treatment. A greater intercellular air space in the large vein segments under saline conditions was also found. The approximately 35% reduction observed in the number of veins under saline conditions (mainly in the number of small veins) may suggest that salinity reduces the capacity for re-translocation of mineral nutrients and assimilates. The reduced area of protoxylem and metaxylem in midrib and large vein segments in growing tissues may be responsible for lower water deposition into the growth zone under saline conditions.

Salinity: !reduces! Cross-sectional area
Salinity: !reduces! Width
Salinity: !reduces! Radii of cells
Salinity: !reduces! Number of veins
Salinity: !reduces! Thickness of leaf
Salinity: !increases! Intercellular air space
Veins: !reduce! Re-translocation of mineral nutrients and assimilates