The isolation and characterization of fruit-specific promoters are critical for the manipulation of the nutritional value and quality of fruits by genetic engineering. The analysis of regulatory sequences of many ripening-related genes has remained elusive for many species due to their low transformation efficiency and/or lengthy regeneration of a small number of transgenic plants. Strawberry is an important crop and represents one of the most widely studied non-climacteric model systems. However, until recently, its difficult regeneration has limited the functional study of promoters by stable transformation. A protocol based on biolistic transient transformation has been developed in order to study the function of promoters in a fast and efficient manner in strawberry fruits. The protocol has been applied to the study of the GalUR promoter, a gene involved in the biosynthesis of vitamin C in this fruit. The activity of the GalUR promoter is restricted to the fruit, being strictly dependent on light. The analysis of deletion series revealed the presence of a minimum activation region 397 bp upstream of the gene with a putative G-box motif, and a negative regulatory region between -397 and -518 bp, where an I-box was identified. The transient assay has been used to study the activity of the tomato polygalacturonase and the pepper fibrillin promoters in strawberry fruits. Whereas slight activity was observed with the fibrillin promoter, no significant activity was found with the polygalacturonase promoter. The GalUR promoter in transiently transformed ripe tomato fruits showed no activity, indicating the presence of regulatory sequences specific for its function in strawberry fruit.

GalUR promoter: !localizes to! strawberry fruit 
GalUR promoter: !enhances! vitamin C biosynthesis 
GalUR promoter: !contains! G-box motif 
GalUR promoter: !represses! I-box 
Tomato polygalacturonase promoter: !inactive in! strawberry fruit 
Pepper fibrillin promoter: !slight activity in! strawberry fruit