['15531707', 'The plant plastidial thioredoxins (Trx) are involved in the light-dependent  regulation of many enzymatic activities, owing to their thiol-disulfide  interchange activity. Three different types of plastidial Trx have been  identified and characterized so far: the m-, f-, and x-types. Recently, a new  putative plastidial type, the y-type, was found. In this work the two isoforms of  Trx y encoded by the nuclear genome of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) were  characterized. The plastidial targeting of Trx y has been established by the  expression of a TrxGFP fusion protein. Then both isoforms were produced as  recombinant proteins in their putative mature forms and purified to characterize  them by a biochemical approach. Their ability to activate two plastidial  light-regulated enzymes, NADP-malate dehydrogenase (NADP-MDH) and  fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, was tested. Both Trx y were poor activators of  fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase and NADP-MDH; however, a detailed study of the  activation of NADP-MDH using site-directed mutants of its regulatory cysteines  suggested that Trx y was able to reduce the less negative regulatory disulfide  but not the more negative regulatory disulfide. This property probably results  from the fact that Trx y has a less negative redox midpoint potential (-337 mV at  pH 7.9) than thioredoxins f and m. The y-type Trxs were also the best substrate  for the plastidial peroxiredoxin Q. Gene expression analysis showed that Trx y2  was mainly expressed in leaves and induced by light, whereas Trx y1 was mainly  expressed in nonphotosynthetic organs, especially in seeds at a stage of major  accumulation of storage lipids.', '2004 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.052233', 'Issakidis-Bourguet']

Trx y: !localizes to! plastids 
Trx y: !activates! NADP-MDH 
Trx y: !activates! fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 
Trx y: !substrate for! peroxiredoxin Q 
Trx y2: !expressed in! leaves 
Trx y2: !induced by! light 
Trx y1: !expressed in! nonphotosynthetic organs 
Trx y1: !expressed in! seeds