The proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is a protein factor required for processive DNA synthesis that is associated with G(1) cell cycle proteins. It has been demonstrated previously that, in germinating maize (Zea mays) embryonic axes, PCNA forms protein complexes with two Cdk-A proteins (32 and 36 kDa) and with a putative D-type cyclin. These complexes exhibit protein kinase activity on histone H1 and on the maize homologue of the pRB (retinoblastoma) protein. Flow cytometry has been used to study the influence of the phytohormones benzyladenine (BA) and abscisic acid (ABA) on cell cycle advancement during maize germination. It was found that, while BA accelerates the passage of cells from G(1) to G(2), ABA delays cell cycle events so that most cells seem to remain in G(1). The amounts of PCNA and Cdk-A proteins also vary according to the hormone treatment. In embryonic axes, PCNA increases rapidly during early germination in BA, compared with a gradual increase in water, while ABA treatment had only a marginal effect. However, of the two Cdk-A proteins, the 32 kDa protein is strongly reduced after 15 h of imbibition in water while this occurs later when axes are imbibed in BA or ABA. The PCNA-associated protein kinase activity in the BA and ABA treatments falls after 3 h of imbibition compared with activity in the control; however, while kinase activity in the BA treatment continues to decline during imbibition, it remains relatively constant until 24 h of imbibition in the ABA treatment. By contrast, a p13(Suc1)-associated Cdk-A kinase is activated after 15 h of imbibition under all treatments, particularly in ABA. These results suggest that, in maize, ABA delays the germination process by affecting cell cycle advancement, stopping cells mostly in a G(1) state.

PCNA: !forms protein complexes with! Cdk-A proteins
BA: !accelerates! passage of cells from G(1) to G(2)
ABA: !delays! cell cycle events
PCNA: !increases rapidly! in BA
Cdk-A 32 kDa protein: !strongly reduced! after 15 h of imbibition in water
PCNA-associated protein kinase activity: !falls! after 3 h of imbibition
p13(Suc1)-associated Cdk-A kinase: !activated! after 15 h of imbibition