['15564521', 'The involvement of the putative glutamate receptor 1.1 (AtGLR1.1) gene in the  regulation of abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthesis and signaling was investigated in  Arabidopsis. Seeds from AtGLR1.1-deficient (antiAtGLR1.1) lines had increased  sensitivity to exogenous ABA with regard to the effect of the hormone on the  inhibition of seed germination and root growth. Seed germination, which was  inhibited by an animal ionotropic glutamate receptor antagonist,  6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3-[1H,4H]-dione, was restored by co-incubation with an  inhibitor of ABA biosynthesis, fluridone. These results confirm that germination  in antiAtGLR1.1 lines was inhibited by increased ABA. When antiAtGLR1.1 and WT  seeds were co-incubated in fluridone and exogenous ABA, the antiAtGLR1.1 seeds  were more sensitive to ABA. In addition, the antiAtGLR1.1 lines exhibited altered  expression of ABA biosynthetic (ABA) and signaling (ABI) genes, when compared  with WT. Combining the physiological and molecular results suggest that ABA  biosynthesis and signaling in antiAtGLR1.1 lines are altered. ABA levels in  leaves of antiAtGLR1.1 lines are higher than those in WT. In addition, the  antiAtGLR1.1 lines had reduced stomatal apertures, and exhibited enhanced drought  tolerance due to deceased water loss compared with WT lines. The results from  these experiments imply that ABA biosynthesis and signaling can be regulated  through AtGLR1.1 to trigger pre- and post-germination arrest and changes in whole  plant responses to water stress. Combined with our earlier results, these  findings suggest that AtGLR1.1 integrates and regulates the different aspects of  C, N and water balance that are required for normal plant growth and development.', '2004 Oct', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pch159', 'Turano']

AtGLR1.1: !affects! ABA biosynthesis and signaling 
AtGLR1.1: !enhances! drought tolerance 
AtGLR1.1: !regulates! C, N and water balance 
ABA: !inhibits! seed germination 
ABA: !represses! root growth 
ABA: !alters! expression of ABA biosynthetic and signaling genes