['15579666', 'Ser acetyltransferase (SATase; EC 2.3.1.30) catalyzes the formation of  O-acetyl-Ser from L-Ser and acetyl-CoA, leading to synthesis of Cys. According to  its position at the decisive junction of the pathways of sulfur assimilation and  amino acid metabolism, SATases are subject to regulatory mechanisms to control  the flux of Cys synthesis. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) there are five  genes encoding SATase-like proteins. Two isoforms, Serat3;1 and Serat3;2, were  characterized with respect to their enzymatic properties, feedback inhibition by  L-Cys, and subcellular localization. Functional identity of Serat3;1 and Serat3;2  was established by complementation of a SATase-deficient mutant of Escherichia  coli. Cytosolic localization of Serat3;1 and Serat3;2 was confirmed by using  fusion construct with the green fluorescent protein. Recombinant Serat3;1 was not  inhibited by L-Cys, while Serat3;2 was a strongly feedback-inhibited isoform.  Quantification of expression patterns indicated that Serat2;1 is the dominant  form expressed in most tissues examined, followed by Serat1;1 and Serat2;2.  Although Serat3;1 and Serat3;2 were expressed weakly in most tissues, Serat3;2  expression was significantly induced under sulfur deficiency and cadmium stress  as well as during generative developmental stages, implying that Serat3;1 and  Serat3;2 have specific roles when plants are subjected to distinct conditions.  Transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing the green fluorescent protein under the  control of the five promoters indicated that, in all Serat genes, the expression  was predominantly localized in the vascular system, notably in the phloem. These  results demonstrate that Arabidopsis employs a complex array of  compartment-specific SATase isoforms with distinct enzymatic properties and  expression patterns to ensure the provision of Cys in response to developmental  and environmental changes.', '2005 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.045377', 'Saito']

Ser acetyltransferase: !catalyzes! formation of O-acetyl-Ser 
L-Ser and acetyl-CoA: !leads to! synthesis of Cys 
SATases: !subject to! regulatory mechanisms 
Arabidopsis: !contains! five genes encoding SATase-like proteins 
Serat3;1 and Serat3;2: !characterized by! enzymatic properties, feedback inhibition, subcellular localization 
Serat3;1 and Serat3;2: !functionally identified by! complementation of a SATase-deficient mutant 
Serat3;1 and Serat3;2: !cytosolic localization confirmed by! fusion construct with green fluorescent protein 
Serat3;1: !not inhibited by! L-Cys 
Serat3;2: !strongly feedback-inhibited isoform! 
Serat2;1: !dominant form expressed in! most tissues 
Serat3;2: !significantly induced under! sulfur deficiency, cadmium stress, generative developmental stages 
Serat genes: !expression predominantly localized in! vascular system, notably phlo