['15608336', 'Reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as O2- and H2O2, play a key role in plant  metabolism, cellular signaling, and defense. In leaf cells, the chloroplast is  considered to be a focal point of ROS metabolism. It is a major producer of O2-  and H2O2 during photosynthesis, and it contains a large array of ROS-scavenging  mechanisms that have been extensively studied. By contrast, the function of the  cytosolic ROS-scavenging mechanisms of leaf cells is largely unknown. In this  study, we demonstrate that in the absence of the cytosolic H2O2-scavenging enzyme  ascorbate peroxidase 1 (APX1), the entire chloroplastic H2O2-scavenging system of  Arabidopsis thaliana collapses, H2O2 levels increase, and protein oxidation  occurs. We further identify specific proteins oxidized in APX1-deficient plants  and characterize the signaling events that ensue in knockout-Apx1 plants in  response to a moderate level of light stress. Using a dominant-negative approach,  we demonstrate that heat shock transcription factors play a central role in the  early sensing of H2O2 stress in plants. Using knockout plants for the NADPH  oxidase D protein (knockout-RbohD), we demonstrate that RbohD might be required  for ROS signal amplification during light stress. Our study points to a key role  for the cytosol in protecting the chloroplast during light stress and provides  evidence for cross-compartment protection of thylakoid and stromal/mitochondrial  APXs by cytosolic APX1.', '2005 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.026971', 'Mittler']

ROS: !plays key role in! plant metabolism 
ROS: !produced by! chloroplast 
ROS: !scavenged by! cytosolic ROS-scavenging mechanisms 
APX1: !collapses! chloroplastic H2O2-scavenging system 
APX1: !increases! H2O2 levels 
APX1: !causes! protein oxidation 
heat shock transcription factors: !play central role in! early sensing of H2O2 stress 
RbohD: !required for! ROS signal amplification 
cytosol: !protects! chloroplast during light stress 
APX1: !cross-protects! thylakoid and stromal/mitochondrial APXs