['15604686', 'In plants, Glycoside Hydrolase (GH) Family 1 beta -glycosidases are believed to  play important roles in many diverse processes including chemical defense against  herbivory, lignification, hydrolysis of cell wall-derived oligosaccharides during  germination, and control of active phytohormone levels. Completion of the  Arabidopsis thaliana genome sequencing project has enabled us, for the first  time, to determine the total number of Family 1 members in a higher plant.  Reiterative database searches revealed a multigene family of 48 members that  includes eight probable pseudogenes. Manual reannotation and analysis of the  entire family were undertaken to rectify existing misannotations and identify  phylogenetic relationships among family members. Forty-seven members (designated  BGLU1 through BGLU47 ) share a common evolutionary origin and were subdivided  into approximately 10 subfamilies based on phylogenetic analysis and  consideration of intron-exon organizations. The forty-eighth member of this  family ( At3g06510; sfr2 ) is a beta -glucosidase-like gene that belongs to a  distinct lineage. Information pertaining to expression patterns and potential  functions of Arabidopsis GH Family 1 members is presented. To determine the  biological function of all family members, we intend to investigate the substrate  specificity of each mature hydrolase after its heterologous expression in the  Pichia pastoris expression system. To test the validity of this approach, the  BGLU44 -encoded hydrolase was expressed in P. pastoris and purified to  homogeneity. When tested against a wide range of natural and synthetic  substrates, this enzyme showed a preference for beta -mannosides including 1,4-  beta -D-mannooligosaccharides, suggesting that it may be involved in A. thaliana  in degradation of mannans, galactomannans, or glucogalactomannans. Supporting  this notion, BGLU44 shared high sequence identity and similar gene organization  with tomato endosperm beta -mannosidase and barley seed beta -glucosidase/ beta  -mannosidase BGQ60.', '2004 May', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-004-0790-1', 'Esen']

Glycoside Hydrolase: !belongs to! Arabidopsis thaliana 
BGLU44: !shares identity with! Tomato endosperm beta-mannosidase 
BGLU44: !shares identity with! Barley seed beta-glucosidase/beta-mannosidase BGQ60 
BGLU44: !prefers! Beta-mannosides 
BGLU44: !potentially involved in! Degradation of mannans, galactomannans, or glucogalactomannans