['15618226', 'During phosphate starvation, it is known that phospholipids are degraded, and  conversely, a nonphosphorus galactolipid digalactosyldiacylglycerol accumulates  in the root plasma membrane of plants. We report a novel phospholipase C that  hydrolyzes phosphatidylcholine and is greatly induced in response to phosphate  deprivation in Arabidopsis. Since phosphatidylcholine-hydrolyzing activity by  phospholipase C was highly up-regulated in phosphate-deprived plants, gene  expression of some phospholipase C was expected to be induced during phosphate  starvation. Based on amino acid sequence similarity to a bacterial  phosphatidylcholine-hydrolyzing phospholipase C, six putative phospholipase Cs  were identified in the Arabidopsis genome, one of which, NPC4, showed significant  transcriptional activation upon phosphate limitation. Molecular cloning and  functional expression of NPC4 confirmed that the NPC4 gene encoded a functional  phosphatidylcholine-hydrolyzing phospholipase C that did not require Ca(2+) for  its activity. Subcellular localization analysis showed that NPC4 protein was  highly enriched in the plasma membrane. Analyses of transferred DNA-tagged npc4  mutants revealed that disruption of NPC4 severely reduces the  phosphatidylcholine-hydrolyzing phospholipase C activity in response to phosphate  starvation. These results suggest that NPC4 plays an important role in the supply  of both inorganic phosphate and diacylglycerol from membrane-localized  phospholipids that would be used for phosphate supplementation and the  replacement of polar lipids in the root plasma membrane during phosphate  deprivation.', '2005 Mar 4', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M408799200', 'Ohta']

NPC4: !encodes! phosphatidylcholine-hydrolyzing phospholipase C 
NPC4: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
phosphate deprivation: !induces! NPC4 gene expression 
NPC4: !enhances! supply of inorganic phosphate and diacylglycerol 
phosphate deprivation: !causes! degradation of phospholipids 
phosphate deprivation: !causes! accumulation of digalactosyldiacylglycerol