Patterns of synthesis and breakdown of carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) stores are relatively well known. But the role of mobilized stores as substrates for growth remains less clear. In this article, a novel approach to estimate C and N import into leaf growth zones was coupled with steady-state labeling of photosynthesis ((13)CO(2)/(12)CO(2)) and N uptake ((15)NO(3)(-)/(14)NO(3)(-)) and compartmental modeling of tracer fluxes. The contributions of current C assimilation/N uptake and mobilization from stores to the substrate pool supplying leaf growth were then quantified in plants of a C(3) (Lolium perenne) and C(4) grass (Paspalum dilatatum Poir.) manipulated thus to have contrasting C assimilation and N uptake rates. In all cases, leaf growth relied largely on photoassimilates delivered either directly after fixation or short-term storage (turnover rate = 1.6-3.3 d(-1)). Long-term C stores (turnover rate < 0.09 d(-1)) were generally of limited relevance. Hence, no link was found between the role of stores and C acquisition rate. Short-term (turnover rate = 0.29-0.90 d(-1)) and long-term (turnover rate < 0.04 d(-1)) stores supplied most N used in leaf growth. Compared to dominant (well-lit) plants, subordinate (shaded) plants relied more on mobilization from long-term N stores to support leaf growth. These differences correlated well with the C-to-N ratio of growth substrates and were associated with responses in N uptake. Based on this, we argue that internal regulation of N uptake acts as a main determinant of the importance of mobilized long-term stores as a source of N for leaf growth.

C assimilation: !supplies! leaf growth
N uptake: !supplies! leaf growth
current C assimilation/N uptake: !contributes to! substrate pool supplying leaf growth
long-term C stores: !limited relevance to! leaf growth
short-term C stores: !contributes to! substrate pool supplying leaf growth
long-term N stores: !supplies most N used in! leaf growth
dominant plants: !rely less on! mobilization from long-term N stores
subordinate plants: !rely more on! mobilization from long-term N stores
C-to-N ratio of growth substrates: !correlates with! differences in N uptake
internal regulation of N uptake: !acts as main determinant of! importance of mobilized long-term stores