['15618435', 'Inositol polyphosphates, such as inositol trisphosphate, are pivotal  intracellular signaling molecules in eukaryotic cells. In higher plants the  mechanism for the regulation of the type and the level of these signaling  molecules is poorly understood. In this study we investigate the physiological  function of an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) gene encoding inositol  polyphosphate kinase (AtIPK2alpha), which phosphorylates inositol  1,4,5-trisphosphate successively at the D-6 and D-3 positions, and inositol  1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate at D-6, resulting in the generation of inositol  1,3,4,5,6-pentakisphosphate. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR and  promoter-beta-glucuronidase reporter gene analyses showed that AtIPK2alpha is  expressed in various tissues, including roots and root hairs, stem, leaf, pollen  grains, pollen tubes, the flower stigma, and siliques. Transgenic Arabidopsis  plants expressing the AtIPK2alpha antisense gene under its own promoter were  generated. Analysis of several independent transformants exhibiting strong  reduction in AtIPK2alpha transcript levels showed that both pollen germination  and pollen tube growth were enhanced in the antisense lines compared to wild-type  plants, especially in the presence of nonoptimal low Ca(2+) concentrations in the  culture medium. Furthermore, root growth and root hair development were also  stimulated in the antisense lines, in the presence of elevated external Ca(2+)  concentration or upon the addition of EGTA. In addition, seed germination and  early seedling growth was stimulated in the antisense lines. These observations  suggest a general and important role of AtIPK2alpha, and hence inositol  polyphosphate metabolism, in the regulation of plant growth most likely through  the regulation of calcium signaling, consistent with the well-known function of  inositol trisphosphate in the mobilization of intracellular calcium stores.', '2005 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.045427', 'Xue']

AtIPK2alpha: !synthesizes! inositol polyphosphates 
AtIPK2alpha: !localizes to! various tissues 
AtIPK2alpha: !enhances! pollen germination and tube growth 
AtIPK2alpha: !enhances! root growth and root hair development 
AtIPK2alpha: !enhances! seed germination and early seedling growth 
inositol polyphosphates: !mobilize! intracellular calcium stores