['15618414', 'Proline transporters (ProTs) mediate transport of the compatible solutes Pro,  glycine betaine, and the stress-induced compound gamma-aminobutyric acid. A new  member of this gene family, AtProT3, was isolated from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana), and its properties were compared to AtProT1 and AtProT2. Transient  expression of fusions of AtProT and the green fluorescent protein in tobacco  (Nicotiana tabacum) protoplasts revealed that all three AtProTs were localized at  the plasma membrane. Expression in a yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) mutant  demonstrated that the affinity of all three AtProTs was highest for glycine  betaine (K(m) = 0.1-0.3 mM), lower for Pro (K(m) = 0.4-1 mM), and lowest for  gamma-aminobutyric acid (K(m) = 4-5 mM). Relative quantification of the mRNA  level using real-time PCR and analyses of transgenic plants expressing the  beta-glucuronidase (uidA) gene under control of individual AtProT promoters  showed that the expression pattern of AtProTs are complementary. AtProT1  expression was found in the phloem or phloem parenchyma cells throughout the  whole plant, indicative of a role in long-distance transport of compatible  solutes. beta-Glucuronidase activity under the control of the AtProT2 promoter  was restricted to the epidermis and the cortex cells in roots, whereas in leaves,  staining could be demonstrated only after wounding. In contrast, AtProT3  expression was restricted to the above-ground parts of the plant and could be  localized to the epidermal cells in leaves. These results showed that, although  intracellular localization, substrate specificity, and affinity are very similar,  the transporters fulfill different roles in planta.', '2005 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.055079', 'Rentsch']

AtProT1: !localizes to! phloem/phloem parenchyma cells 
AtProT2: !localizes to! epidermis/cortex cells in roots 
AtProT2: !localizes to! epidermal cells in leaves after wounding 
AtProT3: !localizes to! above-ground parts of the plant 
AtProT3: !localizes to! epidermal cells in leaves