['15634206', 'The Arabidopsis genome contains six NPR1-related genes. Given the pivotal role  played by NPR1 in controlling salicylic acid (SA)-mediated gene expression and  disease resistance, functional characterization of other family members appears  to be justified. Reverse genetics was used to analyze the role of one NPR1-like  gene, which we called NPR4. The NPR4 protein shares 36% identity with NPR1 and  interacts with the same spectrum of TGA transcription factors in yeast two-hybrid  assays. Plants with T-DNA insertions in NPR4 are more susceptible to the virulent  bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringe pv. tomato DC3000. This phenotype is  complemented by expression of the wild type NPR4 coding region. As determined by  the parasite reproduction, the npr4-1 mutant is more susceptible to the fungal  pathogen Erysiphe cichoracearum, but does not differ markedly from wild type in  its interaction with virulent and avirulent strains of the oomycete Peronospora  parasitica. In leaves of wild-type plants, NPR4 mRNA levels increase following  pathogen challenge or SA treatment, and decrease rapidly following methyl  jasmonic acid (MeJA) treatment. Transcripts of the pathogenesis-related (PR)  genes PR-1, PR-2, and PR-5 are only marginally reduced in the npr4-1 mutant  following pathogen challenge or SA treatment. This reduction of PR gene  expression is more pronounced when leaves are challenged with the bacterial  pathogen following SA treatment. Expression of the jasmonic acid-dependent  pathway marker gene PDF1.2 is compromised in npr4-1 leaves following application  of MeJA or a combination of SA and MeJA. These results indicate that NPR4 is  required for basal defense against pathogens, and that it may be implicated in  the cross-talk between the SA- and JA-dependent signaling pathways.', '2005 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02296.x', 'Fobert']

NPR1: !controls! SA-mediated gene expression
NPR4: !shares! 36% identity with NPR1
NPR4: !interacts with! TGA transcription factors
NPR4: !enhances! resistance to Pseudomonas syringe pv. tomato DC3000
NPR4: !enhances! resistance to Erysiphe cichoracearum
NPR4: !increases! mRNA levels following pathogen challenge/SA treatment
NPR4: !decreases! mRNA levels following MeJA treatment
NPR4: !reduces! PR gene expression following pathogen challenge/SA treatment
NPR4: !compromises! PDF1.2 expression following MeJA/SA+MeJA treatment
NPR4: !required for! basal defense against pathogens
NPR4: !implicated in! cross-talk between SA- and JA-dependent signaling pathways