['15632054', 'Chlorophyll metabolism has been extensively studied with various organisms, and  almost all of the chlorophyll biosynthetic genes have been identified in higher  plants. However, only the gene for 3,8-divinyl protochlorophyllide a 8-vinyl  reductase (DVR), which is indispensable for monovinyl chlorophyll synthesis, has  not been identified yet. In this study, we isolated an Arabidopsis thaliana  mutant that accumulated divinyl chlorophyll instead of monovinyl chlorophyll by  ethyl methanesulfonate mutagenesis. Map-based cloning of this mutant resulted in  the identification of a gene (AT5G18660) that shows sequence similarity with  isoflavone reductase genes. The mutant phenotype was complemented by the  transformation with the wild-type gene. A recombinant protein encoded by  AT5G18660 was expressed in Escherichia coli and found to catalyze the conversion  of divinyl chlorophyllide to monovinyl chlorophyllide, thereby demonstrating that  the gene encodes a functional DVR. DVR is encoded by a single copy gene in the A.  thaliana genome. With the identification of DVR, finally all genes required for  chlorophyll biosynthesis have been identified in higher plants. Analysis of the  complete genome of A. thaliana showed that it has 15 enzymes encoded by 27 genes  for chlorophyll biosynthesis from glutamyl-tRNA(glu) to chlorophyll b.  Furthermore, identification of the DVR gene helped understanding the evolution of  Prochlorococcus marinus, a marine cyanobacterium that is dominant in the open  ocean and is uncommon in using divinyl chlorophylls. A DVR homolog was not found  in the genome of P. marinus but found in the Synechococcus sp WH8102 genome,  which is consistent with the distribution of divinyl chlorophyll in marine  cyanobacteria of the genera Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus.', '2005 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.027276', 'Tanaka']

Gene: AT5G18660 !encodes! DVR 
DVR !converts! divinyl chlorophyllide to monovinyl chlorophyllide 
A. thaliana !has! 15 enzymes encoded by 27 genes for chlorophyll biosynthesis 
P. marinus !lacks! DVR homolog 
Synechococcus sp WH8102 !has! DVR homolog