Rice (Oryza sativa L.) has been used to study the long-term responses of photosynthesis to high irradiance focusing on the composition of the photosynthetic apparatus and leaf morphology. Typical sun/shade differences in chloroplast composition are seen in the fifth leaf following growth in high irradiance compared with low irradiance (1000 and 200 micromol m(-2) s(-1), respectively): higher light-saturated rates of photosynthesis (P(max)), higher amounts of Rubisco protein, and a lower chlorophyll a:b ratio. In addition, leaves were thicker under high light compared with low light. However, responses appear more complex when leaf developmental stage is considered. Using a system of transferring plants from low to high light in the laboratory responses that occur before and after full leaf extension have been studied. Acclimation of photosynthesis is limited by leaf age: the transfer to high light, post-leaf extension, is characterized by alterations in chlorophyll a:b but not in Rubisco protein, which may be limited by leaf morphology. Microarray analysis of gene expression was carried out on plants that were transferred to high light post-leaf extension. A down-regulation of light-harvesting genes was seen. No change in the expression level of Rubisco genes was observed. Up-regulation of genes involved in photoprotection was observed. It was also shown that high-light leaf morphology is established prior to formation of the zone of cellular elongation and division. The endogenous and environmental factors which establish the characteristics of high light acclimation may be important for attaining high rates of assimilation in leaves and crop canopies, and the fifth leaf in rice provides a convenient model system for the determination of the mechanisms involved.

Pmax: !increases with! high irradiance 
Rubisco protein: !increases with! high irradiance 
chlorophyll a:b ratio: !decreases with! high irradiance 
leaf thickness: !increases with! high irradiance 
light-harvesting genes: !down-regulates with! high light 
Rubisco genes: !no change in expression level with! high light 
photoprotection genes: !up-regulates with! high light 
high light acclimation: !established prior to! leaf formation