['15647901', 'Pentatricopeptide repeat proteins (PPRPs) constitute one of the largest  superfamilies in plants, with more than 440 identified in the Arabidopsis  thaliana (L.) Heynh genome. While some PPRPs are known to take part in organelle  gene expression, little is known about the broader biological contexts of PPRP  gene function. Here, using developmental- and reverse-genetic approaches, we  demonstrate that a number of PPRPs are essential early in plant development. We  have characterized the Arabidopsis embryo-defective175 mutant and identified the  EMB175 gene. Emb175 consistently displays aberrant cell organization and  undergoes morphological arrest before the globular-heart transition. The emb175  mutation disrupts an intronless open reading frame encoding a predicted  chloroplast-localized PPR protein- the first to be rigorously associated with an  early embryo-lethal phenotype. To determine if other PPRP genes act in  embryogenesis, we searched Arabidopsis insertion mutant collections for pprp  knockout alleles, and identified 29 mutants representing 11 loci potentially  associated with embryo-defective phenotypes. We assessed gene structures, T-DNA  insertion position, and allelism for these loci and were able to firmly establish  essential functions for six PPRP genes in addition to EMB175. Interestingly,  Nomarski DIC microscopy revealed diverse embryonic defects in these lines,  ranging from early lethality to dramatic late-stage morphological defects such as  enlarged shoot apices and stunted cotyledons. Together, emb175 and these pprp  knockout mutants establish essential roles for PPRPs in embryogenesis, thus  broadening the known organismal context for PPRP gene function. The diversity of  emb-pprp knockout phenotypes indicates that mutation of different PPRPs can,  directly or indirectly, have distinct impacts on embryo morphogenesis.', '2005 Jun', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-004-1452-x', 'Vernon']

PPRPs: !constitute! Superfamily 
EMB175: !disrupts! Intronless ORF 
Arabidopsis: !contains! Insertion Mutant Collection 
pprp Knockout Alleles: !identified in! Collection 
EMB175: !associated with! Embryo-Lethal Phenotype 
pprp Knockout Mutants: !establish essential roles for! PPRPs 
Mutation of Different PPRPs: !can have distinct impacts on! Embryo Morphogenesis