['15643972', 'The Arabidopsis thaliana TGG1 gene encodes thioglucoside glucohydrolase  (myrosinase), an enzyme catalysing the hydrolysis of glucosinolate compounds. The  enzyme is involved in plant defence against some insect herbivores, and is  present in species of the order Capparales (Brassicales). Nucleotide variation  was surveyed by sequencing c. 2.4 kb of the TGG1 locus in a sample of 28  worldwide A. thaliana accessions, and one Arabidopsis lyrata ssp. lyrata  individual. Myrosinase activity was quantified for 27 of these same A. thaliana  accessions, plus five additional others. Overall, estimated nucleotide diversity  in A. thaliana was low compared to other published A. thaliana surveys, and the  frequency distribution was skewed toward an excess of low-frequency variants.  Furthermore, comparison to the outgroup species A. lyrata demonstrated that A.  thaliana exhibited an excess of high-frequency derived variants relative to a  neutral equilibrium model, suggesting a selective sweep. A. thaliana accessions  differed significantly in total myrosinase activity, but analysis of variance  detected no statistical evidence for an association between quantitative enzyme  activity and alleles at the TGG1 myrosinase-encoding locus. We thus conclude that  other, unsurveyed factors primarily affect the observed myrosinase activity  levels in this species. The pattern of nucleotide variation was consistent with a  model of positive selection but might also be compatible with a completely  neutral model that takes into account the metapopulation behaviour of this highly  inbreeding species which experienced a relatively recent worldwide expansion.', '2005 Jan', 'Mol Ecol', '10.1111/j.1365-294X.2004.02403.x', 'Mitchell-Olds']

TGG1: !encodes! myrosinase 
myrosinase: !involved in! plant defence 
A. thaliana: !exhibits! low nucleotide diversity 
A. thaliana: !excess of! high-frequency derived variants 
A. thaliana: !differs significantly in! total myrosinase activity 
TGG1 locus: !no association with! enzyme activity levels 
positive selection: !model of! nucleotide variation