Sessile organisms often exhibit morphological changes in response to permanent exposure to mechanical stimulation (wind or water movements). The adaptive value of these morphological changes (hydrodynamic performance and consequences on fitness) has not been studied extensively, particularly for higher plants submitted to flow stress. The aim was to determine the adaptive value of morphological patterns observed within two higher aquatic plant species, Berula erecta and Mentha aquatica, growing along a natural flow stress gradient. The hydrodynamic ability of each ramet was investigated through quantitative variables (drag coefficient and E-value). Fitness-related traits based on vegetative growth and clonal multiplication were assessed for each individual. For both species, the drag coefficient and the E-value were explained only to a limited extent by the morphological traits used. B. erecta exhibited a reduction in size and low overall plant drag at higher flow velocities, despite high drag values relative to leaf area, due to a low flexibility. The plants maintained their fitness, at least in part, through biomass reallocation: one tall ramet at low velocity, but shorter individuals with many interconnected stolons when flow velocity increased. For M. aquatica, morphological differences along the velocity gradient did not lead to greater hydrodynamic performance. Plant size increased with increasing velocities, suggesting the indirect effects of current favouring growth in high velocities. The fitness-related traits did not demonstrate lower plant fitness for high velocities. Different developmental constraints linked to plant morphology and trade-offs between major plant functions probably lead to different plant responses to flow stress.

Berula erecta: !reduces size! Flow velocity 
Berula erecta: !reallocates biomass! Flow velocity 
Mentha aquatica: !increases size! Flow velocity 
Morphology: !limitedly explains! Hydrodynamic ability 
Fitness-related traits: !not lower! High velocities