['15659626', 'Dynamic cytoplasmic streaming, organelle positioning, and nuclear migration use  molecular tracks generated from actin filaments arrayed into higher-order  structures like actin cables and bundles. How these arrays are formed and  stabilized against cellular depolymerizing forces remains an open question.  Villin and fimbrin are the best characterized actin-filament bundling or  cross-linking proteins in plants and each is encoded by a multigene family of  five members in Arabidopsis thaliana. The related villins and gelsolins are  conserved proteins that are constructed from a core of six homologous gelsolin  domains. Gelsolin is a calcium-regulated actin filament severing, nucleating and  barbed end capping factor. Villin has a seventh domain at its C terminus, the  villin headpiece, which can bind to an actin filament, conferring the ability to  crosslink or bundle actin filaments. Many, but not all, villins retain the  ability to sever, nucleate, and cap filaments. Here we have identified a putative  calcium-insensitive villin isoform through comparison of sequence alignments  between human gelsolin and plant villins with x-ray crystallography data for  vertebrate gelsolin. VILLIN1 (VLN1) has the least well-conserved type 1 and type  2 calcium binding sites among the Arabidopsis VILLIN isoforms. Recombinant VLN1  binds to actin filaments with high affinity (K(d) approximately 1 microM) and  generates bundled filament networks; both properties are independent of the free  Ca(2+) concentration. Unlike human plasma gelsolin, VLN1 does not nucleate the  assembly of filaments from monomer, does not block the polymerization of  profilin-actin onto barbed ends, and does not stimulate depolymerization or sever  preexisting filaments. In kinetic assays with ADF/cofilin, villin appears to bind  first to growing filaments and protects filaments against ADF-mediated  depolymerization. We propose that VLN1 is a major regulator of the formation and  stability of actin filament bundles in plant cells and that it functions to  maintain the cable network even in the presence of stimuli that result in  depolymerization of other actin arrays.', '2005 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.028555', 'Staiger']

Villin: !bundles! Actin filaments 
Villin: !protects! Actin filaments 
VILLIN1: !binds to! Actin filaments 
VILLIN1: !generates! Bundled filament networks 
VILLIN1: !blocks! Polymerization of profilin-actin 
VILLIN1: !stimulates! Depolymerization of filaments 
VILLIN1: !maintains! Cable network