['15659637', 'In flowering plants, penetration of the pollen tube through stigma, style, and  transmitting tract is essential for delivery of sperm nuclei to the egg cells  embedded deeply within female tissues. Despite its importance in plant  reproduction, little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms that  regulate the navigation of the pollen tube through the stigma, style, and  transmitting tract. Here, we report the identification and characterization of an  Arabidopsis thaliana gene, VANGUARD1 (VGD1) that encodes a pectin methylesterase  (PME)-homologous protein of 595 amino acids and is required for enhancing the  growth of pollen tubes in the style and transmitting tract tissues. VGD1 was  expressed specifically in pollen grain and the pollen tube. The VGD1 protein was  distributed throughout the pollen grain and pollen tube, including the plasma  membrane and cell wall. Functional interruption of VGD1 reduced PME activity in  the pollen to 82% of the wild type and greatly retarded the growth of the pollen  tube in the style and transmitting tract, resulting in a significant reduction of  male fertility. In addition, the vgd1 pollen tubes were unstable and burst more  frequently when germinated and grown on in vitro culture medium, compared with  wild-type pollen tubes. Our study suggests that the VGD1 product is required for  growth of the pollen tube, possibly via modifying the cell wall and enhancing the  interaction of the pollen tube with the female style and transmitting tract  tissues.', '2005 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.027631', 'Ye']

VANGUARD1: !encodes! pectin methylesterase 
VANGUARD1: !required for! enhancing pollen tube growth 
VGD1: !expressed in! pollen grain and tube 
VGD1: !distributed throughout! plasma membrane and cell wall 
Functional interruption of VGD1: !reduces! PME activity 
Functional interruption of VGD1: !retards! pollen tube growth 
VGD1 product: !required for! growth of pollen tube 
VGD1 product: !modifies! cell wall 
VGD1 product: !enhances! interaction of pollen tube with female tissues