['15659636', "Plants perceive subtle changes in light quality and quantity through a set of  photoreceptors, including phytochromes and cryptochromes. Upon perception, these  photoreceptors initiate signal transduction pathways leading to photomorphogenic  changes in development. Using activation-tagging mutagenesis to identify novel  light-signaling components, we have isolated a gain-of-function mutant, sob1-D  (suppressor of phytochrome B-4 [phyB-4] dominant), which suppresses the  long-hypocotyl phenotype of the phyB missense allele, phyB-4. The sob1-D mutant  phenotype is caused by the overexpression of a Dof (DNA binding with one finger)  transcription factor, OBF4 Binding Protein 3 (OBP3). A translational fusion  between OBP3 and green fluorescent protein is nuclear localized in onion (Allium  cepa) cells. Tissue-specific accumulation of an OBP3:OBP3-beta-glucuronidase  translational fusion is regulated by light in Arabidopsis thaliana. Hypocotyls of  transgenic lines with reduced OBP3 expression are less responsive to red light.  This aberrant phenotype in red light requires functional phyB, suggesting that  OBP3 is a positive regulator of phyB-mediated inhibition of hypocotyl elongation.  Furthermore, these partial-loss-of-function lines have larger cotyledons. This  light-dependent cotyledon phenotype is most dramatic in blue light and requires  functional cryptochrome 1 (cry1), indicating that OBP3 is a negative regulator of  cry1-mediated cotyledon expansion. These results suggest a model where OBP3 is a  component in both phyB and cry1 signaling pathways, acting as a positive and  negative regulator, respectively. An alternate, though not mutually exclusive,  model places OBP3 as a general inhibitor of tissue expansion with phyB and cry1,  differentially modulating OBP3's role in this response.", '2005 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.027722', 'Neff']

phytochromes: !initiate! signal transduction pathways 
OBP3: !overexpresses in! sob1-D mutant 
OBP3: !localizes to! onion cells 
OBP3: !regulates! hypocotyl elongation 
OBP3: !regulates! cotyledon expansion 
phyB: !modulates! OBP3's role in hypocotyl elongation 
cry1: !modulates! OBP3's role in cotyledon expansion