Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate 3-kinases (IP3K) A, B, and C as well as inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK) catalyze the first step in the formation of the higher phosphorylated inositols InsP5 and InsP6 by metabolizing Ins(1,4,5)P3 to Ins(1,3,4,5)P4. In order to clarify the special role of these InsP3 phosphorylating enzymes and of subsequent anabolic inositol phosphate reactions, a search was conducted for potent enzyme inhibitors starting with a fully active IP3K-A catalytic domain. Seven polyphenolic compounds could be identified as potent inhibitors with IC50 < 200 nM (IC50 given): ellagic acid (36 nM), gossypol (58 nM), (-)-epicatechin-3-gallate (94 nM), (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG, 120 nM), aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA, 150 nM), hypericin (170 nM), and quercetin (180 nM). All inhibitors displayed a mixed-type inhibition with respect to ATP and a non-competitive inhibition with respect to Ins(1,4,5)P3. Examination of these inhibitors toward IP3K-A, -B, and -C and IPMK from mammals revealed that ATA potently inhibits all kinases while the other inhibitors do not markedly affect IPMK but differentially inhibit IP3K isoforms. We identified chlorogenic acid as a specific IPMK inhibitor whereas the flavonoids myricetin, 3',4',7,8-tetrahydroxyflavone and EGCG inhibit preferentially IP3K-A and IP3K-C. Mutagenesis studies revealed that both the calmodulin binding and the ATP [corrected] binding domain in IP3K are involved in inhibitor binding. Their absence in IPMK and the presence of a unique insertion in IPMK were found to be important for selectivity differences from IP3K. The fact that all identified IP3K and IPMK inhibitors have been reported as antiproliferative agents and that IP3Ks or IPMK often are the best binding targets deserves further investigation concerning their antitumor potential.

IP3K A, B, and C: !catalyze! formation of higher phosphorylated inositols
Ellagic acid: !inhibits! IP3K A
Gossypol: !inhibits! IP3K A
(-)-Epicatechin-3-gallate: !inhibits! IP3K A
(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG): !inhibits! IP3K A
Aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA): !inhibits! IP3K A, B, and C
Hypericin: !inhibits! IP3K A
Quercetin: !inhibits! IP3K A
Chlorogenic acid: !inhibits! IPMK
Myricetin: !inhibits! IP3K A and C
3',4',7,8-Tetrahydroxyflavone: !inhibits! IP3K A and C
EGCG: !inhibits! IP3K A and C