['15665250', 'While membrane transporters mediating ammonium uptake across the plasma membrane  have been well described at the molecular level, little is known about  compartmentation and cellular export of ammonium. (The term ammonium is used to  denote both NH3 and NH4+ and chemical symbols are used when specificity is  required.) We therefore developed a yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)  complementation approach and isolated two Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  genes that conferred tolerance to the toxic ammonium analog methylammonium in  yeast. Both genes, AtTIP2;1 and AtTIP2;3, encode aquaporins of the tonoplast  intrinsic protein subfamily and transported methylammonium or ammonium in yeast  preferentially at high medium pH. AtTIP2;1 expression in Xenopus oocytes  increased 14C-methylammonium accumulation with increasing pH. AtTIP2;1- and  AtTIP2;3-mediated methylammonium detoxification in yeast depended on a functional  vacuole, which was in agreement with the subcellular localization of green  fluorescent protein-fusion proteins on the tonoplast in planta. Transcript levels  of both AtTIPs were influenced by nitrogen supply but did not follow those of the  nitrogen-derepressed ammonium transporter gene AtAMT1;1. Transgenic Arabidopsis  plants overexpressing AtTIP2;1 did not show altered ammonium accumulation in  roots after ammonium supply, although AtTIP2;1 mRNA levels in wild-type plants  were up-regulated under these conditions. This study shows that AtTIP2;1 and  AtTIP2;3 can mediate the extracytosolic transport of methyl-NH2 and NH3 across  the tonoplast membrane and may thus participate in vacuolar ammonium  compartmentation.', '2005 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.051268', 'von']

AtTIP2;1: !mediates transport of! methylammonium/ammonium 
AtTIP2;1: !localizes to! tonoplast 
AtTIP2;3: !mediates transport of! methylammonium/ammonium 
AtTIP2;3: !localizes to! tonoplast 
AtTIP2;1: !influenced by! nitrogen supply 
AtAMT1;1: !transcript levels influenced by! nitrogen supply 
AtTIP2;1: !overexpression in! transgenic Arabidopsis plants 
AtTIP2;1: !did not alter! ammonium accumulation in roots