The existence of mutants at specific steps in a pathway is a valuable tool of functional genomics in an organism. Heterologous integration occurring during transformation with a selectable marker in Chlamydomonas (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) has been used to generate an ordered mutant library. A strain, having a chimeric construct (pNia1::arylsulfatase gene) as a sensor of the Nia1 gene promoter activity, was transformed with a plasmid bearing the paramomycin resistance AphVIII gene to generate insertional mutants defective at regulatory steps of the nitrate assimilation pathway. Twenty-two thousand transformants were obtained and maintained in pools of 96 for further use. The mutant library was screened for the following phenotypes: insensitivity to the negative signal of ammonium, insensitivity to the positive signal of nitrate, overexpression in nitrate, and inability to use nitrate. Analyses of mutants showed that (1) the number or integrated copies of the gene marker is close to 1; (2) the probability of cloning the DNA region at the marker insertion site is high (76%); (3) insertions occur randomly; and (4) integrations at different positions and orientations of the same genomic region appeared in at least three cases. Some of the mutants analyzed were found to be affected at putative new genes related to regulatory functions, such as guanylate cyclase, protein kinase, peptidyl-prolyl isomerase, or DNA binding. The Chlamydomonas mutant library constructed would also be valuable to identify any other gene with a screenable phenotype.

Heterologous integration: !generates! ordered mutant library
pNia1::arylsulfatase gene: !senses! Nia1 gene promoter activity
plasmid bearing AphVIII gene: !transforms! strain
mutant library: !screens for! phenotypes
integrated copies of gene marker: !close to! 1
cloning DNA region: !high probability of! 76%
insertions: !occur randomly! 
guanylate cyclase: !affects! regulatory functions
protein kinase: !affects! regulatory functions
peptidyl-prolyl isomerase: !affects! regulatory functions
DNA binding: !affects! regulatory functions