To function, the catalytic sites of Rubisco (EC 4.1.1.39) need to be activated by the reversible carbamylation of a lysine residue within the sites followed by rapid binding of magnesium. The activation of Rubisco in vivo requires the presence of the regulatory protein Rubisco activase. This enzyme is thought to aid the release of sugar phosphate inhibitors from Rubisco's catalytic sites, thereby influencing carbamylation. In C3 species, Rubisco operates in a low CO2 environment, which is suboptimal for both catalysis and carbamylation. In C4 plants, Rubisco is located in the bundle sheath cells and operates in a high CO2 atmosphere close to saturation. To explore the role of Rubisco activase in C4 photosynthesis, activase levels were reduced in Flaveria bidentis, a C4 dicot, by transformation with an antisense gene directed against the mRNA for Rubisco activase. Four primary transformants with very low activase levels were recovered. These plants and several of their segregating T1 progeny required high CO2 (>1 kPa) for growth. They had very low CO2 assimilation rates at high light and ambient CO2, and only 10% to 15% of Rubisco sites were carbamylated at both ambient and very high CO2. The amount of Rubisco was similar to that of wild-type plants. Experiments with the T1 progeny of these four primary transformants showed that CO2 assimilation rate and Rubisco carbamylation were severely reduced in plants with less than 30% of wild-type levels of activase. We conclude that activase activity is essential for the operation of the C4 photosynthetic pathway.

Rubisco: !activated by! Carbamylation 
Rubisco activase: !aids release of! Sugar phosphate inhibitors 
C3 species: !operates in! Low CO2 environment 
C4 plants: !operates in! High CO2 atmosphere 
Flaveria bidentis: !transformed with! Antisense gene 
Primary transformants: !required! High CO2 for growth 
Primary transformants: !had low! CO2 assimilation rate 
Primary transformants: !had low! Rubisco carbamylation 
T1 progeny: !severely reduced! CO2 assimilation rate 
T1 progeny: !severely reduced! Rubisco carbamylation 
Activase activity: !essential for! C4 photosynthetic pathway