['15673576', 'The higher-plant shoot apical meristem is a dynamic structure continuously  producing cells that become incorporated into new leaves, stems and flowers. The  maintenance of a constant flow of cells through the meristem depends on  coordination of two antagonistic processes: self-renewal of the stem cell  population and initiation of the lateral organs. This coordination is stringently  controlled by gene networks that contain both positive and negative components.  We have previously defined the ULTRAPETALA1 (ULT1) gene as a key negative  regulator of cell accumulation in Arabidopsis shoot and floral meristems, because  mutations in ULT1 cause the enlargement of inflorescence and floral meristems,  the production of supernumerary flowers and floral organs, and a delay in floral  meristem termination. Here, we show that ULT1 negatively regulates the size of  the WUSCHEL (WUS)-expressing organizing center in inflorescence meristems. We  have cloned the ULT1 gene and find that it encodes a small protein containing a  B-box-like motif and a SAND domain, a DNA-binding motif previously reported only  in animal transcription factors. ULT1 and its Arabidopsis paralog ULT2 define a  novel small gene family in plants. ULT1 and ULT2 are expressed coordinately in  embryonic shoot apical meristems, in inflorescence and floral meristems, and in  developing stamens, carpels and ovules. Additionally, ULT1 is expressed in  vegetative meristems and leaf primordia. ULT2 protein can compensate for mutant  ULT1 protein when overexpressed in an ult1 background, indicating that the two  genes may regulate a common set of targets during plant development.  Downregulation of both ULT genes can lead to shoot apical meristem arrest shortly  after germination, revealing a requirement for ULT activity in early development.', '2005 Mar', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.01642', 'Fletcher']

ULT1: !negatively regulates! WUS-expressing organizing center 
ULT1: !encodes! small protein 
ULT1: !expressed in! embryonic shoot apical meristems 
ULT1: !expressed in! inflorescence and floral meristems 
ULT1: !expressed in! developing stamens, carpels and ovules 
ULT1: !expressed in! vegetative meristems and leaf primordia 
ULT1/ULT2: !required for! early development