Protein disulfide isomerases (PDIs) are molecular chaperones that contain thioredoxin (TRX) domains and aid in the formation of proper disulfide bonds during protein folding. To identify plant PDI-like (PDIL) proteins, a genome-wide search of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) was carried out to produce a comprehensive list of 104 genes encoding proteins with TRX domains. Phylogenetic analysis was conducted for these sequences using Bayesian and maximum-likelihood methods. The resulting phylogenetic tree showed that evolutionary relationships of TRX domains alone were correlated with conserved enzymatic activities. From this tree, we identified a set of 22 PDIL proteins that constitute a well-supported clade containing orthologs of known PDIs. Using the Arabidopsis PDIL sequences in iterative BLAST searches of public and proprietary sequence databases, we further identified orthologous sets of 19 PDIL sequences in rice (Oryza sativa) and 22 PDIL sequences in maize (Zea mays), and resolved the PDIL phylogeny into 10 groups. Five groups (I-V) had two TRX domains and showed structural similarities to the PDIL proteins in other higher eukaryotes. The remaining five groups had a single TRX domain. Two of these (quiescin-sulfhydryl oxidase-like and adenosine 5'-phosphosulfate reductase-like) had putative nonisomerase enzymatic activities encoded by an additional domain. Two others (VI and VIII) resembled small single-domain PDIs from Giardia lamblia, a basal eukaryote, and from yeast. Mining of maize expressed sequence tag and RNA-profiling databases indicated that members of all of the single-domain PDIL groups were expressed throughout the plant. The group VI maize PDIL ZmPDIL5-1 accumulated during endoplasmic reticulum stress but was not found within the intracellular membrane fractions and may represent a new member of the molecular chaperone complement in the cell.

Protein disulfide isomerases (PDIs): !aid in! Protein folding 
Arabidopsis: !produces! Comprehensive list of 104 genes 
Phylogenetic analysis: !correlates with! Conserved enzymatic activities 
Arabidopsis PDIL sequences: !identify! Orthologous sets in rice and maize 
10 groups: !contain! TRX domains 
5 groups: !have! Two TRX domains 
5 groups: !have! Single TRX domain 
Maize expressed sequence tag: !indicates! Members of all PDIL groups are expressed 
ZmPDIL5-1: !accumulates during! Endoplasmic reticulum stress