['15695441', "In Arabidopsis thaliana, a number of clock-associated protein factors have been  identified. Among them, TOC1 (TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1) is believed to be a  component of the central oscillator. TOC1 is a member of a small family of  proteins, designated as ARABIDOPSIS PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR, including  PRR1/TOC1, PRR3, PRR5, PRR7 and PRR9. It has not been certain whether or not  other PRR family members are also implicated in clock function per se. To clarify  this problem, here we constructed a double mutant line, which is assumed to have  severe lesions in both the PRR5 and PRR7 genes. Resulting homozygous prr5-11  prr7-11 young seedlings showed a marked phenotype of hyposensitivity to red light  during de-etiolation. In addition, they displayed a phenotype of extremely late  flowering under long-day photoperiod conditions, but not short-day conditions.  The rhythms at the level of transcription of certain clock-controlled genes were  severely perturbed in the double mutant plants when they were released into  continuous light (LL) and darkness (DD). The observed phenotype was best  interpreted as 'arrhythmic in both LL and DD' and/or 'very short period with  markedly reduced amplitude'. Even under the light entrainment (LD) conditions,  the mutant plants showed anomalous diurnal oscillation profiles with altered  amplitude and/or phase with regard to certain clock-controlled genes, including  the clock component CCA1 (CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1) gene. Such events were  observed even under temperature entrainment conditions, suggesting that the  prr5-11 prr7-11 lesions cannot simply be attributed to a defect in the light  signal input pathway. These pleiotropic circadian-associated phenotypes of the  double mutant were very remarkable, as compared with those observed previously  for each single mutant. Taking these results together, we propose for the first  time that PRR5 and PRR7 coordinately (or synergistically) play essential  clock-associated roles close to the central oscillator.", '2005 Apr', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pci061', 'Mizuno']

TOC1: !belongs to! ARABIDOPSIS PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR
PRR5: !interacts with! PRR7
prr5-11 prr7-11: !displays! hyposensitivity to red light
prr5-11 prr7-11: !displays! late flowering
prr5-11 prr7-11: !perturbs! clock-controlled genes
CCA1: !altered in! prr5-11 prr7-11
PRR5: !coordinately plays! essential clock-associated roles