Ethylene biosynthesis in higher plants is regulated developmentally and environmentally. To investigate the regulation of ACC synthase gene expression, the promoters of Arabidopsis ACS genes, AtACS4, AtACS5, and AtACS7, were fused to a GUS reporter gene, and the recombinant transgenes were introduced into Arabidopsis to produce three groups of AtACS::GUS transgenic plants. Histochemic and fluorometric study of these transgenic plants revealed that promoters of AtACS4, AtACS, and AtACS7 are all active in dark-germinated seedlings. AtACS5 has the highest promoter activity in leaves of 2-week-old light-grown seedlings among the three AtACS genes studied. In the mature leaves, AtACS4 and AtACS7 genes are expressed in both veins and areoles, whereas AtACS5 is expressed at a higher level in the areoles and epidermal cells surrounding trichomes. The promoter activities of all these AtACS genes are found in the reproductive organs. AtACS5 and AtACS7 are highly expressed in petals, sepals, carpels, stamens, cauline leaves, inflorescence stems, and siliques, while AtACS4 expression is undetectable in the petals of open flowers. All three AtACS genes are expressed in root tissue. In the 2-week-old light-grown Arabidopsis, the AtACS4 promoter is responsive to the plant hormones IAA, ethylene, and ABA, and to darkness and wounding; the AtACS5 promoter to IAA, ABA, salt, high temperature, and wounding; and the AtACS7 promoter to GA3, ethylene, and ABA, and to darkness and salt. Low-temperature treatment abolishes the darkness-induced AtACS7 gene expression, but not that of AtACS4. Each AtACS gene has a unique expression profile during growth and development. It appears that at any developmental stage or any growth period of Arabidopsis, there is always a member of AtACS multigene family that is actively expressed.

AtACS4: !responds to! IAA, ethylene, ABA, darkness, wounding
AtACS5: !responds to! IAA, ABA, salt, high temperature, wounding
AtACS7: !responds to! GA3, ethylene, ABA, darkness, salt
AtACS4: !repressed by! low temperature
AtACS4: !expressed in! dark-germinated seedlings, leaves, reproductive organs, root tissue
AtACS5: !expressed in! leaves, areoles, epidermal cells, reproductive organs, root tissue
AtACS7: !expressed in! veins, areoles, reproductive organs, root tissue