In order to investigate the mechanisms of maize adaptation to temperate climate, we studied photosynthetic efficiency, as evaluated by means of phiPSII and chloroplast ultrastructure, as well as growth and development of two inbred lines (the chilling-tolerant KW 1074 and the chilling-sensitive CM 109) under laboratory conditions. Plants were grown from seed to the 3rd leaf stage at a suboptimal temperature (14 degrees C/ 12 degrees C) and then the temperature was increased to 24 degrees C/22 degrees C. To verify the results obtained with the two model lines, twelve inbred lines were tested under both laboratory and field conditions. Initial growth at low temperature affected the chloroplast ultrastructure and photosynthetic efficiency, and this was more pronounced in CM 109 than in KW 1074 plants. The differences between the two lines were particularly pronounced in leaf 5. One week after the onset of favourable conditions, mesophyll chloroplast grana in the CM 109 line were small and thylakoids were developed only poorly. Also, thylakoids in bundle sheath chloroplasts were less frequent in CM 109 than in KW 1074. However, two weeks after the temperature increase, the ultrastructure of chloroplasts of the 5th leaf no longer differed distinctly between the two lines. One should note that in both lines, only the 7th and younger leaves reached a chloroplast ultrastructure and phiPSII indistinguishable from those of control plants. In general, the recovery of photosynthetic efficiency followed the development of leaves. It was delayed in the CM 109 more than in the KW 1074 inbred line relative to control plants grown continuously at the optimal temperature. The growth difference of 2-3 days between the two lines persisted even after the growth temperature was elevated. This suggested that the primary factor responsible for the different chilling-sensitivities of the two model lines was leaf development and the differences in development of the photosynthetic apparatus had only a secondary role. The delay in leaf development appeared as early as the stage of the 1st leaf. The same delay was observed when only the shoot apex was cooled. The importance for further recovery of the early stages of morphogenesis was confirmed by a correlation of Laboratory and field data that were obtained using a set of 12 inbred lines. Our results suggest that early stages of shoot morphogenesis determine the duration of the vegetative phase in cool regions, since the delay in growth at a low temperature cannot be compensated for during later growth at a higher temperature.

KW 1074: !tolerates! chilling
CM 109: !sensitive to! chilling
KW 1074: !develops faster than! CM 109
CM 109: !delayed in! leaf development
CM 109: !delayed in! photosynthetic efficiency
Temperature: !affects! chloroplast ultrastructure
Temperature: !influences! photosynthetic efficiency
Morphogenesis: !determines! duration of vegetative phase