['15705060', 'FN3K (fructosamine 3-kinase) is a mammalian enzyme that catalyses the  phosphorylation of fructosamines, which thereby becomes unstable and detaches  from proteins. The homologous mammalian enzyme, FN3K-RP (FN3K-related protein),  does not phosphorylate fructosamines but ribulosamines, which are probably formed  through a spontaneous reaction of amines with ribose 5-phosphate, an intermediate  of the pentose-phosphate pathway and the Calvin cycle. We show in the present  study that spinach leaf extracts display a substantial ribulosamine kinase  activity (approx. 700 times higher than the specific activity of FN3K in  erythrocytes). The ribulosamine kinase was purified approx. 400 times and shown  to phosphorylate ribulose-epsilon-lysine, protein-bound ribulosamines and also,  with higher affinity, erythrulose-epsilon-lysine and protein-bound  erythrulosamines. Evidence is presented for the fact that the third carbon of the  sugar portion is phosphorylated by this enzyme and that this leads to the  formation of unstable compounds decomposing with half-lives of approx. 30 min at  37 degrees C (ribulosamine 3-phosphates) and 5 min at 30 degrees C  (erythrulosamine 3-phosphates). This decomposition results in the formation of a  2-oxo-3-deoxyaldose and inorganic phosphate, with regeneration of the free amino  group. The Arabidopsis thaliana homologue of FN3K/FN3K-RP was overexpressed in  Escherichia coli and shown to have properties similar to those of the enzyme  purified from spinach leaves. These results indicate that the plant FN3K/FN3K-RP  homologue, which appears to be targeted to the chloroplast in many species, is a  ribulosamine/erythrulosamine 3-kinase. This enzyme may participate in a protein  deglycation process removing Amadori products derived from ribose 5-phosphate and  erythrose 4-phosphate, two Calvin cycle intermediates that are potent glycating  agents.', '2005 Jun 15', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BJ20041976', 'van']

FN3K: !catalyses! phosphorylation of fructosamines 
FN3K-RP: !catalyses! phosphorylation of ribulosamines 
Spinach leaf extracts: !display! ribulosamine kinase activity 
Ribulosamine kinase: !phosphorylates! ribulose-epsilon-lysine 
Ribulosamine kinase: !phosphorylates! protein-bound ribulosamines 
Ribulosamine kinase: !phosphorylates! erythrulose-epsilon-lysine 
Ribulosamine kinase: !phosphorylates! protein-bound erythrulosamines 
Ribulosamine 3-phosphates: !decompose! with half-lives of approx. 30 min 
Erythrulosamine 3-phosphates: !decompose! with half-lives of approx. 5 min 
Arabidopsis thaliana homologue of FN3K/FN3K-RP: !overexpressed in! Escherichia coli 
Plant