The seasonal change of free abscisic acid (ABA) and indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) and their relationship with the cambial activity in Eucommia ulmoides trees were investigated by ABA and IAA immunolocalization using primary polyclonal and rhodamine-red fluorescing secondary antibodies, ABA and IAA quantification using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and systematic monitoring of vascular cell layers production. ABA and IAA clearly displayed opposite annual distribution patterns. In the active period (AP), both immunolocalization and HPLC detected an abrupt decrease of ABA, reaching its lowest level in the summer. During dormancy, ABA started increasing in the first quiescence (Q1) (autumn), peaked in the rest (winter), and gradually decreased from the onset of the second quiescence (Q2) (the end of winter). IAA showed a reverse pattern to that of ABA: it sharply increased in AP, but noticeably decreased from the commencement of Q1. Longitudinally, the ABA distribution increased apico-basally, contrasting with IAA. Laterally, most of the ABA was located in mature vascular tissues, whereas the IAA essentially occurred in the cambial region. The concomitant IAA-ABA distribution and seasonal changes in vascular tissues greatly correlated with xylem and phloem cell production, and late wood differentiation and maturation. Interestingly, the application of exogenous ABA to quiescent E. ulmoides branches, in a water-culture system, inhibited external IAA action on cambial activity reactivation. These results suggest that, in E. ulmoides, ABA and IAA might probably interact in the cambial region. The annual cambial activity could be influenced by an IAA:ABA ratio; and ABA might play a key role in vascular cambium dormancy in higher plants. The relationship between hormonal changes and the (particular) annual life cycle of E. ulmoides is also discussed.

ABA: !decreases! in active period
ABA: !increases! in quiescence
IAA: !increases! in active period
IAA: !decreases! in quiescence
ABA: !localizes to! mature vascular tissues
IAA: !localizes to! cambial region
ABA: !represses! IAA action
IAA: !enhances! cambial activity
ABA: !interacts with! IAA