['15714319', 'In the postgenomic era many experiments rely on the availability of transcript  sequence for cloning. As these clones usually originate from cDNA libraries, the  quality of these libraries is crucial. If a good library is generated it is  desirable to use a versatile cloning system suitable for many different kinds of  applications. The cloning systems based on in vitro recombination proves fitting  for this task. However, the use of this method for shuttling entire cDNA  libraries between different vectors has not yet been studied in great detail.  Here we describe the construction of four cDNA libraries from different tissues  of Arabidopsis thaliana, the shuttling of the libraries into expression vectors,  and evaluation of this method as well as its suitability for downstream  applications. Libraries were constructed from seedlings, hormone treated  seedlings, flowers, developing seeds and primary leaves in the "entry vector" of  the Gateway cloning system. After initial characterization of the libraries, they  were shuttled into an expression vector (a yeast two-hybrid prey vector). To  monitor for a size bias generally assumed to be inherent to in vitro  recombination methods, the libraries were characterized before and after the  transfer into the expression vector. However no significant difference could be  detected. The functionality of the in vitro recombination system for the  shuttling of entire libraries was then further tested by protein-protein  interaction screens. The results of the library characterization and of the yeast  two-hybrid screens and their implications for large-scale proteomic approaches  are discussed.', '2005 Jul', 'Funct Integr Genomics', '10.1007/s10142-005-0134-5', 'Heyl']

cDNA library: !crucial for! experiments 
cloning system: !suitable for! applications 
Gateway cloning system: !used to construct! cDNA libraries 
expression vector: !shuttled into! Gateway cloning system 
in vitro recombination: !used to shuttle! cDNA libraries 
library characterization: !monitored for! size bias 
yeast two-hybrid screens: !tested for! protein-protein interaction