Soybean suspension cell cultures were treated by H2O2 or nitric oxide (NO), to assess the mechanism leading to programmed cell death (PCD). Hydrogen peroxide (5 mM) induced PCD. Cells become necrotic at 20 mM H2O2, with cells exhibiting intermediate hallmarks before that (necrapoptotic cells). The level of ATP and of glucose-6-phosphate remained constant in cells undergoing PCD, while it decreased significantly in the necrotic ones. Mitochondria, isolated from 5 mM H2O2-treated (apoptotic) cells, showed that succinate-dependent oxygen consumption was slightly uncoupled, and the electrical potential difference (delta psi) weakly decreased. The addition of KCl to the delta psi formed determined a partial dissipation, which was higher than the dissipation observed in mitochondria from control cells. The addition of cyclosporin A (CsA) to de-energized mitochondria also induced delta psi formation, due to a K+ efflux from the matrix, which was decreased in mitochondria from treated cells. The same pattern of response was also observed in mitochondria isolated from 1 mM sodium nitroprusside (NO)-treated cells, exhibiting apoptotic symptoms. In mitochondria isolated from 20 mM H2O2-treated (necrotic) cells, succinate-dependent oxygen consumption was completely uncoupled, delta psi generation significantly inhibited, and CsA-dependent delta psi formation prevented. In addition, mitochondria isolated from control cells still underwent swelling, which was partially or completely prevented in mitochondria isolated from apoptotic or necrotic cells, respectively. The moderate swelling was accompanied by a slight rupture of the outer membrane and by a release of cytochrome c. These results point to the involvement of a K(+)ATP channel during the manifestation of PCD induced by H2O2 or NO in plants.

H2O2: !induces! PCD
NO: !induces! PCD
ATP: !remains constant! in cells undergoing PCD
glucose-6-phosphate: !remains constant! in cells undergoing PCD
succinate-dependent oxygen consumption: !slightly uncoupled! in mitochondria from 5 mM H2O2-treated cells
delta psi: !weakly decreased! in mitochondria from 5 mM H2O2-treated cells
KCl: !determines! partial dissipation of delta psi
CsA: !induces! delta psi formation
NO: !exhibits! apoptotic symptoms
succinate-dependent oxygen consumption: !completely uncoupled! in mitochondria from 20 mM H2O2-treated cells
delta psi generation: !significantly inhibited! in mitochondria from 20 mM H2O2-treated cells
CsA-dependent delta psi formation: !prevented! in mitochondria from 20 mM H2O2-treated cells
swelling: !partially or completely prevented! in mitochondria isolated from apoptotic or necrotic cells, respectively
cytochrome c: !released