A negative correlation was observed between the aggressiveness of several Erwinia chrysanthemi strains on potato tuber and their osmotic tolerance. The disruption of the ousA gene encoding the major osmoprotectant uptake system highly enhanced bacterial virulence on potato tubers. The ousA disruption also increased the maceration efficiency on potato tubers under anaerobic conditions. In the absence of oxygen, pectate lyase (Pel) production was significantly higher in the tissue macerated with the ousA- strain than with the wild type. Oxygen content is significantly different between infected and healthy tissues; therefore, ousA may be a contributory factor in the infection progression within the host. In minimal medium, ousA disruption enhanced Pel production and pelE expression only under micro-aerobiosis conditions. The effect on Pel was reversed by reintroduction of the ousA gene. The osmoprotectectants glycine betaine, proline betaine, and pipecolic acid are known to be taken up via OusA and to have an inhibitory effect on Pel production. However, their effects on Pel activity were not (glycine betaine) or only weakly (proline and pipecolic acid) affected by ousA disruption. Furthermore, no correlation was observed between their effects on Pel activities and their osmoprotection efficacies. The results demonstrate a relationship between E. chrysanthemi pathogenicity factors and the activity of ousA under low oxygen status. The evidence indicates that ousA and osmoprotectant effects on Pel are not linked to osmoregulation and that complex regulations exist between Pel production, ousA, and osmoprotection via compounds liberated during the plant infection.

ousA: !enhances! virulence 
ousA: !increases! maceration efficiency 
ousA: !enhances! Pel production 
ousA: !reversed by! reintroduction of gene 
glycine betaine: !inhibitory effect on! Pel production 
proline betaine: !weakly affected by! ousA disruption 
pipecolic acid: !weakly affected by! ousA disruption 
ousA: !not linked to! osmoregulation