['15722468', 'Plastids of nongreen tissues can import carbon in the form of glucose 6-phosphate  via the glucose 6-phosphate/phosphate translocator (GPT). The Arabidopsis  thaliana genome contains two homologous GPT genes, AtGPT1 and AtGPT2. Both  proteins show glucose 6-phosphate translocator activity after reconstitution in  liposomes, and each of them can rescue the low-starch leaf phenotype of the pgi1  mutant (which lacks plastid phosphoglucoisomerase), indicating that the two  proteins are also functional in planta. AtGPT1 transcripts are ubiquitously  expressed during plant development, with highest expression in stamens, whereas  AtGPT2 expression is restricted to a few tissues, including senescing leaves.  Disruption of GPT2 has no obvious effect on growth and development under  greenhouse conditions, whereas the mutations gpt1-1 and gpt1-2 are lethal. In  both gpt1 lines, distorted segregation ratios, reduced efficiency of transmission  in males and females, and inability to complete pollen and ovule development were  observed, indicating profound defects in gametogenesis. Embryo sac development is  arrested in the gpt1 mutants at a stage before the fusion of the polar nuclei.  Mutant pollen development is associated with reduced formation of lipid bodies  and small vesicles and the disappearance of dispersed vacuoles, which results in  disintegration of the pollen structure. Taken together, our results indicate that  GPT1-mediated import of glucose 6-phosphate into nongreen plastids is crucial for  gametophyte development. We suggest that loss of GPT1 function results in  disruption of the oxidative pentose phosphate cycle, which in turn affects fatty  acid biosynthesis.', '2005 Mar', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.029124', 'Schneider']

AtGPT1: !ubiquitously expressed! during plant development 
AtGPT2: !restricted to! a few tissues 
gpt1-1: !lethal! mutation 
gpt1-2: !lethal! mutation 
GPT1: !crucial for! gametophyte development 
GPT1: !affects! fatty acid biosynthesis