Plant viruses elicit the expression of common sets of genes in susceptible hosts. Studies in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) indicate that at least one-third of the genes induced in common by viruses have been previously associated with plant defense and stress responses. The genetic and molecular requirements for the induction of these stress and defense-related genes during compatible host-virus interactions were investigated with a panel of Arabidopsis mutant and transgenic plants defective in one or more defense signaling pathways. pad4, eds5, NahG, npr1, jar1, ein2, sid2, eds1, and wild-type Columbia-0 and Wassilewskija-2 plants were infected with two different viruses, cucumber mosaic virus and oilseed rape mosaic virus. Gene expression was assayed by a high-throughput fiber-optic bead array consisting of 388 genes and by RNA gel blots. These analyses demonstrated that, in compatible host-virus interactions, the expression of the majority of defense-related genes is induced by a salicylic acid-dependent, NPR1-independent signaling pathway with a few notable exceptions that did require NPR1. Interestingly, none of the mutant or transgenic plants showed enhanced susceptibility to either cucumber mosaic virus or oilseed rape mosaic virus based on both symptoms and virus accumulation. This observation is in contrast to the enhanced disease susceptibility phenotypes that these mutations or transgenes confer to some bacterial and fungal pathogens. These experimental results suggest that expression of many defense-related genes in compatible host plants might share components of signaling pathways involved in incompatible host-pathogen interactions, but their increased expression has no negative effect on viral infection.

Plant viruses: !elicit expression of! common sets of genes
Arabidopsis/tomato: !indicate! at least one-third of genes induced in common by viruses associated with defense/stress responses
Salicylic acid/NPR1-independent signaling pathway: !induces expression of! majority of defense-related genes
Mutant/transgenic plants: !show no enhanced susceptibility to! cucumber mosaic virus/oilseed rape mosaic virus