['15722464', 'Plants treated with the nonprotein amino acid beta-aminobutyric acid (BABA)  develop an enhanced capacity to resist biotic and abiotic stresses. This  BABA-induced resistance (BABA-IR) is associated with an augmented capacity to  express basal defense responses, a phenomenon known as priming. Based on the  observation that high amounts of BABA induce sterility in Arabidopsis thaliana, a  mutagenesis screen was performed to select mutants impaired in BABA-induced  sterility (ibs). Here, we report the isolation and subsequent characterization of  three T-DNA-tagged ibs mutants. Mutant ibs1 is affected in a cyclin-dependent  kinase-like protein, and ibs2 is defective in AtSAC1b encoding a  polyphosphoinositide phosphatase. Mutant ibs3 is affected in the regulation of  the ABA1 gene encoding the abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthetic enzyme zeaxanthin  epoxidase. To elucidate the function of the three IBS genes in plant resistance,  the mutants were tested for BABA-IR against the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae pv  tomato, the oomycete Hyaloperonospora parasitica, and BABA-induced tolerance to  salt. All three ibs mutants were compromised in BABA-IR against H. parasitica,  although to a different extent. Whereas ibs1 was reduced in priming for  salicylate (SA)-dependent trailing necrosis, mutants ibs2 and ibs3 were affected  in the priming for callose deposition. Only ibs1 failed to express BABA-IR  against P. syringae, which coincided with a defect in priming for SA-inducible  PR-1 gene expression. By contrast, ibs2 and ibs3 showed reduced BABA-induced  tolerance to salt, which correlated with an affected priming for ABA-inducible  gene expression. For all three ibs alleles, the defects in BABA-induced sterility  and BABA-induced protection against P. syringae, H. parasitica, and salt could be  confirmed in independent mutants. The data presented here introduce three novel  regulatory genes involved in priming for different defense responses.', '2005 Mar', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.029728', 'Mauch-Mani']

BABA-IR: !associated with! priming
ibs1: !affected in! cyclin-dependent kinase-like protein
ibs2: !defective in! AtSAC1b
ibs3: !affected in! regulation of ABA1 gene
ibs1: !failed to express! BABA-IR against P. syringae
ibs2, ibs3: !reduced! BABA-induced tolerance to salt
ibs mutants: !compromised in! BABA-IR against H. parasitica