Plants have evolved adaptation mechanisms to sense oxygen deficiency in their environments and make coordinated physiological and structural adjustments to enhance their hypoxic tolerance. To gain insight into how plants respond to low-oxygen stress, gene expression profiling using whole-genome DNA amplicon microarrays was carried out at seven time points over 24 h, in wild-type and transgenic P(SAG12):ipt Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Transcript levels of genes involved in glycolysis and fermentation pathways, ethylene synthesis and perception, calcium signaling, nitrogen utilization, trehalose metabolism, and alkaloid synthesis were significantly altered in response to oxygen limitation. Analysis based on gene ontology assignments suggested a significant down-regulation of genes whose functions are associated with cell walls, nucleosome structures, water channels, and ion transporters and a significant up-regulation of genes involved in transcriptional regulation, protein kinase activity, and auxin responses under conditions of oxygen shortage. Promoter analysis on a cluster of up-regulated genes revealed a significant overrepresentation of the AtMYB2-binding motif (GT motif), a sugar response element-like motif, and a G-box-related sequence, and also identified several putative anaerobic response elements. Finally, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reactions using 29 selected genes independently verified the microarray results. This study represents one of the most comprehensive analyses conducted to date investigating hypoxia-responsive transcriptional networks in plants.

Gene: !affects! Glycolysis and fermentation pathways
Gene: !affects! Ethylene synthesis and perception
Gene: !affects! Calcium signaling
Gene: !affects! Nitrogen utilization
Gene: !affects! Trehalose metabolism
Gene: !affects! Alkaloid synthesis
Gene: !down-regulates! Cell walls
Gene: !down-regulates! Nucleosome structures
Gene: !down-regulates! Water channels
Gene: !down-regulates! Ion transporters
Gene: !up-regulates! Transcriptional regulation
Gene: !up-regulates! Protein kinase activity
Gene: !up-regulates! Auxin responses
Gene: !binds to! AtMYB2-binding motif
Gene: !binds to! Sugar response element-like motif
Gene: !binds to! G-box-related sequence
Gene: !contains! Putative anaerobic response elements