Vernalization is required to induce flowering in cabbage (Brassica oleracea var Capitata L.). Since FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) was identified as a major repressor of flowering in the vernalization pathway in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), two homologs of AtFLC, BoFLC3-2 and BoFLC4-1, were isolated from cabbage to investigate the molecular mechanism of vernalization in cabbage flowering. In addition to the sequence homology, the genomic organization of cabbage FLC is similar to that of AtFLC, except that BoFLC has a relatively smaller intron 1 compared to that of AtFLC. A vernalization-mediated decrease in FLC transcript level was correlated with an increase in FT transcript level in the apex of cabbage. This observation is in agreement with the down-regulation of FT by FLC in Arabidopsis. Yet, unlike that in Arabidopsis, the accumulation of cabbage FLC transcript decreased after cold treatment of leafy plants but not imbibed seeds, which is consistent with the promotion of cabbage flowering by vernalizing adult plants rather than seeds. To further dissect the different regulation of FLC expression between seed-vernalization-responsive species (e.g. Arabidopsis) and plant-vernalization-responsive species (e.g. cabbage), the pBoFLC4-1BoFLC4-1GUS construct was introduced into Arabidopsis to examine its vernalization response. Down-regulation of the BoFLC4-1GUS construct by seed vernalization was unstable and incomplete; in addition, the expression of BoFLC4-1GUS was not suppressed by vernalization of transgenic rosette-stage Arabidopsis plants. We propose a hypothesis to illustrate the distinct mechanism by which vernalization regulates the expression of FLC in cabbage and Arabidopsis.

FLC: !represses! FT 
BoFLC3-2/BoFLC4-1: !homologous to! AtFLC 
BoFLC: !smaller intron 1 than! AtFLC 
Vernalization: !decreases! FLC transcript level 
FT: !increased by! FLC down-regulation 
Vernalizing adult plants: !promotes! cabbage flowering 
BoFLC4-1GUS: !down-regulated by! seed vernalization 
BoFLC4-1GUS: !not suppressed by! vernalization of transgenic rosette-stage Arabidopsis plants