Autosporulation is a common mode of propagation for unicellular algae. Autospore-forming species of Chlorellaceae, Chlorella vulgaris Beijerinck, C. sorokiniana Shihira et Krauss, C. lobophora Andreyeva, and Parachlorella kessleri (Fott et Nováková) Krienitz et al. have glucosamine as the main constituent of their rigid cell wall. Recent phylogenetic analyses have showed that the Chlorellaceae divided into two sister groups: the Chlorella-clade and the Parachlorella-clade. We compared the cell wall structure and synthesis of the daughter cell wall in the four species by electron microscopy using rapid freezing and freeze substitution methods. The cell wall of C. vulgaris, C. sorokiniana, and C. lobophora consisted of an electron-dense thin layer with an average thickness of 17-20, 22, and 19 nm, respectively. In these three species, daughter cell wall synthesis occurred on the outer surface of the plasma membrane in the early cell-growth phase. The cell wall of P. kessleri, however, was electron-transparent and 54-59 nm in thickness. Ruthenium red staining of P. kessleri indicated that ruthenium-red-specific polysaccharides accumulated over the outer surface of the plasma membrane. Immunoelectron microscopic observation with an anti-beta-1, 3-glucan antibody and staining with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) indicated that the cell wall contained beta-1, 3-glucan and WGA specific N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosamine. In P. kessleri, daughter cell wall synthesis began after successive protoplast division. The daughter cell wall synthesis during autosporulation in the four species of Chlorellaceae can be classified into two types-the early and the late types.

Chlorellaceae: !divides into! two sister groups
C. vulgaris, C. sorokiniana, C. lobophora: !have! electron-dense thin layer
P. kessleri: !has! electron-transparent layer
C. vulgaris, C. sorokiniana, C. lobophora: !synthesize! daughter cell wall on outer surface of plasma membrane
P. kessleri: !synthesizes! daughter cell wall after successive protoplast division
Chlorellaceae: !classified into! two types-early and late