['15743448', 'Vacuolar compartments associated with leaf senescence and the subcellular  localization of the senescence-specific cysteine-protease SAG12  (senescence-associated gene 12) were studied using specific fluorescent markers,  the expression of reporter genes, and the analysis of high-pressure  frozen/freeze-substituted samples. Senescence-associated vacuoles (SAVs) with  intense proteolytic activity develop in the peripheral cytoplasm of mesophyll and  guard cells in Arabidopsis and soybean. The vacuolar identity of these  compartments was confirmed by immunolabeling with specific antibody markers. SAVs  and the central vacuole differ in their acidity and tonoplast composition: SAVs  are more acidic than the central vacuole and, whereas the tonoplast of central  vacuoles is highly enriched in gamma-TIP (tonoplast intrinsic protein), the  tonoplast of SAVs lacks this aquaporin. The expression of a SAG12-GFP fusion  protein in transgenic Arabidopsis plants shows that SAG12 localizes to SAVs. The  analysis of Pro(SAG12):GUS transgenic plants indicates that SAG12 expression in  senescing leaves is restricted to SAV-containing cells, for example, mesophyll  and guard cells. A homozygous sag12 Arabidopsis mutant develops SAVs and does not  show any visually detectable phenotypical alteration during senescence,  indicating that SAG12 is not required either for SAV formation or for progression  of visual symptoms of senescence. The presence of two types of vacuoles in  senescing leaves could provide different lytic compartments for the dismantling  of specific cellular components. The possible origin and functions of SAVs during  leaf senescence are discussed.', '2005 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02346.x', 'Guiamet']

SAV: !develops in! mesophyll and guard cells 
SAV: !differs from! central vacuole 
SAG12: !localizes to! SAVs 
SAG12: !expressed in! senescing leaves 
SAG12: !not required for! SAV formation 
SAV: !provides different lytic compartments for! dismantling of cellular components