The mechanism by which plasma membrane proteins are transported to vacuoles for degradation has not been well characterized in plants. To clarify how plasma membrane proteins are degraded, we monitored the endocytotic pathway in tobacco suspension-cultured BY-2 cells with a fluorescent endocytosis marker, FM4-64. Because of the efficient and rapid delivery of endosomes to the vacuoles, endosomes were scarcely detectable. Interestingly, we found that E-64d, an inhibitor of papain family proteases, caused the accumulation of a large number of endosomes in the cells under the sucrose-starved condition. This result indicates that E-64d attenuates the fusion of endosomes with vacuoles. We identified two papain homologues, which are localized in the endosomes, with a biotinylated inhibitor. We designated them as endosome-localized papains (ENPs). Immunofluorescent analysis revealed that vacuolar sorting receptor, a marker of prevacuolar compartment (PVC), was localized in the endosomes. This result and their acidic nature show that the endosomes correspond to PVC. These results suggest that ENPs facilitate the final step in the vacuolar trafficking pathway under the sucrose-starved condition. We further examined the effects of E-64d on two transgenic Arabidopsis plants that constitutively express a fusion protein composed of green fluorescent protein (GFP) and a plasma membrane protein (GFP-PIP2a or GFP-LTI6b). GFP fluorescence was observed on the plasma membrane of root cells in these transgenic plants. Treatment with E-64d induced the accumulation of GFP-fluorescent endosomes and inhibited the degradation of these fusion proteins. No GFP fluorescence was observed in vacuoles in E-64d-treated transgenic plants. Taken together, these results suggest that endosomal proteases are required for the fusion of endosomes with vacuoles at the final step in the endocytotic pathway for degradation of plasma membrane proteins in plants.

FM4-64: !monitors! Endocytotic pathway
E-64d: !inhibits! Fusion of endosomes with vacuoles
ENPs: !localize to! Endosomes
Vacuolar sorting receptor: !localizes to! Prevacuolar compartment
GFP-PIP2a/GFP-LTI6b: !accumulate! GFP-fluorescent endosomes
E-64d: !inhibits! Degradation of fusion proteins