['15743447', 'The aim of this work was to evaluate the function of isoamylase in starch granule  biosynthesis in Arabidopsis leaves. A reverse-genetic approach was used to  knockout AtISA1, one of three genes in Arabidopsis encoding isoamylase-type  debranching enzymes. The mutant (Atisa1-1) lacks functional AtISA1 transcript and  the major isoamylase activity (detected by native gels) in crude extracts of  leaves. The same activity is abolished by mutation at the DBE1 locus, which  encodes a second isoamylase-type protein, AtISA2. This is consistent with the  idea that ISA1 and ISA2 proteins are subunits of the same enzyme in vivo.  Atisa1-1, Atisa2-1 (dbe1), and the Atisa1-1/Atisa2-1 double mutant all have  identical phenotypes. Starch content is reduced compared with the wild type but  substantial quantities of the soluble glucan phytoglycogen are produced. The  amylopectin of the remaining starch and the phytoglycogen in the mutants are  structurally related to each other and differ from wild-type amylopectin.  Electron micrographs reveal that the phytoglycogen-accumulating phenotype is  highly tissue-specific. Phytoglycogen accumulates primarily in the plastids of  the palisade and spongy mesophyll cells. Remarkably, other cell types appear to  accumulate only starch, which is normal in appearance but is altered in  structure. As phytoglycogen accumulates during the day, its rate of accumulation  decreases, its structure changes and intermediates of glucan breakdown  accumulate, suggesting that degradation occurs simultaneously with synthesis. We  conclude that the AtISA1/AtISA2 isoamylase influences glucan branching pattern,  but that this may not be the primary determinant of partitioning between  crystalline starch and soluble phytoglycogen.', '2005 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02348.x', 'Zeeman']

AtISA1: !encodes! isoamylase-type debranching enzymes 
AtISA2: !encodes! isoamylase-type proteins 
AtISA1/AtISA2: !influences! glucan branching pattern 
Atisa1-1: !lacks! functional AtISA1 transcript 
Atisa2-1 (dbe1): !abolishes! major isoamylase activity 
Atisa1-1/Atisa2-1 double mutant: !has identical phenotypes! 
Starch content: !reduced! in mutants 
Phytoglycogen: !accumulates! in plastids of palisade and spongy mesophyll cells 
Phytoglycogen: !degrades! simultaneously with synthesis