['15767265', 'In Arabidopsis thaliana, a number of clock-associated protein components have  been identified. Among them, CCA1 (CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1)/LHY (LATE  ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL) and TOC1 (TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1) are believed to be the  essential components of the central oscillator. CCA1 and LHY are homologous and  partially redundant Myb-related DNA-binding proteins, whereas TOC1 is a member of  a small family of proteins, designated as PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR. It is also  believed that these two different types of clock components form an  autoregulatory positive/negative feedback loop at the levels of  transcription/translation that generates intrinsic rhythms. Nonetheless, it was  not yet certain whether or not other PRR family members (PRR9, PRR7, PRR5 and  PRR3) are implicated in clock function per se. Employing a set of prr9, prr7 and  prr5 mutant alleles, here we established all possible single, double and triple  prr mutants. They were examined extensively by comparing them with each other  with regard to their phenotypes of circadian rhythms, photoperiodicity-dependent  control of flowering time and photomorphogenic responses to red light during  de-etiolation. Notably, the prr9 prr7 prr5 triple lesions in plants resulted in  severe phenotypes: (i) arrhythmia in the continuous light conditions, and an  anomalous phasing of diurnal oscillation of certain circadian-controlled genes  even in the entrained light/dark cycle conditions; (ii) late flowering that was  no longer sensitive to the photoperiodicity; and (iii) hyposensitivity (or blind)  to red light in the photomorphogenic responses. The phenotypes of the single and  double mutants were also characterized extensively, showing that they exhibited  circadian-associated phenotypes characteristic for each. These results are  discussed from the viewpoint that PRR9/PRR7/PRR5 together act as  period-controlling factors, and they play overlapping and distinctive roles close  to (or within) the central oscillator in which the relative, PRR1/TOC1, plays an  essential role.', '2005 May', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pci086', 'Mizuno']

CCA1/LHY: !form! autoregulatory positive/negative feedback loop 
PRR9/PRR7/PRR5: !act as! period-controlling factors 
PRR9/PRR7/PRR5: !play overlapping and distinctive roles! close to central oscillator 
PRR1/TOC1: !plays essential role! in central oscillator