NADPH:protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (POR) A is a key enzyme of chlorophyll biosynthesis in angiosperms. It is nucleus-encoded, synthesized as a larger precursor in the cytosol and imported into the plastids in a substrate-dependent manner. Plastid envelope membrane proteins, called protochlorophyllide-dependent translocon proteins, Ptcs, have been identified that interact with pPORA during import. Among them are a 16-kDa ortholog of the previously characterized outer envelope protein Oep16 (named Ptc16) and a 33-kDa protein (Ptc33) related to the GTP-binding proteins Toc33 and Toc34 of Arabidopsis. In the present work, we studied the interactions and roles of Ptc16 and Ptc33 during pPORA import. Radiolabeled Ptc16/Oep16 was synthesized from a corresponding cDNA and imported into isolated Arabidopsis plastids. Crosslinking experiments revealed that import of 35S-Oep16/Ptc16 is stimulated by GTP. 35S-Oep16/Ptc16 forms larger complexes with Toc33 but not Toc34. Plastids of the ppi1 mutant of Arabidopsis lacking Toc33, were unable to import pPORA in darkness but imported the small subunit precursor of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (pSSU), precursor ferredoxin (pFd) as well as pPORB which is a close relative of pPORA. In white light, partial suppressions of pSSU, pFd and pPORB import were observed. Our results unveil a hitherto unrecognized role of Toc33 in pPORA import and suggest photooxidative membrane damage, induced by excess Pchlide accumulating in ppi1 chloroplasts because of the lack of pPORA import, to be the cause of the general drop of protein import.

NADPH:protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (POR) A !affects! chlorophyll biosynthesis 
Plastid envelope membrane proteins !interact with! pPORA 
16-kDa ortholog of Oep16 !forms larger complexes with! Toc33 
ppi1 mutant !lacks! Toc33 
Toc33 !unveils role in! pPORA import 
pSSU, pFd and pPORB import !partially suppressed in! white light 
Photooxidative membrane damage !caused by! excess Pchlide