Copper delivery to the thylakoid lumen protein plastocyanin and the stromal enzyme Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase in chloroplasts is required for photosynthesis and oxidative stress protection. The copper delivery system in chloroplasts was characterized by analyzing the function of copper transporter genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. Two mutant alleles were identified of a previously uncharacterized gene, PAA2 (for P-type ATPase of Arabidopsis), which is required for efficient photosynthetic electron transport. PAA2 encodes a copper-transporting P-type ATPase with sequence similarity to PAA1, which functions in copper transport in chloroplasts. Both proteins localized to the chloroplast, as indicated by fusions to green fluorescent protein. The PAA1 fusions were found in the chloroplast periphery, whereas PAA2 fusions were localized in thylakoid membranes. The phenotypes of paa1 and paa2 mutants indicated that the two transporters have distinct functions: whereas both transporters are required for copper delivery to plastocyanin, copper delivery to the stroma is inhibited only in paa1 but not in paa2. The effects of paa1 and paa2 on superoxide dismutase isoform expression levels suggest that stromal copper levels regulate expression of the nuclear genes IRON SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE1 and COPPER/ZINC SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE2. A paa1 paa2 double mutant was seedling-lethal, underscoring the importance of copper to photosynthesis. We propose that PAA1 and PAA2 function sequentially in copper transport over the envelope and thylakoid membrane, respectively.

PAA1: !transports copper to! chloroplast periphery 
PAA2: !transports copper to! thylakoid membranes 
PAA1: !regulates expression of! IRON SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE1 
PAA1: !regulates expression of! COPPER/ZINC SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE2 
PAA1: !required for! efficient photosynthetic electron transport 
PAA2: !required for! copper delivery to plastocyanin 
PAA1: !inhibited for! copper delivery to stroma 
PAA1: !sequentially functions with! PAA2 in copper transport