The roots of Epipremnum aureum, though not synthesizing nicotine themselves, take up exogenously fed nicotine as a xenobiotic. The alkaloid is subsequently translocated to the leaves, via the xylem path, where it accumulates in the mesophyll up to levels comparable with nicotine-rich Nicotiana species. The Epipremnum plants accept nicotine only up to a distinct level; saturation is reached after about 10 days. All mature, non-senescent leaves accumulate the same amount of nicotine. By different experimental approaches, unequivocal evidence could be provided that root pressure is the 'translocative force' for nicotine transport in E. aureum. Xylem sap exudates, collected from shoot stumps that were connected to an intact root system immersed in nicotine solution were analyzed for nicotine content. Nicotine uptake from the medium by the root and its subsequent transfer into the xylem of the shoot persisted for more than 10h without measurable decline of the transport rate, provided the nicotine concentrations applied were < or =0.05%. In intact plants, where both components of water transport in the xylem--root pressure and transpirative water flow--are in operation, no surplus transport of nicotine from the roots into the leaves took place beyond the level observed in amputated plants. Under the influence of inhibitors of root respiration, nicotine uptake was halted slowly in case of oxygen deprivation and in case of cyanide, or it stopped very rapidly when CCCP, an uncoupler of mitochondrial ATP formation, was applied to the roots. This threshold of toxicity against the xenobiotic was established by dose effect curves for nicotine sensitivity of the roots for root respiration and by transpiration measurements. Leaves, bearing a heavy 'nicotine load', showed symptoms of senescence only after 3-6 weeks, as indicated by a decline in the chlorophyll content, the chl a/b ratio, and the maximal quantum yield efficiency (Fv/Fm), and by an increase in catalase activity. Our results provide insight into the mechanisms of uptake, transport and storage of nicotine as a xenobiotic.

root: !translocates! nicotine 
xylem: !transports! nicotine 
root pressure: !drives! nicotine transport 
root respiration: !regulates! nicotine uptake 
nicotine: !accumulates in! leaves 
nicotine: !causes! senescence