['15772283', 'Lysophosphatidyl acyltransferase (LPAT) is a pivotal enzyme controlling the  metabolic flow of lysophosphatidic acid into different phosphatidic acids in  diverse tissues. We examined putative LPAT genes in Arabidopsis thaliana and  characterized two related genes that encode the cytoplasmic LPAT. LPAT2 is the  lone gene that encodes the ubiquitous and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-located  LPAT. It could functionally complement a bacterial mutant with defective LPAT.  LPAT2 and 3 synthesized in recombinant bacteria and yeast possessed in vitro  enzyme activity higher on 18:1-CoA than on 16:0-CoA. LPAT2 was expressed  ubiquitously in diverse tissues as revealed by RT-PCR, profiling with massively  parallel signature sequencing, and promoter-driven beta-glucuronidase gene  expression. LPAT2 was colocalized with calreticulin in the ER by  immunofluorescence microscopy and subcellular fractionation. LPAT3 was expressed  predominately but more actively than LPAT2 in pollen. A null allele (lpat2)  having a T-DNA inserted into LPAT2 was identified. The heterozygous mutant  (LPAT2/lpat2) had minimal altered vegetative phenotype but produced shorter  siliques that contained normal seeds and remnants of aborted ovules in a 1:1  ratio. Results from selfing and crossing it with the wild type revealed that  lpat2 caused lethality in the female gametophyte but not the male gametophyte,  which had the redundant LPAT3. LPAT2-cDNA driven by an LPAT2 promoter  functionally complemented lpat2 in transformed heterozygous mutants to produce  the lpat2/lpat2 genotype. LPAT3-cDNA driven by the LPAT2 promoter could rescue  the lpat2 female gametophytes to allow fertilization to occur but not to full  embryo maturation. Two other related genes, putative LPAT4 and 5, were expressed  ubiquitously albeit at low levels in diverse organs. When they were expressed in  bacteria or yeast, the microbial extract did not contain LPAT activity higher  than the endogenous LPAT activity. Whether LPAT4 and 5 encode LPATs remains to be  elucidated.', '2005 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.104.030403', 'Huang']

LPAT2: !synthesizes! LPAT 
LPAT2: !localizes to! ER 
LPAT2: !expressed ubiquitously! diverse tissues 
LPAT2: !colocalized with! calreticulin 
LPAT3: !expressed predominately! pollen 
LPAT3: !redundant for! male gametophyte 
LPAT2-cDNA: !rescues! lpat2 female gametophytes 
LPAT3-cDNA: !allows fertilization! but not full embryo maturation 
LPAT4/5: !expressed ubiquitously! diverse organs 
LPAT4/5: !encode LPATs?! remains to be elucidated