['15807777', 'Eubacterial-type multi-subunit plastid RNA polymerase (PEP) is responsible for  the principal transcription activity in chloroplasts. PEP is composed of  plastid-encoded core subunits and one of multiple nuclear-encoded sigma factors  that confer promoter specificity on PEP. Thus, the replacement of sigma factors  associated with PEP has been assumed to be a major mechanism for the switching of  transcription patterns during chloroplast development. The null mutant (sig6-1)  of plastid sigma factor gene AtSIG6 exhibited a cotyledon-specific pale green  phenotype. Light-dependent chloroplast development was significantly delayed in  the sig6-1 mutant. Genetic complementation of the mutant phenotype by the AtSIG6  cDNA demonstrated that AtSIG6 plays a key role in light-dependent chloroplast  development. Northern and array-based global analyses for plastid transcripts  revealed that the transcript levels of most PEP-dependent genes were greatly  reduced in the sig6-1 mutant, but that the accumulation of nuclear-encoded RNA  polymerase (NEP)-dependent transcripts generally increased. As the PEP alpha  subunit and PEP-dependent trnV accumulated at normal levels in the sig6-1 mutant,  the AtSIG6 knockout mutant probably retained functional PEP, and the  transcriptional defects are likely to have been directly caused by AtSIG6  deficiency. Most of the AtSIG6-dependent genes are preceded by sigma70-type  promoters comprised of conserved -35/-10 elements. Thus, AtSIG6 may act as a  major general sigma factor in chloroplasts during early plant development. On the  other hand, the mutant phenotype was restored in older seedlings. Arabidopsis  probably contains another late general sigma factor, the promoter specificity of  which widely overlaps with that of AtSIG6.', '2005 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02362.x', 'Shiina']

AtSIG6: !plays a key role in! light-dependent chloroplast development 
AtSIG6: !reduces! PEP-dependent gene transcripts 
AtSIG6: !comprises of! conserved -35/-10 elements 
AtSIG6: !overlaps with! late general sigma factor