['15807784', 'The integration of metabolomics and transcriptomics can provide precise  information on gene-to-metabolite networks for identifying the function of  unknown genes unless there has been a post-transcriptional modification. Here, we  report a comprehensive analysis of the metabolome and transcriptome of  Arabidopsis thaliana over-expressing the PAP1 gene encoding an MYB transcription  factor, for the identification of novel gene functions involved in flavonoid  biosynthesis. For metabolome analysis, we performed flavonoid-targeted analysis  by high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and non-targeted  analysis by Fourier-transform ion-cyclotron mass spectrometry with an  ultrahigh-resolution capacity. This combined analysis revealed the specific  accumulation of cyanidin and quercetin derivatives, and identified eight novel  anthocyanins from an array of putative 1800 metabolites in PAP1 over-expressing  plants. The transcriptome analysis of 22,810 genes on a DNA microarray revealed  the induction of 38 genes by ectopic PAP1 over-expression. In addition to  well-known genes involved in anthocyanin production, several genes with  unidentified functions or annotated with putative functions, encoding putative  glycosyltransferase, acyltransferase, glutathione S-transferase, sugar  transporters and transcription factors, were induced by PAP1. Two putative  glycosyltransferase genes (At5g17050 and At4g14090) induced by PAP1 expression  were confirmed to encode flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase and anthocyanin  5-O-glucosyltransferase, respectively, from the enzymatic activity of their  recombinant proteins in vitro and results of the analysis of anthocyanins in the  respective T-DNA-inserted mutants. The functional genomics approach through the  integration of metabolomics and transcriptomics presented here provides an  innovative means of identifying novel gene functions involved in plant  metabolism.', '2005 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02371.x', 'Saito']

PAP1: !over-expresses! flavonoid derivatives 
metabolome: !identifies! 1800 metabolites 
transcriptome: !reveals! 38 genes 
glycosyltransferase: !encodes! flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase 
anthocyanin: !encodes! 5-O-glucosyltransferase 
T-DNA-inserted mutants: !confirms! glycosyltransferase genes 
metabolomics: !integrates with! transcriptomics