['15807788', 'The small GTPase Ran is involved in nucleocytoplasmic transport, spindle  formation, nuclear envelope (NE) formation, and cell-cycle control. In  vertebrates, these functions are controlled by a three-dimensional gradient of  Ran-GTP to Ran-GDP, established by the spatial separation of Ran  GTPase-activating protein (RanGAP) and the Ran guanine nucleotide exchange factor  RCC1. While this spatial separation is established by the NE during interphase,  it is orchestrated during mitosis by association of RCC1 with the chromosomes and  RanGAP with the spindle and kinetochores. SUMOylation of vertebrate RanGAP1 is  required for NE, spindle, and centromere association. Arabidopsis RanGAP1  (AtRanGAP1) lacks the SUMOylated C-terminal domain of vertebrate RanGAP, but  contains a plant-specific N-terminal domain (WPP domain), which is necessary and  sufficient for its targeting to the NE in interphase. Here we show that the human  and plant RanGAP-targeting domains are kingdom specific. AtRanGAP1 has a mitotic  trafficking pattern uniquely different from that of vertebrate RanGAP, which  includes targeting to the outward-growing rim of the cell plate. The WPP domain  is necessary and sufficient for this targeting. Point mutations in conserved  residues of the WPP domain also abolish targeting to the nuclear rim and the cell  plate, suggesting that the same mechanism is involved in both targeting events.  These results indicate that plant and animal RanGAPs undergo different migration  patterns during cell division, which require their kingdom-specific targeting  domains.', '2005 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02368.x', 'Meier']

Ran: !controls! nucleocytoplasmic transport 
RanGAP: !separates! Ran-GTP and Ran-GDP 
RCC1: !associates with! chromosomes 
RanGAP: !associates with! spindle and kinetochores 
SUMOylation: !required for! NE, spindle, and centromere association 
AtRanGAP1: !contains! WPP domain 
WPP domain: !targets! NE in interphase 
WPP domain: !targets! outward-growing rim of cell plate 
Point mutations: !abolish! targeting to nuclear rim and cell plate