['15829601', 'Adventitious rooting is a quantitative genetic trait regulated by both  environmental and endogenous factors. To better understand the physiological and  molecular basis of adventitious rooting, we took advantage of two classes of  Arabidopsis thaliana mutants altered in adventitious root formation: the  superroot mutants, which spontaneously make adventitious roots, and the  argonaute1 (ago1) mutants, which unlike superroot are barely able to form  adventitious roots. The defect in adventitious rooting observed in ago1  correlated with light hypersensitivity and the deregulation of auxin homeostasis  specifically in the apical part of the seedlings. In particular, a clear  reduction in endogenous levels of free indoleacetic acid (IAA) and IAA conjugates  was shown. This was correlated with a downregulation of the expression of several  auxin-inducible GH3 genes in the hypocotyl of the ago1-3 mutant. We also found  that the Auxin Response Factor17 (ARF17) gene, a potential repressor of  auxin-inducible genes, was overexpressed in ago1-3 hypocotyls. The  characterization of an ARF17-overexpressing line showed that it produced fewer  adventitious roots than the wild type and retained a lower expression of GH3  genes. Thus, we suggest that ARF17 negatively regulates adventitious root  formation in ago1 mutants by repressing GH3 genes and therefore perturbing auxin  homeostasis in a light-dependent manner. These results suggest that ARF17 could  be a major regulator of adventitious rooting in Arabidopsis.', '2005 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.031625', 'Bellini']

Adventitious rooting: !regulated by! environmental/endogenous factors 
superroot mutants: !spontaneously make! adventitious roots 
ago1 mutants: !barely able to form! adventitious roots 
light hypersensitivity: !correlated with! deregulation of auxin homeostasis 
free IAA/IAA conjugates: !reduced in! ago1-3 mutant 
GH3 genes: !downregulated in! ago1-3 hypocotyl 
ARF17 gene: !overexpressed in! ago1-3 hypocotyls 
ARF17-overexpressing line: !produces fewer! adventitious roots 
ARF17: !negatively regulates! adventitious root formation 
ARF17: !represses! GH3 genes 
ARF17: !perturbs! auxin homeostasis