['15821880', 'Plants are capable to de novo synthesize the essential amino acids leucine,  isoleucine and valine. Studies in recent years, however, also revealed that  plants have the potential to degrade leucine or may be all of the branched-chain  amino acids. One of the enzymes participating in both biosynthesis and  degradation is the branched-chain aminotransferase, which is in Arabidopsis  thaliana encoded by a small gene family with six transcribed members. We have now  studied the steady state mRNA levels by quantitative RT-PCR and promoter  activities of these genes with promoter::glucuronidase reporter gene constructs  in transgenic plants. The gene encoding the mitochondrial isoenzyme (Atbcat-1) is  expressed in all tissues with predominant transcription in seedlings and leaves.  Surprisingly the plastid located proteins (AtBCAT-2, -3 and -5) are expressed at  rather low levels with only Atbcat-3 transcribed in all tissues. The most likely  cytoplasmic-located AtBCAT-4 and AtBCAT-6 are mainly expressed in tissues  associated with transport function and in meristematic tissues, respectively. A  detailed characterization of the enzyme activity and substrate specificity of the  mitochondrial AtBCAT-1 enzyme revealed the potential of this enzyme to initiate  degradation of all branched-chain amino acids. In addition alpha-aminobutyrate  and alpha-ketobutyrate as well as methionine and alpha-ketomethylthiobutyrate are  identified as substrates. This suggests that AtBCAT-1 and potentially other  members of this protein family may influence methionine levels and may play an  important role in the metabolism of the nonprotein amino acid  alpha-aminobutyrate. The consequences of these substrate specificities for  bioplastic production and methionine homeostasis are discussed.', '2005 Jan', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-004-7533-1', 'Binder']

AtBCAT-1: !synthesizes! essential amino acids 
AtBCAT-1: !degrades! leucine 
AtBCAT-1: !transcribed in! all tissues 
AtBCAT-3: !transcribed in! all tissues 
AtBCAT-4: !expressed in! transport tissues 
AtBCAT-6: !expressed in! meristematic tissues 
AtBCAT-1: !substrates include! alpha-aminobutyrate, alpha-ketobutyrate, methionine, alpha-ketomethylthiobutyrate