We previously identified both self-incompatible and self-compatible plants in a natural population of self-incompatible Petunia axillaris subsp. axillaris, and found that all the self-compatible plants studied carried either SC1- or SC2-haplotype. Genetic crosses showed that SC2 was identical to S17 identified from another natural population of P. axillaris, except that its pollen function was defective, and that the pollen-part mutation in SC2 was tightly linked to the S-locus. Recent identification of the S-locus F-box gene (SLF) as the gene that controls pollen specificity in S-RNase-based self-incompatibility has prompted us to examine the molecular basis of this pollen-part mutation. We cloned and sequenced the S17-allele of SLF of P. axillaris, named PaSLF17, and found that SC2SC2 plants contained extra restriction fragments that hybridized to PaSLF17 in addition to all of those observed in S17S17 plants. Moreover, these additional fragments co-segregated with SC2. We used the SC2-specific restriction fragments as templates to clone an allele of PaSLF by PCR. To determine the identity of this allele, named PaSLFx, primers based on its sequence were used to amplify PaSLF alleles from genomic DNA of 40 S-homozygotes of P. axillaris, S1S1 through S40S40. Sequence comparison revealed that PaSLFx was completely identical with PaSLF19 obtained from S19S19. We conclude that the S-locus of SC2 contained both S17-allele and the duplicated S19-allele of PaSLF. SC2 is the first naturally occurring pollen-part mutation of a solanaceous species that was shown to be associated with duplication of the pollen S. This finding lends support to the proposal, based on studies of irradiation-generated pollen-part mutants of solanaceous species, that duplication, but not deletion, of the pollen S, causes breakdown of pollen function.

SC2: !contains! S17-allele 
SC2: !contains! duplicated S19-allele 
PaSLF17: !hybridizes to! SC2 
PaSLFx: !identical to! PaSLF19 
S-locus: !controls! pollen specificity 
S-locus F-box gene: !synthesizes! SLF 
pollen-part mutation: !associated with! duplication of the pollen S