Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) is known to change its terpenoid metabolism in response to egg deposition by the sawfly Diprion pini (Hymenoptera, Diprionidae). Three days after egg deposition, parts of the pine twig adjacent to the egg-laden one are induced to emit volatiles, which attract egg parasitoids. In this study, we investigated whether egg deposition by this sawfly affects pine photosynthesis. Measurements of photosynthesis were taken from untreated control twigs and from pine twigs adjacent to egg-laden ones (i.e. systemically oviposition-induced twigs) for a period of 3 d starting after egg deposition. The net photosynthetic rate of oviposition-induced pine twigs was lower than that of untreated control twigs, whereas the respiration rate of pine twigs was not affected by egg deposition. CO2 response curves of oviposition-induced twigs tended to be lower than those of controls. The potential rate of electron transport (J(max)) and the maximum rate of Rubisco activity (V(cmax)) were calculated from the data of the CO2 response curves. J(max) of oviposition-induced twigs was significantly lower than that of controls at day 1 after egg deposition, while the difference diminished from day 2 to day 3. A similar pattern was observed for V(cmax). Light response curves of oviposition-induced twigs were significantly lower than those of untreated ones during 3 d of measurements. Stomatal conductance was slightly lowered by egg deposition. When considering photosynthetic activity as a physiological currency to measure costs of induction of plant defense, the effects of insect egg deposition on gas exchange of pine are discussed with respect to known effects of insect feeding on the photosynthesis activity of plants.

Diprion pini: !induces! Pine twig
Pine twig: !lowers! Photosynthetic rate
Photosynthetic rate: !lower in! Oviposition-induced twigs
Oviposition-induced twigs: !lower! Potential rate of electron transport
Potential rate of electron transport: !lower than! Control twigs
Control twigs: !higher! Light response curves