Quantification of the damaging effects of pathogens on diseased plants and inclusion of these damaging functions in crop simulation models is of great importance for a more complete understanding of yield response to diseases. In this study, the effect of Septoria tritici blotch (STB) on net photosynthetic and dark respiration rates of wheat flag leaves was quantified. Bastiaans' model: Y=(1-x)beta was used to characterize the relationship between relative leaf photosynthesis (Y, considering Ynet and Ygross) and STB severity (with x the proportion of the diseased area). The value of beta indicates whether the effect of disease on photosynthesis is larger (beta >1), lower (beta <1), or equal (beta =1) to the proportion of visible diseased area. In the experimental conditions used here, leaf nitrogen content (in a range from 0.18 to 0.24 mg cm(-2)), and leaf number (flag and second leaves) did not significantly influence the effect of STB on leaf gas exchange. By contrast, damage depended strongly on the developmental stages of the STB lesions. STB lesions had no effect on inoculated leaves before visible symptoms appeared. Chlorotic symptoms had less effect on leaf net photosynthetic rate than could be accounted for by the visible diseased area (betanet=0.81). The effect of necrotic lesions on the leaf net photosynthetic capacity was slightly greater than that accounted for by visible symptoms (betanet=1.35). Our results suggest that the effect of the necrotic symptoms on the net photosynthesis expressed by betanet >1 is due to a combination of a decrease in the gross photosynthesis (betagross still >1) and to an increase in the dark respiration rate (betagross<betanet). Finally, it is discussed how the results could improve the prediction of crop loss caused by an STB epidemic in wheat fields.

Septoria tritici blotch: !affects! net photosynthetic and dark respiration rates
STB severity: !influences! effect on photosynthesis
Leaf nitrogen content: !does not affect! STB damage
Leaf number: !does not affect! STB damage
Chlorotic symptoms: !have less effect on! leaf net photosynthetic rate
Necrotic lesions: !have greater effect on! leaf net photosynthetic capacity