Bean plants, Phaseolus vulgaris L. cv. Contender, were grown in the spring and summer seasons to study the relationship between xylem Na+/Cl-, transpiration rate, and salt tolerance. Eight-day-old seedlings were transplanted to 50% modified Hoagland solution with 1 mM NaCl. Four days after transfer, one of two treatments was applied: a control of 1 mM NaCl or a treatment of 25 mM NaCl every two days to reach a final treatment concentration of 75 mM NaCl. Plants were sampled on the fourth day after the final salt concentration was reached, eight days after the salinisation treatment began. Relative growth rate was 2.6-fold greater in summer than in spring. However, while no differences were found between treatments in spring, summer salt-treated plants had growth rates that were 31% lower than those of controls. In summer, CO2 assimilation, stomatal conductance, and transpiration rate of salinised plants declined with respect to controls. Leaf Na+ and trifoliolate leaf Cl- were higher in salt-treated plants in summer, although root Na+ was significantly higher in spring. Moreover, in summer salinity inhibited Ca2+ and K+ uptake and changed its distribution. Summer salt-treated plants had an average of 17-fold higher xylem Na+ during the daily cycle, while xylem Cl-, only in the afternoon, showed higher values (1.5-fold) compared to spring-grown plants. Our results suggest that the faster growth response to salt in summer-grown bean was at least partly due to an increase in xylem Na+ independent of the transpiration rate and possibly related to an increase in xylem Na+ influx or/and Na+ recirculation.

xylem Na+/Cl-: !increases with! Summer season
CO2 assimilation: !decreases with! Salinisation treatment
stomatal conductance: !decreases with! Salinisation treatment
transpiration rate: !decreases with! Salinisation treatment
leaf Na+: !increases with! Salinisation treatment
trifoliolate leaf Cl-: !increases with! Salinisation treatment
root Na+: !increases with! Spring season
Ca2+ uptake: !inhibited by! Salinisation treatment
K+ uptake: !inhibited by! Salinisation treatment
xylem Na+: !increases with! Daily cycle