The effects of inorganic phosphate (Pi) status, light/dark and sucrose on expression of UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (UGPase) gene (Ugp), which is involved in sucrose/ polysaccharides metabolism, were investigated using Arabidopsis wild-type (wt) plants and mutants impaired in Pi and carbohydrate status. Generally, P-deficiency resulted in increased Ugp expression and enhanced UGPase activity and protein content, as found for wt plants grown on P-deficient and complete nutrient solution, as well as for pho1 (P-deficient) mutants. Ugp was highly expressed in darkened leaves of pho1, but not wt plants; daily light exposure enhanced Ugp expression both in wt and pho mutants. The pho1 and pho2 (Pi-accumulating) mutations had little or no effect on leaf contents of glucose and fructose, regardless of light/dark conditions, whereas pho1 plants had much higher levels of sucrose and starch in the dark than pho2 and wt plants. The Ugp was up-regulated when leaves were fed with sucrose in wt plants, but the expression in pho2 background was much less sensitive to sucrose supply than in wt and pho1 plants. Expression of Ugp in pgm1 and sex1 mutants (impaired in starch/sugar content) was not dependent on starch content, and not tightly correlated with soluble sugar status. Okadaic acid (OKA) effectively blocked the P-starvation and sucrose-dependent expression of Ugp in excised leaves, whereas staurosporine (STA) had only a small effect on both processes (especially in -P leaves), suggesting that P-starvation and sucrose effects on Ugp are transmitted by pathways that may share similar components with respect to their (in) sensitivity to OKA and STA. The results of this study suggest that Ugp expression is modulated by an interaction of signals derived from P-deficiency status, sucrose content and dark/light conditions, and that light/sucrose and P-deficiency may have additive effects on Ugp expression.

P-deficiency: !enhances! Ugp expression
light/dark: !affects! Ugp expression
sucrose: !modulates! Ugp expression
P-deficiency: !interacts with! sucrose
OKA: !blocks! P-starvation & sucrose-dependent expression of Ugp
STA: !has small effect on! P-starvation & sucrose-dependent expression of Ugp