Etiolated pea (Pisum sativum L. cv. Alaska) seedlings grown under microgravity conditions in space show automorphosis: bending of epicotyls, inhibition of hook formation and changes in root growth direction. In order to determine the mechanisms of microgravity conditions that induce automorphosis, we used a three-dimensional clinostat and obtained the successful induction of automorphosis-like growth of etiolated pea seedlings. Kinetic studies revealed that epicotyls bent at their basal region towards the clockwise direction far from the cotyledons from the vertical line (0 degrees) at approximately 40 degrees in seedlings grown both at 1 g and in the clinostat within 48 h after watering. Thereafter, epicotyls retained this orientation during growth in the clinostat, whereas those at 1 g changed their growth direction against the gravity vector and exhibited a negative gravitropic response. On the other hand, the plumular hook that had already formed in the embryo axis tended to open continuously by growth at the inner basal portion of the elbow; thus, the plumular hook angle initially increased; this was followed by equal growth on the convex and concave sides at 1 g, resulting in normal hook formation; in contrast, hook formation was inhibited on the clinostat. The automorphosis-like growth and development of etiolated pea seedlings was induced by auxin polar transport inhibitors (9-hydroxyfluorene-9-carboxylic acid, N-(1-naphthyl)phthalamic acid and 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid), but not by anti-auxin (p-chlorophenoxyisobutyric acid) at 1 g. An ethylene biosynthesis inhibitor, 1-aminooxyacetic acid, inhibited hook formation at 1 g, and ethylene production of etiolated seedlings was suppressed on the clinostat. Clinorotation on the clinostat strongly reduced the activity of auxin polar transport of epicotyls in etiolated pea seedlings, similar to that observed in space experiments (Ueda J, Miyamoto K, Yuda T, Hoshino T, Fujii S, Mukai C, Kamigaichi S, Aizawa S, Yoshizaki I, Shimazu T, Fukui K (1999) Growth and development, and auxin polar transport in higher plants under microgravity conditions in space: BRIC-AUX on STS-95 space experiment. J Plant Res 112: 487492). These results suggest that clinorotation on a three-dimensional clinostat is a valuable tool for simulating microgravity conditions, and that automorphosis of etiolated pea seedlings is induced by the inhibition of auxin polar transport and ethylene biosynthesis.

microgravity: !induces! automorphosis
clinorotation: !inhibits! auxin polar transport
clinorotation: !suppresses! ethylene production
auxin polar transport inhibitors: !induce! automorphosis-like growth
anti-auxin: !does not induce! automorphosis-like growth
ethylene biosynthesis inhibitor: !inhibits! hook formation