The mitochondrial DNA of the Nicotiana sylvestris CMSII mutant carries a 72-kb deletion comprising the single copy nad7 gene that encodes the NAD7 subunit of the respiratory complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase). CMSII plants lack rotenone-sensitive complex I activity and are impaired in physiological and phenotypical traits. To check whether these changes directly result from the deletion of nad7, we constructed CMS transgenic plants (termed as CMSnad7) carrying an edited nad7 cDNA fused to the CAMV 35S promoter and to a mitochondrial targeting sequence. The nad7 sequence was transcribed and translated and the NAD7 protein directed to mitochondria in CMSnad7 transgenic plants, which recovered both wild type morphology and growth features. Blue-native/SDS gel electrophoresis and enzymatic assays showed that, whereas fully assembled complex I was absent from CMSII mitochondria, a functional complex was present in CMSnad7 mitochondria. Furthermore, a supercomplex involving complex I and complex III was present in CMSnad7 as in the wild type. Taken together, these data demonstrate that lack of complex I in CMSII was indeed the direct consequence of the absence of nad7. Hence, NAD7 is a key element for complex assembly in plants. These results also show that allotopic expression from the nucleus can fully complement the lack of a mitochondrial-encoded complex I gene.

NAD7: !encodes! NAD7 subunit of respiratory complex I 
CMSII plants: !lack! rotenone-sensitive complex I activity 
CMSnad7 transgenic plants: !carry! edited nad7 cDNA 
NAD7 protein: !directed to! mitochondria 
CMSnad7 transgenic plants: !recovered! wild type morphology and growth features 
CMSII mitochondria: !absent! fully assembled complex I 
CMSnad7 mitochondria: !present! functional complex I 
CMSnad7: !present! supercomplex involving complex I and III 
Lack of complex I in CMSII: !direct consequence! absence of nad7 
NAD7: !key element! for complex assembly in plants 
Allotopic expression from nucleus: !can fully complement! lack of mitochondrial-encoded complex I gene