['15840645', "AtAGP17, AtAGP18 and AtAGP19 are homologous genes encoding three putative  glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored classical arabinogalactan-proteins  (AGPs) in Arabidopsis. They are distinguished from other AGPs by a short,  C-terminal lysine-rich region. Organ-specific expression of these genes was  revealed by Northern blot analysis. AtAGP17 was strongly expressed in leaves and  stems, and weakly expressed in flowers and roots; AtAGP18 was strongly expressed  in flowers, and moderately expressed in roots, stems and young leaves; and  AtAGP19 was strongly expressed in stems, moderately expressed in flowers and  roots, and weakly expressed in young leaves. One of these genes, AtAGP17, was  expressed and purified as a green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion protein in  transgenic tobacco cells using hydrophobic interaction chromatography, size  exclusion chromatography and reverse phase high-performance liquid  chromatography. The fusion (glyco)protein produced a characteristic AGP 'smear'  with a molecular mass of 80-150 kDa when detected by Western blot analysis.  Glycosyl composition and linkage analyses of purified GFP-AtAGP17 showed that  carbohydrate accounted for approximately 86% of the molecule, with arabinose and  galactose as major, and rhamnose and glucuronic acid as minor glycosyl residues  and with 1,3,6-galactose, 1,4-glucuronic acid, 1,3-galactose and terminal  arabinose as major linkages. GFP-AtAGP17 was also precipitated by beta-Yariv  reagent, further confirming that AtAGP17 is a bona fide AGP. Confocal  fluorescence microscopy of plasmolysed, transformed cells indicated that AtAGP17  is localized on the plasma membrane and in Hechtian strands. Hydroxyproline (Hyp)  glycoside profiles of GFP-AtAGP17 in conjunction with the deduced protein  sequence also served to corroborate the Hyp contiguity hypothesis, which predicts  contiguous Hyp residues as attachment sites for arabinosides and clustered,  non-contiguous Hyp residues as attachment sites for arabinogalactan  polysaccharides.", '2005 Jun', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pci106', 'Showalter']

AtAGP17: !expresses in! leaves, stems, flowers, roots 
AtAGP18: !expresses in! flowers, roots, stems, young leaves 
AtAGP19: !expresses in! stems, flowers, roots, young leaves 
GFP-AtAGP17: !purified using! hydrophobic interaction chromatography, size exclusion chromatography, reverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography 
GFP-AtAGP17: !contains! arabinose, galactose, rhamnose, glucuronic acid 
GFP-AtAGP17: !precipitated by! beta-Yariv reagent 
AtAGP17: !localized on! plasma membrane, Hechtian strands 
GFP-AtAGP17: !confirms Hyp contiguity hypothesis!