The substrate specificity of acyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) thioesterases (EC 3.1.2.14) determines the fatty acids available for the biosynthesis of storage and membrane lipids in seeds. In order to determine the mechanisms involved in the biosynthesis of fatty acids in sunflower seeds (Helianthus annuus L.), we isolated, cloned and sequenced a cDNA clone of acyl-ACP thioesterase from developing sunflower seeds, HaFatA1. Through the heterologous expression of HaFatA1 in Escherichia coli we have purified and characterized this enzyme, showing that sunflower HaFatA1 cDNA encodes a functional thioesterase with preference for monounsaturated acyl-ACPs. The HaFatA1 thioesterase was most efficient (kcat/K(m)) in catalyzing oleoyl-ACP, both in vivo and in vitro. By comparing this sequence with those obtained from public databases, we constructed a phylogenetic tree that included FatA and FatB thioesterases, as well as related prokaryotic proteins. The phylogenetic relationships support the endosymbiotic theory of the origin of eukaryotic cells and the suggestion that eubacteria from the delta-subdivision were the guest cells in the symbiosis with archaea. These prokaryotic proteins are more homologous to plant FatB, suggesting that the ancient thioesterases were more similar to FatB. Finally, using the available structure prediction methods, a 3D model of plant acyl-ACP thioesterases is proposed that reflects the combined data from direct mutagenesis and chimera studies. In addition, the model was tested by mutating the residues proposed to interact with the ACP protein in the FatA thioesterase by site-directed mutagenesis. The results indicate that this region is involved in the stabilization of the substrate at the active site.

HaFatA1: !encodes! functional thioesterase 
HaFatA1: !prefers! monounsaturated acyl-ACPs 
FatA/FatB: !more homologous to! plant FatB 
3D model: !proposed for! plant acyl-ACP thioesterases 
mutagenesis: !indicates! region involved in substrate stabilization