We examined pollen cells of Wisteria sinensis and Robinia pseudoacacia (Leguminosae) to determine a possible mode for cytoplasmic inheritance in these species. Epifluorescence microscopy revealed distinct mature generative cells. Mature generative cells of W. sinensis were associated with large numbers of punctuated fluorescent signals corresponding to cytoplasmic DNA aggregates, but no fluorescent signals were observed in the generative cells of R. pseudoacacia. Closer examination showed that the punctate fluorescent signals corresponded to plastid but not mitochondrial DNA. These results suggest a strong potential for paternal transmission of the plastid genome in W. sinensis. Electron microscopy confirmed the presence of plastids in the generative cells of W. sinensis and the absence of plastids in R. pseudoacacia cells due to an unequal distribution of plastids during the first pollen mitosis. Mitochondria were present and intact in the mature generative cells of both species. The lack of fluoresced mitochondrial DNA suggests a very low level of mitochondrial DNA in the cells. Immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated that the labeling of mitochondrial DNA in these cells was reduced by nearly 90% during pollen development. Such a dramatic reduction suggests an active degradation of paternal mitochondrial DNA, which may contribute greatly to the maternal inheritance of mitochondria. In short, we found that W. sinensis exhibits a strong potential for paternal transmission of plastids and that both W. sinensis and R. pseudoacacia appear to share the same mechanism for maternal mitochondrial inheritance.

W. sinensis: !exhibits! paternal transmission of plastids
R. pseudoacacia: !exhibits! maternal mitochondrial inheritance
plastid DNA: !localizes to! W. sinensis generative cells
mitochondrial DNA: !localizes to! both species generative cells
plastid DNA: !synthesizes! punctuated fluorescent signals
mitochondrial DNA: !represses! fluorescence
mitochondrial DNA: !degrades! during pollen development