In tobacco and other Solanaceae species, the tobacco N gene confers resistance to tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), and leads to induction of standard defense and resistance responses. Here, we report the use of N-transgenic tomato to identify a fast-neutron mutant, sun1-1 (suppressor of N), that is defective in N-mediated resistance. Induction of salicylic acid (SA) and expression of pathogenesis-related (PR) genes, each signatures of systemic acquired resistance, are both dramatically suppressed in sun1-1 plants after TMV treatment compared to wild-type plants. Application of exogenous SA restores PR gene expression, indicating that SUN1 acts upstream of SA. Upon challenge with additional pathogens, we found that the sun1-1 mutation impairs resistance mediated by certain resistance (R) genes, (Bs4, I, and Ve), but not others (Mi-1). In addition, sun1-1 plants exhibit enhanced susceptibility to TMV, as well as to virulent pathogens. sun1-1 has been identified as an EDS1 homolog present on chromosome 6 of tomato. The discovery of enhanced susceptibility in the sun1-1 (Le_eds1-1) mutant plant, which contrasts to reports in Nicotiana benthamiana using virus-induced gene silencing, provides evidence that the intersection of R gene-mediated pathways with general resistance pathways is conserved in a Solanaceous species. In tomato, EDS1 is important for mediating resistance to a broad range of pathogens (viral, bacterial, and fungal pathogens), yet shows specificity in the class of R genes that it affects (TIR-NBS-LRR as opposed to CC-NBS-LRR). In addition, a requirement for EDS1 for Ve-mediated resistance in tomato exposes that the receptor-like R gene class may also require EDS1.

N gene: !confers resistance to! TMV 
N-transgenic tomato: !identifies! sun1-1 mutant 
sun1-1 plants: !suppress! SA induction 
sun1-1 plants: !suppress! PR gene expression 
exogenous SA: !restores! PR gene expression 
sun1-1 mutation: !impairs! Bs4, I, and Ve resistance 
sun1-1 mutation: !enhances! TMV and virulent pathogen susceptibility 
EDS1 homolog: !identified on! chromosome 6 of tomato 
EDS1: !mediates resistance to! viral, bacterial, and fungal pathogens 
EDS1: !shows specificity in! TIR-NBS-LRR R genes 
EDS1: !required for! Ve-mediated resistance in tomato