['15854901', 'BACKGROUND: Crossovers are essential for the completion of meiosis. Recently, two  pathways of crossover formation have been identified on the basis of distinct  genetic controls. In one pathway, crossover inhibits the occurrence of another  such event in a distance-dependent manner. This phenomenon is known as  interference. The second kind of crossover is insensitive to interference. The  two pathways function independently in budding yeast. Only  interference-insensitive crossovers occur in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. In  contrast, only interference-sensitive crossovers occur in Caenorabditis elegans.  The situation in mammals and plants remains unclear. Mer3 is one of the genes  shown to be required for the formation of interference-sensitive crossovers in  Saccharomyces cerevisiae. RESULTS: To unravel the crossover status in the plant  Arabidopsis thaliana, we investigated the role of the A. thaliana MER3 gene  through the characterization of a series of allelic mutants. All mer3 mutants  showed low levels of fertility and a significant decrease (about 75%) but not a  total disappearance of meiotic crossovers, with the number of recombination  events initiated in the mutants being similar to that in the wild-type. Genetic  analyses showed that the residual crossovers in mer3 mutants did not display  interference in one set of adjacent intervals. CONCLUSIONS: Mutation in MER3 in  Arabidopsis appeared to be specific to recombination events resulting in  interference-sensitive crossovers. Thus, MER3 function is conserved from yeast to  plants and may exist in other metazoans. Arabidopsis therefore has at least two  pathways for crossover formation, one giving rise to interference-sensitive  crossover and the other to independently distributed crossovers.', '2005 Apr 26', 'Curr Biol', '10.1016/j.cub.2005.02.056', 'Mezard']

Mer3: !affects! Interference-sensitive crossovers 
Mer3: !represses! Interference-insensitive crossovers 
Arabidopsis: !has! Two pathways for crossover formation 
Yeast: !conserves! Mer3 function 
Metazoans: !may have! Mer3 function