Oxalic acid secretion from roots is considered to be an important mechanism for aluminum (Al) resistance in buckwheat (Fygopyrum esculentum Moench). Nonetheless, only a single Al-resistant buckwheat cultivar was used to investigate the significance of oxalic acid in detoxifying Al. In this study, we investigated two buckwheat cultivars, Jiangxi (Al resistant) and Shanxi (Al sensitive), which showed significant variation in their resistance to Al stress. In the presence of 0 to 100 microM Al, the inhibition of root elongation was greater in Shanxi than that in Jiangxi, and the Al content of root apices (0-10 mm) was much lower in Jiangxi. However, the dependence of oxalic acid secretion on external Al concentration and the time course for secretion were similar in both cultivars. Furthermore, the variation in Al-induced oxalic acid efflux along the root was similar, showing a 10-fold greater efflux from the apical 0- to 5-mm region than from the 5- to 10-mm region. These results suggest that both Shanxi and Jiangxi possess an equal capacity for Al-dependent oxalic acid secretion. Another two potential Al resistance mechanisms, i.e. Al-induced alkalinization of rhizosphere pH and root inorganic phosphate release, were also not involved in their differential Al resistance. However, after longer treatments in Al (10 d), the concentrations of phosphorus and Al in the roots of the Al-resistant cultivar Jiangxi were significantly higher than those in Shanxi. Furthermore, more Al was localized in the cell walls of the resistant cultivar. All these results suggest that while Al-dependent oxalic acid secretion might contribute to the overall high resistance to Al stress of buckwheat, this response cannot explain the variation in tolerance between these two cultivars. We present evidence suggesting the greater Al resistance in buckwheat is further related to the immobilization and detoxification of Al by phosphorus in the root tissues.

Jiangxi: !resists! Al
Shanxi: !susceptible to! Al
Jiangxi: !localizes! Al
Jiangxi: !immobilizes! Al
Jiangxi: !detoxifies! Al
Al: !induces! oxalic acid secretion
Al: !induces! alkalinization of rhizosphere pH
Al: !induces! root inorganic phosphate release