['15863698', 'Plant isoprenoids are synthesized via two independent pathways, the cytosolic  mevalonate (MVA) pathway and the plastid nonmevalonate pathway. The Escherichia  coli IspH (LytB) protein is involved in the last step of the nonmevalonate  pathway. We have isolated an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ispH null mutant  that has an albino phenotype and have generated Arabidopsis transgenic lines  showing various albino patterns caused by IspH transgene-induced gene silencing.  The initiation of albino phenotypes rendered by IspH gene silencing can arise  independently from multiple sites of the same plant. After a spontaneous  initiation, the albino phenotype is systemically spread toward younger tissues  along the source-to-sink flow relative to the initiation site. The development of  chloroplasts is severely impaired in the IspH-deficient albino tissues. Instead  of thylakoids, mutant chloroplasts are filled with vesicles. Immunoblot analysis  reveals that Arabidopsis IspH is a chloroplast stromal protein. Expression of  Arabidopsis IspH complements the lethal phenotype of an E. coli ispH mutant. In  2-week-old Arabidopsis seedlings, the expression of 1-deoxy-d-xylulose  5-phosphate synthase (DXS), 1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase  (DXR), IspD, IspE, IspF, and IspG genes is induced by light, whereas the  expression of the IspH gene is constitutive. The addition of 3% sucrose in the  media slightly increased levels of DXS, DXR, IspD, IspE, and IspF mRNA in the  dark. In a 16-h-light/8-h-dark photoperiod, the accumulation of the IspH  transcript oscillates with the highest levels detected in the early light period  (2-6 h) and the late dark period (4-6 h). The expression patterns of DXS and IspG  are similar to that of IspH, indicating that these genes are coordinately  regulated in Arabidopsis when grown in a 16-h-light/8-h-dark photoperiod.', '2005 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.058735', 'Goodman']

IspH: !synthesizes! Plant isoprenoids 
IspH: !localizes to! Chloroplast stroma 
IspH: !enhances! Development of chloroplasts 
IspH: !represses! Albino phenotype 
IspH: !interacts with! DXS, DXR, IspD, IspE, IspF, and IspG genes 
DXS, DXR, IspD, IspE, IspF, and IspG genes: !induce by! Light 
DXS, DXR, IspD, IspE, IspF, and IspG genes: !oscillate with! IspH transcript