An international consortium is sequencing the euchromatic genespace of Medicago truncatula. Extensive bioinformatic and database resources support the marker-anchored bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) sequencing strategy. Existing physical and genetic maps and deep BAC-end sequencing help to guide the sequencing effort, while EST databases provide essential resources for genome annotation as well as transcriptome characterization and microarray design. Finished BAC sequences are joined into overlapping sequence assemblies and undergo an automated annotation process that integrates ab initio predictions with EST, protein, and other recognizable features. Because of the sequencing project's international and collaborative nature, data production, storage, and visualization tools are broadly distributed. This paper describes databases and Web resources for the project, which provide support for physical and genetic maps, genome sequence assembly, gene prediction, and integration of EST data. A central project Web site at medicago.org/genome provides access to genome viewers and other resources project-wide, including an Ensembl implementation at medicago.org, physical map and marker resources at mtgenome.ucdavis.edu, and genome viewers at the University of Oklahoma (www.genome.ou.edu), the Institute for Genomic Research (www.tigr.org), and Munich Information for Protein Sequences Center (mips.gsf.de).

Gene: !affects! Process 
BAC-end sequencing: !guides! Sequencing effort 
EST databases: !provide! Essential resources 
Finished BAC sequences: !joined into! Overlapping sequence assemblies 
Automated annotation process: !integrates! Ab initio predictions 
Data production, storage, visualization tools: !broadly distributed! 
Genome viewers: !accessed at! medicago.org/genome 
Physical map and marker resources: !accessed at! mtgenome.ucdavis.edu 
Genome viewers: !accessed at! University of Oklahoma 
Genome viewers: !accessed at! Institute for Genomic Research 
Genome viewers: !accessed at! Munich Information for Protein Sequences Center