We have isolated PcGA3ox1, a cDNA clone from developing runner bean (Phaseolus coccineus) seeds that shows significant amino acid homology with the gibberellin (GA) 3-oxidases. A recombinant fusion protein of PcGA3ox1 converted GA20 and GA9 to GA1 and GA4, respectively. In situ hybridization results showed that transcripts of this gene accumulate specifically within the suspensor of globular-stage embryos. PcGA3ox1 mRNA begins to accumulate in the epidermal cells of the embryo proper and is also detectable in the endosperm during the transition from globular- to heart-stage embryos. PcGA3ox1 transcripts were localized exclusively in the cotyledons from the early cotyledonary stage up to the cotyledonary stage. Transcripts of the previously cloned GA 2-oxidase (PcGA2ox1) from developing seeds of runner bean were found primarily within the suspensor neck region from the late globular stage up to the heart stage. PcGA2ox1 mRNA was detectable in the whole suspensor from the early cotyledonary stage, and was found in the inner layer of integuments at the cotyledonary stage. Soluble enzyme preparations made from suspensors and embryos at two stages of embryogenesis (the heart and cotyledonary stages) were incubated with [14C]GA20 and [14C]GA1. Only young suspensor preparations converted GA20 to GA1 and GA5. Both suspensor preparations converted GA1 to GA8. Both embryo preparations converted GA20 to GA1, but were unable to convert GA1 to GA8.

PcGA3ox1: !converts! GA20 and GA9 
PcGA3ox1: !accumulates in! suspensor of globular-stage embryos 
PcGA3ox1: !accumulates in! epidermal cells of embryo proper 
PcGA3ox1: !accumulates in! endosperm during transition from globular- to heart-stage embryos 
PcGA3ox1: !accumulates in! cotyledons from early cotyledonary stage up to cotyledonary stage 
PcGA2ox1: !accumulates in! suspensor neck region from late globular stage up to heart stage 
PcGA2ox1: !accumulates in! whole suspensor from early cotyledonary stage 
PcGA2ox1: !accumulates in! inner layer of integuments at cotyledonary stage 
young suspensor preparations: !convert! GA20 to GA1 and GA5 
both suspensor preparations: !convert! GA1 to GA8 
both embryo preparations: !convert!