ENHANCED DISEASE RESISTANCE 1 (EDR1) encodes a CTR1-like kinase and was previously reported to function as a negative regulator of disease resistance and ethylene-induced senescence. Here, we report that the edr1 mutant displays enhanced stress responses and spontaneous necrotic lesions under drought conditions in the absence of pathogen, suggesting that EDR1 is also involved in stress response signaling and cell death regulation. Double mutant analysis revealed that these drought-induced phenotypes require salicylic acid but not ethylene signaling pathways. In addition, the edr1-mediated ethylene-induced senescence phenotype was suppressed by mutations in EIN2, but not by mutations in SID2, PAD4, EDS1, or NPR1, suggesting that EDR1 functions at a point of cross talk between ethylene and salicylic acid signaling that impinges on senescence and cell death. Two edr1-associated phenotypes, drought-induced growth inhibition and ethylene-induced senescence, were suppressed by mutations in ORE9, implicating ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation in the regulation of these phenotypes. However, the ore9 mutation did not suppress edr1-mediated enhanced disease resistance to powdery mildew or spontaneous lesions, indicating that these phenotypes are controlled by separate signaling pathways. To investigate the function of the EDR1 kinase domain, we expressed the C-terminal third of EDR1 in wild-type Columbia and edr1 backgrounds under the control of a dexamethasone-inducible promoter. Overexpression of the EDR1 kinase domain in an edr1 background had no obvious effect on edr1-associated phenotypes. However, overexpression of the EDR1 kinase domain in a wild-type Columbia background caused dominant negative phenotypes, including enhanced disease resistance to powdery mildew and enhanced ethylene-induced senescence; thus, the overexpressed EDR1 kinase domain alone does not exert EDR1 function, but rather negatively affects the function of native EDR1 protein.

EDR1: !regulates! Disease resistance 
EDR1: !regulates! Stress response 
EDR1: !regulates! Cell death 
EDR1: !cross-talks with! Ethylene signaling 
EDR1: !cross-talks with! Salicylic acid signaling 
EDR1: !requires! ORE9 
EDR1: !negatively affects! EDR1 protein