['15908600', 'Wild-type Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana L. Heynh.) roots growing on a tilted  surface of impenetrable hard-agar media adopt a wave-like pattern and tend to  skew to the right of the gravity vector (when viewed from the back of the plate  through the medium). Reversible root-tip rotation often accompanies the clockwise  and counterclockwise curves that form each wave. These rotations are manifested  by epidermal cell file rotation (CFR) along the root. Loss-of-function alleles of  ROOT HAIR DEFECTIVE3 (RHD3), a gene previously implicated in the control of  vesicle trafficking between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi compartments,  resulted in an almost complete suppression of epidermal CFR, root skewing, and  waving on hard-agar surfaces. Several other root hair defective mutants (rhd2-1,  rhd4-1, and rhd6-1) did not exhibit dramatic alterations in these root growth  behaviors, suggesting that a generalized defect in root hair formation is not  responsible for the surface-dependent phenotypes of rhd3. However, similar  alterations in root growth behavior were observed in a variety of mutants  characterized by defects in cell expansion (cob-1, cob-2, eto1-1, eto2-1, erh2-1,  and erh3-1). The erh2-1 and rhd3-1 mutants differed from other anisotropic cell  expansion mutants, though, by an inability to respond to low doses of the  microtubule-binding drug propyzamide, which normally causes enhanced left-handed  CFR and right skewing. We hypothesize that RHD3 may control epidermal CFR, root  skewing, and waving on hard-agar surfaces by regulating the traffic of wall- or  plasma membrane-associated determinants of anisotropic cell expansion.', '2005 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.059774', 'Masson']

RHD3: !affects! epidermal CFR 
RHD3: !regulates! traffic of wall- or plasma membrane-associated determinants 
rhd2-1, rhd4-1, rhd6-1: !do not affect! root growth behaviors 
cob-1, cob-2, eto1-1, eto2-1, erh2-1, erh3-1: !exhibit! alterations in root growth behavior 
erh2-1, rhd3-1: !differ from! other anisotropic cell expansion mutants 
propyzamide: !causes! enhanced left-handed CFR and right skewing