Nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ) of excitation energy is a well-established phenomenon in green plants, where it serves to protect the photosynthetic apparatus from photodamage under excess illumination. The induction of NPQ involves a change in the function of the light-harvesting apparatus, with the formation of quenching centers that convert excitation energy into heat. Recently, a comparable phenomenon was demonstrated in cyanobacteria grown under iron-starvation. Under these conditions, an additional integral membrane chlorophyll-protein, IsiA, is synthesized, and it is therefore likely that IsiA is required for NPQ in cyanobacteria. We have previously used fluorescence recovery after photobleaching to show that phycobilisomes diffuse rapidly on the membrane surface, but are immobilized when cells are immersed in high-osmotic strength buffers, apparently because the interaction between phycobilisomes and reaction centers is stabilized. Here, we show that when cells of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 subjected to prolonged iron-deprivation are immersed in 1 m phosphate buffer, NPQ can still be induced as normal by high light. However, the formation of the quenched state is irreversible under these conditions, suggesting that it involves the coupling of free phycobilisomes to an integral-membrane complex, an interaction that is stabilized by 1 m phosphate. Fluorescence spectra are consistent with this idea. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching measurements confirm that the induction of NPQ in the presence of 1 m phosphate is accompanied by immobilization of the phycobilisomes. We propose as a working hypothesis that a major component of the fluorescence quenching observed in iron-starved cyanobacteria arises from the coupling of free phycobilisomes to IsiA.

NPQ: !involves! Change in Light-Harvesting Apparatus 
IsiA: !synthesizes! Under Iron-Starvation 
Phycobilisomes: !diffuse rapidly! On Membrane Surface 
Phycobilisomes: !immobilized! By High-Osmotic Strength Buffers 
NPQ: !induced as normal! By High Light 
Quenched State: !irreversible! In Presence of 1m Phosphate 
Fluorescence Quenching: !arises from! Coupling of Free Phycobilisomes to IsiA