['15908593', 'Several different cellular processes determine the size of the metabolically  available nitrate pool in the cytoplasm. These processes include not only ion  fluxes across the plasma membrane and tonoplast but also assimilation by the  activity of nitrate reductase (NR). In roots, the maintenance of cytosolic  nitrate activity during periods of nitrate starvation and resupply (M. van der  Leij, S.J. Smith, A.J. Miller [1998] Planta 205: 64-72; R.-G. Zhen, H.-W. Koyro,  R.A. Leigh, A.D. Tomos, A.J. Miller [1991] Planta 185: 356-361) suggests that  this pool is regulated. Under nitrate-replete conditions vacuolar nitrate is a  membrane-bound store that can release nitrate to the cytoplasm; after depletion  of cytosolic nitrate, tonoplast transporters would serve to restore this pool. To  study the role of assimilation, specifically the activity of NR in regulating the  size of the cytosolic nitrate pool, we have compared wild-type and mutant plants.  In leaf mesophyll cells, light-to-dark transitions increase cytosolic nitrate  activity (1.5-2.8 mm), and these changes were reversed by dark-to-light  transitions. Such changes were not observed in nia1nia2 NR-deficient plants  indicating that this change in cytosolic nitrate activity was dependent on the  presence of functional NR. Furthermore, in the dark, the steady-state cytosolic  nitrate activities were not statistically different between the two types of  plant, indicating that NR has little role in determining resting levels of  nitrate. Epidermal cells of both wild type and NR mutants had cytosolic nitrate  activities that were not significantly different from mesophyll cells in the dark  and were unaltered by dark-to-light transitions. We propose that the NR-dependent  changes in cytosolic nitrate provide a cellular mechanism for the diurnal changes  in vacuolar nitrate storage, and the results are discussed in terms of the  possible signaling role of cytosolic nitrate.', '2005 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.062349', 'Miller']

Ion fluxes: !affect! Metabolically available nitrate pool
Nitrate reductase: !regulates! Size of cytosolic nitrate pool
Light-to-dark transitions: !increase! Cytosolic nitrate activity
Dark-to-light transitions: !reverse! Increase in cytosolic nitrate activity
NR-deficient plants: !lack! Changes in cytosolic nitrate activity
Epidermal cells: !maintain! Steady-state cytosolic nitrate activities