['15908596', 'Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) accessions provide an excellent resource to  dissect the molecular basis of adaptation. We have selected 192 Arabidopsis  accessions collected to represent worldwide and local variation and analyzed two  adaptively important traits, flowering time and vernalization response. There was  huge variation in the flowering habit of the different accessions, with no simple  relationship to latitude of collection site and considerable diversity occurring  within local regions. We explored the contribution to this variation from the two  genes FRIGIDA (FRI) and FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), previously shown to be important  determinants in natural variation of flowering time. A correlation of FLC  expression with flowering time and vernalization was observed, but it was not as  strong as anticipated due to many late-flowering/vernalization-requiring  accessions being associated with low FLC expression and early-flowering  accessions with high FLC expression. Sequence analysis of FRI revealed which  accessions were likely to carry functional alleles, and, from comparison of  flowering time with allelic type, we estimate that approximately 70% of flowering  time variation can be accounted for by allelic variation of FRI. The maintenance  and propagation of 20 independent nonfunctional FRI haplotypes suggest that the  loss-of-function mutations can confer a strong selective advantage. Accessions  with a common FRI haplotype were, in some cases, associated with very different  FLC levels and wide variation in flowering time, suggesting additional variation  at FLC itself or other genes regulating FLC. These data reveal how useful these  Arabidopsis accessions will be in dissecting the complex molecular variation that  has led to the adaptive phenotypic variation in flowering time.', '2005 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.061309', 'Dean']

FRI: !affects! Flowering time 
FLC: !correlates with! Flowering time 
FLC: !correlates with! Vernalization response 
FRI: !maintains! Nonfunctional haplotypes 
FRI: !propagates! Nonfunctional haplotypes 
FRI: !associated with! Different FLC levels 
FRI: !associated with! Wide variation in flowering time