Increased cellular levels of reactive oxygen species are known to occur during seed development and germination, but the consequences in terms of protein degradation are poorly characterized. In this work, protein carbonylation, which is an irreversible oxidation process leading to a loss of function of the modified proteins, has been analyzed by a proteomic approach during the first stages of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seed germination. In the dry mature seeds, the legumin-type globulins (12S cruciferins) were the major targets. However, the acidic alpha-cruciferin subunits were carbonylated to a much higher extent than the basic (beta) ones, consistent with a model in which the beta-subunits are buried within the cruciferin molecules and the alpha-subunits are more exposed to the outside. During imbibition, various carbonylated proteins accumulated. This oxidation damage was not evenly distributed among seed proteins and targeted specific proteins as glycolytic enzymes, mitochondrial ATP synthase, chloroplastic ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase large chain, aldose reductase, methionine synthase, translation factors, and several molecular chaperones. Although accumulation of carbonylated proteins is usually considered in the context of aging in a variety of model systems, this was clearly not the case for the Arabidopsis seeds since they germinated at a high rate and yielded vigorous plantlets. The results indicate that the observed specific changes in protein carbonylation patterns are probably required for counteracting and/or utilizing the production of reactive oxygen species caused by recovery of metabolic activity in the germinating seeds.

Reactive oxygen species: !affects! Protein carbonylation 
Legumin-type globulins: !targeted by! Protein carbonylation 
Alpha-cruciferin subunits: !carbonylated to a higher extent than! Beta-subunits 
Imbibition: !causes accumulation of! Carbonylated proteins 
Glycolytic enzymes: !targeted by! Protein carbonylation 
Mitochondrial ATP synthase: !targeted by! Protein carbonylation 
Chloroplastic ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase large chain: !targeted by! Protein carbonylation 
Aldose reductase: !targeted by! Protein carbonylation 
Methionine synthase: !targeted by! Protein carbonylation 
Translation factors: !targeted by! Protein carbonylation 
Molecular chaperones: !targeted by! Protein carbonylation 
Arabidopsis seeds: !germinate at a high rate and yield vigorous plantlets despite! Accumulation of carbonylated proteins