['15908590', 'Plantacyanins belong to the phytocyanin family of blue copper proteins. In the  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome, only one gene encodes plantacyanin.  The T-DNA-tagged mutant is a knockdown mutant that shows no visible phenotype. We  used both promoter-beta-glucuronidase transgenic plants and immunolocalization to  show that Arabidopsis plantacyanin is expressed most highly in the inflorescence  and, specifically, in the transmitting tract of the pistil. Protein levels show a  steep gradient in expression from the stigma into the style and ovary.  Overexpression plants were generated using cauliflower mosaic virus 35S, and  protein levels in the pistil were examined as well as the pollination process.  Seed set in these plants is highly reduced mainly due to a lack of anther  dehiscence, which is caused by degeneration of the endothecium. Callose deposits  occur on the pollen walls in plants that overexpress plantacyanin, and a small  percentage of these pollen grains germinate in the closed anthers. When wild-type  pollen was used on the overexpression stigma, seed set was still decreased  compared to the control pollinations. We detected an increase in plantacyanin  levels in the overexpression pistil, including the transmitting tract. Guidance  of the wild-type pollen tube on the overexpression stigma is disrupted as  evidenced by the growth behavior of pollen tubes after they penetrate the  papillar cell. Normally, pollen tubes travel down the papilla cell and into the  style. Wild-type pollen tubes on the overexpression stigma made numerous turns  around the papilla cell before growing toward the style. In some rare cases,  pollen tubes circled up the papilla cell away from the style and were arrested  there. We propose that when plantacyanin levels in the stigma are increased,  pollen tube guidance into the style is disrupted.', '2005 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.063388', 'Lord']

Plantacyanin: !localizes to! inflorescence 
Plantacyanin: !enhances! anther dehiscence 
Plantacyanin: !represses! seed set 
Plantacyanin: !disrupts! pollen tube guidance