['15923339', 'Plant responses to enemies are coordinated by several interacting signaling  systems. Molecular and genetic studies with mutants and exogenous signal  application suggest that jasmonate (JA)-, salicylate (SA)-, and ethylene  (ET)-mediated pathways modulate expression of portions of the defense phenotype  in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), but have not yet linked these observations  directly with plant responses to insect attack. We compared the glucosinolate  (GS) profiles of rosette leaves of 4-week-old mutant and transgenic Arabidopsis  (Columbia) plants compromised in these three major signaling pathways, and  characterized responses by those plants to feeding by two phloem-feeding aphids  (generalist Myzus persicae and specialist Brevicoryne brassicae) and one  generalist caterpillar species (Spodoptera exigua Hubner). Blocked JA signaling  in coronatine-insensitive (coi1) and enhanced expression of SA-signaled disease  resistance in hypersensitive response-like (hrl1) mutants reduced constitutive GS  concentrations, while blocking SA signaling at the mediator protein npr1 mutant  (NPR) increased them. There was no significant impact on constitutive GS contents  of blocking ET signaling (at ET resistant [etr1]) or reducing SA concentrations  (nahG transgene). We found increased GS accumulation in response to insect  feeding, which required functional NPR1 and ETR1 but not COI1 or SA. Insect  feeding caused increases primarily in short-chain aliphatic methylsulfinyl GS. By  contrast, responses to exogenous JA, a frequent experimental surrogate for insect  attack, were characterized by an increase in indolyl GS. Insect performance,  measured as population increase or weight increase, was negatively related to GS  levels, but we found evidence that other, ET-regulated factors may also be  influential. Plant resistance to (consumption by) S. exigua was not related to  insect growth because some plant chemistries inhibited growth while others  inhibited feeding. These major signaling pathways modulate Arabidopsis GS  accumulation and response to both phloem-feeding and chewing insects, often  antagonistically; NPR appears to be central to these interactions. Our results  indicate that exogenous signal application and plant consumption measures may not  provide useful measures of plant responses to actual insect feeding.', '2005 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.104.053389', 'Schultz']

jasmonate: !modulates expression of! defense phenotype
salicylate: !modulates expression of! defense phenotype
ethylene: !modulates expression of! defense phenotype
coi1: !reduces! constitutive GS concentrations
hrl1: !enhances! SA-signaled disease resistance
npr1: !increases! constitutive GS concentrations
ET resistant: !required for! increased GS accumulation
nahG: !no effect on! constitutive GS contents
Myzus persicae: !causes increase in! short-chain aliphatic methylsulfinyl GS
Brevicoryne brassicae: !causes increase in! short-chain aliphatic methylsulfinyl GS
Spodoptera exigua Hubner: !causes increase in! short-chain aliphatic methylsulfinyl GS
exogenous JA: !causes increase in! indolyl GS
GS levels: !negatively related to! insect performance
ET-regulated factors: !influential on! insect performance
NPR: !central to! interactions