['15923322', 'To investigate the importance of different processes to heat stress tolerance, 45  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutants and one transgenic line were tested  for basal and acquired thermotolerance at different stages of growth. Plants  tested were defective in signaling pathways (abscisic acid, salicylic acid,  ethylene, and oxidative burst signaling) and in reactive oxygen metabolism  (ascorbic acid or glutathione production, catalase) or had previously been found  to have temperature-related phenotypes (e.g. fatty acid desaturase mutants,  uvh6). Mutants were assessed for thermotolerance defects in seed germination,  hypocotyl elongation, root growth, and seedling survival. To assess oxidative  damage and alterations in the heat shock response, thiobarbituric acid reactive  substances, heat shock protein 101, and small heat shock protein levels were  determined. Fifteen mutants showed significant phenotypes. Abscisic acid (ABA)  signaling mutants (abi1 and abi2) and the UV-sensitive mutant, uvh6, showed the  strongest defects in acquired thermotolerance of root growth and seedling  survival. Mutations in nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase  homolog genes (atrbohB and D), ABA biosynthesis mutants (aba1, aba2, and aba3),  and NahG transgenic lines (salicylic acid deficient) showed weaker defects.  Ethylene signaling mutants (ein2 and etr1) and reactive oxygen metabolism mutants  (vtc1, vtc2, npq1, and cad2) were more defective in basal than acquired  thermotolerance, especially under high light. All mutants accumulated wild-type  levels of heat shock protein 101 and small heat shock proteins. These data  indicate that, separate from heat shock protein induction, ABA, active oxygen  species, and salicylic acid pathways are involved in acquired thermotolerance and  that UVH6 plays a significant role in temperature responses in addition to its  role in UV stress.', '2005 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.062257', 'Vierling']

ABA: !affects! acquired thermotolerance 
UVH6: !affects! temperature responses 
ATRBOHB/D: !affects! acquired thermotolerance 
ABA1/2/3: !affects! acquired thermotolerance 
NahG: !affects! acquired thermotolerance 
EIN2/ETR1: !affects! basal thermotolerance 
VTC1/2/NPQ1/CAD2: !affects! basal thermotolerance