['15923348', 'The mechanisms controlling plant resistance to necrotrophic fungal pathogens are  poorly understood. We previously reported on Ep5C, a gene shown to be induced by  the H(2)O(2) generated during a plant-pathogen interaction. To identify novel  plant components operating in pathogen-induced signaling cascades, we initiated a  large-scale screen using Arabidopsis thaliana plants carrying the  beta-glucuronidase reporter gene under control of the H(2)O(2)-responsive Ep5C  promoter. Here, we report the identification and characterization of a mutant,  ocp3 (for overexpressor of cationic peroxidase 3), in which the reporter  construct is constitutively expressed. Healthy ocp3 plants show increased  accumulation of H(2)O(2) and express constitutively the Glutathione  S-transferase1 and Plant Defensine 1.2 marker genes, but not the salicylic acid  (SA)-dependent pathogenesis-related PR-1 gene. Strikingly, the ocp3 mutant shows  enhanced resistance to the necrotrophic pathogens Botrytis cinerea and  Plectosphaerella cucumerina. Conversely, resistance to virulent forms of the  biotrophic oomycete Hyaloperonospora parasitica and the bacterial pathogen  Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000 remains unaffected in ocp3 plants when  compared with wild-type plants. Consistently with this, ocp3 plants are not  affected in SA perception and express normal levels of PR genes after pathogen  attack. To analyze signal transduction pathways where ocp3 operates, epistasis  analyses between ocp3 and pad4, nahG, npr1, ein2, jin1, or coi1 were performed.  These studies revealed that the resistance signaling to necrotrophic infection in  ocp3 is fully dependent on appropriate perception of jasmonic acid through COI1  and does not require SA or ethylene perception through NPR1 or EIN2,  respectively. The OCP3 gene encodes a homeodomain transcription factor that is  constitutively expressed in healthy plants but repressed in response to infection  by necrotrophic fungi. Together, these results suggest that OCP3 is an important  factor for the COI1-dependent resistance of plants to infection by necrotrophic  pathogens.', '2005 Jul', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.032375', 'Vera']

Ep5C: !induces! H2O2
OCP3: !constitutively expresses! beta-glucuronidase reporter gene
OCP3: !increases accumulation of! H2O2
OCP3: !expresses! Glutathione S-transferase1 and Plant Defensine 1.2 marker genes
OCP3: !enhances resistance to! Botrytis cinerea and Plectosphaerella cucumerina
OCP3: !does not affect! resistance to Hyaloperonospora parasitica and Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000
OCP3: !requires! appropriate perception of jasmonic acid through COI1
OCP3: !repressed in response to! infection by necrotrophic fungi