The growth of secondary xylem and phloem depends on the division of cells in the vascular cambium and results in an increase in the diameter of the root and stem. Very little is known about the genetic mechanisms that control cambial activity and the differentiation of secondary xylem and phloem cell types. To begin to identify new genes required for vascular cell differentiation and function, we performed genome-wide expression profiling of xylem and phloem-cambium isolated from the root-hypocotyl of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Gene expression in the remaining nonvascular tissue was also profiled. From these transcript profiles, we assembled three sets of genes with expression significantly biased toward xylem, phloem-cambium, or nonvascular tissue. We also assembled three two-tissue sets of genes with expression significantly biased toward xylem/phloem-cambium, xylem/nonvascular, or phloem-cambium/nonvascular tissues. Localizations predicted by transcript profiles were supported by results from promoter-reporter and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction experiments with nine xylem- or phloem-cambium-biased genes. An analysis of the members of the phloem-cambium gene set suggested that some genes involved in regulating primary meristems are also regulators of the cambium. Secondary phloem was implicated in the synthesis of auxin, glucosinolates, cytokinin, and gibberellic acid. Transcript profiles also supported the importance of class III HD ZIP and KANADI transcription factors as regulators of radial patterning during secondary growth, and identified several members of the G2-like, NAC, AP2, MADS, and MYB transcription factor families that may play roles as regulators of xylem or phloem cell differentiation and activity.

Gene: !affects! Division of cells in vascular cambium 
Gene: !localizes to! Xylem and phloem-cambium 
Gene: !interacts with! Primary meristems 
Gene: !enhances! Radial patterning during secondary growth 
Gene: !represses! Auxin, glucosinolates, cytokinin, and gibberellic acid synthesis 
Gene: !synthesizes! Class III HD ZIP and KANADI transcription factors