Kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein (KCBP), a member of the Kinesin-14 family, is a C-terminal microtubule motor with three unique domains including a myosin tail homology region 4 (MyTH4), a talin-like domain, and a calmodulin-binding domain (CBD). The MyTH4 and talin-like domains (found in some myosins) are not found in other reported kinesins. A calmodulin-binding kinesin called kinesin-C (SpKinC) isolated from sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) is the only reported kinesin with a CBD. Analysis of the completed genomes of Homo sapiens, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and a red alga (Cyanidioschyzon merolae 10D) did not reveal the presence of a KCBP. This prompted us to look at the origin of KCBP and its relationship to SpKinC. To address this, we isolated KCBP from a gymnosperm, Picea abies, and a green alga, Stichococcus bacillaris. In addition, database searches resulted in identification of KCBP in another green alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and several flowering plants. Gene tree analysis revealed that the motor domain of KCBPs belongs to a clade within the Kinesin-14 (C-terminal motors) family. Only land plants and green algae have a kinesin with the MyTH4 and talin-like domains of KCBP. Further, our analysis indicates that KCBP is highly conserved in green algae and land plants. SpKinC from sea urchin, which has the motor domain similar to KCBP and contains a CBD, lacks the MyTH4 and talin-like regions. Our analysis indicates that the KCBPs, SpKinC, and a subset of the kinesin-like proteins are all more closely related to one another than they are to any other kinesins, but that either KCBP gained the MyTH4 and talin-like domains or SpKinC lost them.

Kinesin-14 family: !contains! KCBP 
KCBP: !found in! Picea abies, Stichococcus bacillaris, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, flowering plants 
KCBP: !has! MyTH4, talin-like domains 
SpKinC: !found in! sea urchin 
SpKinC: !has! motor domain similar to KCBP, CBD 
SpKinC: !lacks! MyTH4, talin-like regions 
KCBP: !more closely related to! SpKinC, subset of kinesin-like proteins