['15960618', 'Glucosinolates are a class of secondary metabolites with important roles in plant  defense and human nutrition. To uncover regulatory mechanisms of glucosinolate  production, we screened Arabidopsis thaliana T-DNA activation-tagged lines and  identified a high-glucosinolate mutant caused by overexpression of IQD1  (At3g09710). A series of gain- and loss-of-function IQD1 alleles in different  accessions correlates with increased and decreased glucosinolate levels,  respectively. IQD1 encodes a novel protein that contains putative nuclear  localization signals and several motifs known to mediate calmodulin binding,  which are arranged in a plant-specific segment of 67 amino acids, called the IQ67  domain. We demonstrate that an IQD1-GFP fusion protein is targeted to the cell  nucleus and that recombinant IQD1 binds to calmodulin in a Ca(2+)-dependent  fashion. Analysis of steady-state messenger RNA levels of glucosinolate pathway  genes indicates that IQD1 affects expression of multiple genes with roles in  glucosinolate metabolism. Histochemical analysis of tissue-specific IQD1::GUS  expression reveals IQD1 promoter activity mainly in vascular tissues of all  organs, consistent with the expression patterns of several glucosinolate-related  genes. Interestingly, overexpression of IQD1 reduces insect herbivory, which we  demonstrated in dual-choice assays with the generalist phloem-feeding green peach  aphid (Myzus persicae), and in weight-gain assays with the cabbage looper  (Trichoplusia ni), a generalist-chewing lepidopteran. As IQD1 is induced by  mechanical stimuli, we propose IQD1 to be novel nuclear factor that integrates  intracellular Ca(2+) signals to fine-tune glucosinolate accumulation in response  to biotic challenge.', '2005 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02435.x', 'Abel']

IQD1: !overexpression of! increases glucosinolate levels 
IQD1: !encodes! novel protein 
IQD1: !contains! putative nuclear localization signals 
IQD1: !binds to! calmodulin 
IQD1: !targets to! cell nucleus 
IQD1: !affects expression of! multiple genes 
IQD1: !promoter activity mainly in! vascular tissues 
IQD1: !reduces insect herbivory! 
IQD1: !integrates intracellular Ca(2+) signals!