In the context of our research on cell wall formation and maturation in flax (Linum usitatissimum L) bast fibers, we (1) confirmed the presence of lignin in bast fibers and (2) quantified and characterized the chemical nature of this lignin at two developmental stages. Histochemical methods (Weisner and Maüle reagents and KMnO(4)-staining) indicating the presence of lignin in bast fibers at the light and electron microscope levels were confirmed by chemical analyses (acetyl bromide). In general, the lignin content in flax bast fibers varied between 1.5% and 4.2% of the dry cell wall residues (CWRs) as compared to values varying between 23.7% and 31.4% in flax xylem tissues. Immunological and chemical analyses (thioacidolysis and nitrobenzene oxidation) indicated that both flax xylem- and bast fiber-lignins were rich in guaiacyl (G) units with S/G values inferior to 0.5. In bast fibers, the highly sensitive immunological probes allowed the detection of condensed guaiacyl-type (G) lignins in the middle lamella, cell wall junctions, and in the S1 layer of the secondary wall. In addition, lower quantities of mixed guaiacyl-syringyl (GS) lignins could be detected throughout the secondary cell wall. Chemical analyses suggested that flax bast-fiber lignin is more condensed than the corresponding xylem lignin. In addition, H units represented up to 25% of the monomers released from bast-fiber lignin as opposed to a value of 1% for the corresponding xylem tissue. Such an observation indicates that the structure of flax bast-fiber lignin is significantly different from that of the more typical 'woody plant lignin', thereby suggesting that flax bast fibers represent an interesting system for studying an unusual lignification process.

Weisner reagent: !detects! lignin 
Maüle reagent: !detects! lignin 
KMnO(4)-staining: !detects! lignin 
acetyl bromide: !quantifies! lignin 
flax bast fibers: !contain! lignin 
flax xylem tissues: !contain! lignin 
immunological probes: !detect! G-type lignins 
thioacidolysis: !identifies! S/G values 
nitrobenzene oxidation: !identifies! S/G values 
bast-fiber lignin: !more condensed than! xylem lignin 
H units: !up to 25% of! monomers released from bast-fiber lignin