Grain-filling is a crucial process that determines final grain yield in rice (Oryza sativa L.). To understand the genetic basis of dynamics of grain-filling, quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis was conducted using time-related phenotypic data on grain-filling collected from a population of 155 recombinant inbred lines (F12), derived from a cross between Milyang 23 and Akihikari. Two QTLs detected on chromosomes 8 and 12 were strongly associated with increased filling percentage per panicle. These QTLs were not linked with those controlling spikelet numbers per panicle. This result confers the possibility of improving grain-filling together with an enlargement of sink size. The QTL for filling percentage per panicle on chromosome 8 exactly overlapped that for non-structural carbohydrate (NSC) content in the culm and leaf sheaths during grain-filling, and the Milyang 23 allele associated with increased grain-filling percentage per panicle was associated with decreased NSC content. Therefore, this QTL may be directly involved in NSC translocation from the culm and leaf sheaths to panicle. In addition, the Milyang 23 alleles of QTLs associated with greater spikelet number per panicle on chromosomes 1 and 6 were also related with a reduction in NSC content in the culm and leaf sheaths during grain-filling. These results indicate that NSC dynamics during grain-filling is partly dependent on sink size. NSC accumulation in the culm and leaf sheaths at the heading stage was mainly controlled by different genetic regulations from NSC dynamics during grain-filling. Nitrogen dynamics during grain-filling may also be involved in carbohydrate dynamics.

QTL: !associated with! increased filling percentage per panicle
QTL: !not linked with! those controlling spikelet numbers per panicle
Milyang 23 allele: !associated with! increased grain-filling percentage per panicle
Milyang 23 allele: !associated with! decreased NSC content
Milyang 23 allele: !related with! reduction in NSC content
NSC dynamics: !partly dependent on! sink size
NSC accumulation: !mainly controlled by! different genetic regulations
Nitrogen dynamics: !may also be involved in! carbohydrate dynamics