['15993049', 'The full-length cDNA (LeDET2) encoding a 257 amino acid protein homolog of  Arabidopsis DET2 (AtDET2) was isolated in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum).  LeDET2 has 76% similarity with AtDET2 and structural characteristics conserved  among plant and mammalian steroid 5alpha-reductases (5alphaRs). LeDET2 is  ubiquitously expressed in tomato tissues with higher levels in leaf than in stem,  root, seed and callus. When expressed in mammalian cells (COS-7), recombinant  LeDET2 was active on substrates typical of mammalian 5alphaRs (progesterone,  testosterone, androstenedione), but reduced at very low levels campestenone, the  substrate described for AtDET2. Similar results were obtained with the expression  in COS-7 of recombinant AtDET2 that showed 5alphaR activity for progesterone and  not for campestenone. Recombinant LeDET2 was inhibited by several inhibitors of  the human 5alphaRs and the application of an active inhibitor to tomato seedlings  induced dwarfism and morphological changes similar to BR-deficient mutants. In  tomato tissues, campestenone was 5alpha-reduced in leaf, stem and root  homogenates, like progesterone and testosterone, while androstenedione was  converted to testosterone, evidencing for the first time a 17beta-hydroxysteroid  dehydrogenase activity in plants. Moreover, two separate 5alphaR activities with  different kinetic characteristic and response to inhibitors were characterized in  tomato tissues. The presence of two 5alphaR isoenzymes was demonstrated also in  Arabidopsis using the det2-1 mutant, in which a residual 5alphaR activity for  campestenone and progesterone was evidenced and characterized. Therefore, the  existence of two isoenzymes of 5alphaR is probably characteristic of the whole  plant kingdom highlighting the similarities between the animal and plant steroid  biosynthetic pathways.', '2005 Aug', 'J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol', '10.1016/j.jsbmb.2005.04.035', 'Danza']

LeDET2: !encodes! 257 amino acid protein 
LeDET2: !expresses in! tomato tissues 
LeDET2: !converts! progesterone, testosterone, androstenedione 
LeDET2: !inhibited by! human 5alphaRs inhibitors 
LeDET2: !induces! dwarfism and morphological changes 
LeDET2: !converts! campestenone, progesterone, testosterone 
LeDET2: !characterized by! two separate 5alphaR activities 
AtDET2: !structurally similar to! LeDET2 
AtDET2: !reduces! campestenone at low levels 
AtDET2: !converts! androstenedione to testosterone 
AtDET2: !evidences! 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity 
AtDET2: !characterized by! two isoenzymes of 5alphaR