['15998304', 'Arabidopsis resistance to the necrotrophic fungus Plectosphaerella cucumerina is  complex and depends on the ethylene, jasmonic acid and salicylic acid signaling  pathways. A quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis of resistance to this fungus  was performed using two populations of recombinant inbred lines. Three loci  QRP1-QRP3 (for Quantitative Resistance to Plectosphaerella) were identified and  mapped on chromosome 2 (QRP1 and QRP2) and 5 (QRP3). QRP1, the locus showing the  strongest effect, was found to correspond to the ERECTA (ER) gene that encodes a  receptor-like-kinase (RLK), which has been previously implicated in plant  development, and resistance to the bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum. The  leucine-rich repeat and the kinase domains of ERECTA were specifically required  for resistance to P. cucumerina, as er mutant alleles impaired in any of these  domains showed enhanced susceptibility to this fungus, but not to other virulent  pathogens. The involvement of the ER-signaling pathway in resistance to P.  cucumerina was supported by the fact that three mutants defective in this  pathway, elk2, elk5 and elk4 (agb1-1), which encodes the beta-subunit of  Arabidopsis heterotrimeric G protein, were also impaired in their resistance to  this fungus. The putative function of the Arabidopsis heterotrimeric G protein in  resistance to P. cucumerina suggested by the enhanced susceptibility of agb1-1  was corroborated by the demonstration that a null allele (gpa1-4) of the G  protein alpha-subunit showed enhanced resistance to this pathogen. Deposition of  beta-1,3-glucan callose at infection sites was specifically impaired in er-1 and  agb1-1 mutants upon P. cucumerina inoculation. Taken together, these data suggest  a putative function of ERECTA and heterotrimeric G protein in P. cucumerina  perception.', '2005 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02440.x', 'Molina']

ERECTA: !affects! Resistance to P. cucumerina 
ERECTA: !localizes to! Chromosome 2 & 5 
ERECTA: !interacts with! RLK 
ERECTA: !enhances! Callose deposition 
ELK2, ELK5, ELK4: !represses! Resistance to P. cucumerina 
GPA1-4: !synthesizes! Enhanced resistance to P. cucumerina