['16006578', 'The circadian clock acts as the timekeeping mechanism in photoperiodism. In  Arabidopsis thaliana, a circadian clock-controlled flowering pathway comprising  the genes GIGANTEA (GI), CONSTANS (CO), and FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) promotes  flowering specifically under long days. Within this pathway, GI regulates  circadian rhythms and flowering and acts earlier in the hierarchy than CO and FT,  suggesting that GI might regulate flowering indirectly by affecting the control  of circadian rhythms. We studied the relationship between the roles of GI in  flowering and the circadian clock using late elongated hypocotyl circadian clock  associated1 double mutants, which are impaired in circadian clock function,  plants overexpressing GI (35S:GI), and gi mutants. These experiments demonstrated  that GI acts between the circadian oscillator and CO to promote flowering by  increasing CO and FT mRNA abundance. In addition, circadian rhythms in expression  of genes that do not control flowering are altered in 35S:GI and gi mutant plants  under continuous light and continuous darkness, and the phase of expression of  these genes is changed under diurnal cycles. Therefore, GI plays a general role  in controlling circadian rhythms, and this is different from its effect on the  amplitude of expression of CO and FT. Functional GI:green fluorescent protein is  localized to the nucleus in transgenic Arabidopsis plants, supporting the idea  that GI regulates flowering in the nucleus. We propose that the effect of GI on  flowering is not an indirect effect of its role in circadian clock regulation,  but rather that GI also acts in the nucleus to more directly promote the  expression of flowering-time genes.', '2005 Aug', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.033464', 'Coupland']

GI: !regulates! Circadian rhythms 
GI: !increases! CO and FT mRNA abundance 
GI: !controls! Circadian rhythms 
GI: !promotes! Flowering 
GI: !localizes to! Nucleus 
GI: !directly promotes! Expression of flowering-time genes