Vitamin E inhibits processes thought to be important in the development of atherosclerosis but clinical trials to determine its effect on cardiovascular disease have given variable results, the majority being negative. The reasons for this are unclear. Animal trials can be better controlled and use more rigorous measures of lesion progression than human trials. The present study reviewed trials using rabbits and mice to determine whether they also are variable and, if so, to uncover methodological differences that may account for the different outcomes. A large number of trials examining the effect of vitamin E supplements on experimental atherosclerosis were identified. Using rigorous selection criteria, a well-defined group was selected for further investigation. Almost all the mice trials showed a significant effect of vitamin E, but only around one-third of the rabbit trials did so. When the rabbit trials were divided into those that did and those that did not observe significant effects, no single factor was found that could account for the dichotomy. However, when the percentage reduction in disease was considered, rather than the within-trial significance level, there were clear dose-dependent effects of vitamin E on disease severity in heritable hyperlipidaemic rabbits, and in genetically normal rabbits made hyperlipidaemic with cholesterol alone; the dose dependence was different in the two groups, the heritable hyperlipidaemic rabbits showing a near ten-fold lower sensitivity. The high doses required to affect experimental atherosclerosis may, if applicable to other species, help explain the absence of effects in many human trials.

Vitamin E: !inhibits! Processes 
Vitamin E: !affects! Disease Severity 
Trials: !variable! Outcomes 
Trials: !divided into! Those with/without Significant Effects 
Mice Trials: !showed! Significant Effect 
Rabbit Trials: !showed! Variable Effect 
Heritable Hyperlipidaemic Rabbits: !showed! Dose-Dependent Effect 
Genetically Normal Rabbits: !showed! Different Dose Dependence