The phytohormone auxin is involved in the regulation of a variety of developmental processes. In this report, we describe how the processes of lateral root and root hair formations and root gravity response in rice are controlled by auxin. We use a rice mutant aem1 (auxin efflux mutant) because the mutant is defective in these characters. The aem1 line was originally isolated as a short lateral root mutant, but we found that the mutant has a defect in auxin efflux in roots. The acropetal and basipetal indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) transports were reduced in aem1 roots compared to wild type (WT). Furthermore, gravitropic bending as well as efflux of radioactive IAA was impaired in the mutant roots. We also propose a unique distribution of endogenous IAA in aem1 roots. An immunoassay revealed a 4-fold-endogenous IAA content in the aem1 roots compared to WT, and the application of IAA to the shoot of WT seedlings mimicked the short lateral root phenotype of aem1, suggesting that the high content of IAA in aem1 roots impaired the elongation of lateral roots. However, the high level of IAA in aem1 roots contradicts the auxin requirement for root hair formation in the epidermis of mutant roots. Since the reduced development in root hairs of aem1 roots was rescued by exogenous auxin, the auxin level in the epidermis is likely to be sub-optimum in aem1 roots. This discrepancy can be solved by the ideas that IAA level is higher in the stele and lower in the epidermis of aem1 roots compared to WT and that the unique distribution of IAA in aem1 roots is induced by the defect in auxin efflux. All these results suggest that AEM1 may encode a component of auxin efflux carrier in rice and that the defects in lateral roots, root hair formation and root gravity response in aem1 mutant are due to the altered auxin efflux in roots.

Auxin: !regulates! Developmental Processes
aem1: !defective in! Lateral Root & Root Hair Formations & Root Gravity Response
IAA: !transports! Acropetal & Basipetal
aem1: !impaired in! Gravitropic Bending & IAA Efflux
aem1: !high content of! IAA
aem1: !contradicts! Auxin Requirement for Root Hair Formation
Exogenous Auxin: !rescues! Reduced Development in Root Hairs of aem1 Roots
AEM1: !encodes! Component of Auxin Efflux Carrier