We have used oligonucleotide microarrays to detect Arabidopsis gene expression during early flower development. Among the 22,746 genes represented on the Affymetrix ATH1 chip, approximately 14,660 (approximately 64.5%) genes were expressed with signal intensity at or more than 50 in each of the six organs/structures examined, including young inflorescences (floral stages 1-9), stage-12 floral buds, developing siliques, leaves, stems, and roots. 17,583 genes were expressed with an intensity at or above 50 in at least one tissue, including 12,245 genes that were expressed in all the six tissues. Comparison of genes expressed between young inflorescence or stage-12 floral buds with other tissues suggests that relatively large numbers of genes are expressed at similar levels in tissues that are related morphologically and/or developmentally, as supported by a cluster analysis with data from two other studies. Further analysis of the genes preferentially expressed in floral tissues has uncovered new genes potentially involved in Arabidopsis flower development. One hundred and four genes were determined to be preferentially expressed in young inflorescences, including 22 genes encoding putative transcription factors. We also identified 105 genes that were preferentially expressed in three reproductive structures (the young inflorescences, stage-12 floral buds and developing siliques), when compared with the vegetative tissues. RT-PCR results of selected genes are consistent with the results from these microarrays and suggest that the relative signal intensities detected with the Affymetrix microarray are reliable estimates of gene expression.

Gene: !expressed in! Young inflorescences 
Gene: !expressed in! Stage-12 floral buds 
Gene: !expressed in! Developing siliques 
Gene: !expressed in! Leaves 
Gene: !expressed in! Stems 
Gene: !expressed in! Roots 
Gene: !preferentially expressed in! Young inflorescences 
Gene: !preferentially expressed in! Stage-12 floral buds 
Gene: !preferentially expressed in! Developing siliques 
Gene: !encodes! Putative transcription factors 
Gene: !confirmed by! RT-PCR results