To identify the gibberellin (GA) signaling components involved in rice leaf sheath elongation process, protein phosphorylation changed by GA3 was analyzed. The protein kinase activities in rice leaf sheath were assessed in an in-gel kinase assay using SDS-polyacrylamide gel containing histone III-S as a substrate. The activity of a putative 54-kDa calcium dependent protein kinase (CDPK) in cytosolic fraction in rice leaf sheath increased significantly by GA3. Further, phosphorylation status of the proteins changed by GA3 in rice leaf sheath were detected by in vitro protein phosphorylation followed by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and the phosphoproteins were identified by mass spectrometry. Sixty phosphoproteins was detected after in vitro protein phosphorylation and the phosphorylation of 7 proteins was enhanced by GA3 treatment. The addition of GA3 treated cytosolic fraction of leaf sheath further increased the phosphorylation of 4 proteins, glyoxalase-I, cytoplasmic malate dehydrogenase, glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and another unknown protein. The protein kinase inhibitor, staurosporine inhibited the phosphorylation of these proteins in vitro. Other hormones, particularly, indole acetic acid, 6-benzylaminopurine and abscisic acid did not change the phosphorylation status of these proteins. The identified proteins did not show any change by GA3 treatment at transcription level. The abundance of glyoxalase-I and cytoplasmic malate dehydrogenase remained unchanged by GA3 treatment as detected on 2D-gel by silver staining, unlike for glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Results suggest that the phosphoproteins, glyoxalase-I and cytoplasmic malate dehydrogenase in rice leaf sheath could be important signaling components of GA3, downstream to 54-kDa CDPK.

GA3: !increases! 54-kDa CDPK activity
54-kDa CDPK: !enhances! phosphorylation of proteins
GA3: !enhances! phosphorylation of 7 proteins
GA3: !increases! phosphorylation of 4 proteins
Staurosporine: !inhibits! phosphorylation of proteins
IAA, 6-benzylaminopurine, ABA: !do not change! phosphorylation status of proteins
GA3: !does not change! transcription level of proteins