['16038894', 'Although the regulation of Arabidopsis floral meristem patterning and determinacy  has been studied in detail, very little is known about the genetic mechanisms  directing development of the pedicel, the short stem linking the flower to the  inflorescence axis. Here, we provide evidence that the pedicel consists of a  proximal portion derived from the young flower primordium, and a bulged distal  region that emerges from tissue at the bases of sepals in the floral bud. Distal  pedicel growth is controlled by the KNOTTED1-like homeobox gene BREVIPEDICELLUS  (BP), as 35S::BP plants show excessive proliferation of pedicel tissue, while  loss of BP conditions a radial constriction around the distal pedicel  circumference. Mutant radial constrictions project proximally along abaxial and  lateral sides of pedicels, leading to occasional downward bending at the distal  pedicel. This effect is severely enhanced in a loss-of-function erecta (er)  background, resulting in radially constricted tissue along the entire abaxial  side of pedicels and downward-oriented flowers and fruit. Analysis of pedicel  vascular patterns revealed biasing of vasculature towards the abaxial side,  consistent with a role for BP and ER in regulating a vascular-borne growth  inhibitory signal. BP expression in a reporter line marked boundaries between the  inflorescence stem and lateral organs and the receptacle and floral organs. This  boundary expression appears to be important to prevent homeotic displacement of  node and lateral organ fates into underlying stem tissue. To investigate  interactions between pedicel and flower development, we crossed bp er into  various floral mutant backgrounds. Formation of laterally-oriented bends in bp  lfy er pedicels paralleled phyllotaxy changes, consistent with a model where the  architecture of mutant stems is controlled by both organ positioning and  vasculature patterns. Collectively, our results indicate that the BP gene acts in  Arabidopsis stems to confer a growth-competent state that counteracts  lateral-organ associated asymmetries and effectively radializes internode and  pedicel growth and differentiation patterns.', '2005 Aug 15', 'Dev Biol', '10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.06.011', 'Riggs']

BP: !controls! Distal pedicel growth 
BP: !regulates! Vascular-borne growth inhibitory signal 
BP: !marks boundaries between! Inflorescence stem and lateral organs 
ER: !enhances! Radial constriction of pedicels 
ER: !parallels phyllotaxy changes in! bp lfy er pedicels 
BP: !counteracts! Lateral-organ associated asymmetries