The histochemical and cytochemical localization of abscisic acid (ABA)-induced H(2)O(2) production in leaves of maize (Zea mays L.) plants were examined, using 3,3-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and CeCl(3) staining, respectively, and the relationship between ABA-induced H(2)O(2) production and ABA-induced subcellular activities of antioxidant enzymes was studied. H(2)O(2) generated in response to ABA treatment was detected within 0.5 h in major veins of the leaves and maximized at about 2-4 h. In mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, ABA-induced H(2)O(2) accumulation was observed only in apoplast, and the greatest accumulation occurred in the walls of mesophyll cells facing large intercellular spaces. Meanwhile, ABA treatment led to a significant increase in the activities of the leaf chloroplastic and cytosolic antioxidant enzymes superoxide dismutase (SOD), ascorbate peroxidase (APX) and glutathione reductase (GR), and pretreatment with the NADPH oxidase inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), the O (2) (-) scavenger Tiron and the H(2)O(2) scavenger dimethylthiourea (DMTU) almost completely arrested the increase in the activities of these antioxidant enzymes. Our results indicate that the accumulation of apoplastic H(2)O(2) is involved in the induction of the chloroplastic and cytosolic antioxidant enzymes. Moreover, an oxidative stress induced by paraquat (PQ), which generates O (2) (-) and then H(2)O(2) in chloroplasts, also up-regulated the activities of the chloroplastic and cytosolic antioxidant enzymes, and the up-regulation was blocked by the pretreatment with Tiron and DMTU. These data suggest that H(2)O(2) produced at a specific cellular site could coordinate the activities of antioxidant enzymes in different subcellular compartments.

ABA: !induces! H2O2
H2O2: !accumulates in! apoplast
ABA: !increases! activities of antioxidant enzymes
PQ: !induces! oxidative stress
Oxidative stress: !upregulates! activities of antioxidant enzymes
Tiron/DMTU: !block! upregulation of antioxidant enzymes