['16040662', 'Degradation of unsaturated fatty acids through the peroxisomal beta-oxidation  pathway requires the participation of auxiliary enzymes in addition to the  enzymes of the core beta-oxidation cycle. The auxiliary enzyme  delta(3,5),delta(2,4)-dienoyl-coenzyme A (CoA) isomerase has been well studied in  yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and mammals, but no plant homolog had been  identified and characterized at the biochemical or molecular level. A candidate  gene (At5g43280) was identified in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) encoding a  protein showing homology to the rat (Rattus norvegicus)  delta(3,5),delta(2,4)-dienoyl-CoA isomerase, and possessing an enoyl-CoA  hydratase/isomerase fingerprint as well as aspartic and glutamic residues shown  to be important for catalytic activity of the mammalian enzyme. The protein,  named AtDCI1, contains a peroxisome targeting sequence at the C terminus, and  fusion of a fluorescent protein to AtDCI1 directed the chimeric protein to the  peroxisome in onion (Allium cepa) cells. AtDCI1 expressed in Escherichia coli was  shown to have delta(3,5),delta(2,4)-dienoyl-CoA isomerase activity in vitro.  Furthermore, using the synthesis of polyhydroxyalkanoate in yeast peroxisomes as  an analytical tool to study the beta-oxidation cycle, expression of AtDCI1 was  shown to complement the yeast mutant deficient in the  delta(3,5),delta(2,4)-dienoyl-CoA isomerase, thus showing that AtDCI1 is also  appropriately targeted to the peroxisome in yeast and has  delta(3,5),delta(2,4)-dienoyl-CoA isomerase activity in vivo. The AtDCI1 gene is  expressed constitutively in several tissues, but expression is particularly  induced during seed germination. Proteins showing high homology with AtDCI1 are  found in gymnosperms as well as angiosperms belonging to the Monocotyledon or  Dicotyledon classes.', '2005 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.064311', 'Poirier']

AtDCI1: !localizes to! peroxisome 
AtDCI1: !synthesizes! delta(3,5),delta(2,4)-dienoyl-CoA isomerase 
AtDCI1: !enhances! beta-oxidation cycle 
AtDCI1: !represses! yeast mutant deficient in delta(3,5),delta(2,4)-dienoyl-CoA isomerase 
AtDCI1: !expressed in! several tissues 
AtDCI1: !induced during! seed germination 
AtDCI1: !homologous to! proteins in gymnosperms and angiosperms