We previously gave a picture of the homeostatic characteristics of polyamine (PA) biosynthesis and conjugation in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) plant organs during development. In this work, we present the sites and regulation of PA catabolism related to cell division/expansion, cell cycle progression, and vascular development in the tobacco plant. Diamine oxidase (DAO), PA oxidase (PAO), peroxidases (POXs), and putrescine N-methyltransferase expressions follow temporally and spatially discrete patterns in shoot apical cells, leaves (apical, peripheral, and central regions), acropetal and basipetal petiole regions, internodes, and young and old roots in developing plants. DAO and PAO produce hydrogen peroxide, a plant signal molecule and substrate for POXs. Gene expression and immunohistochemistry analyses reveal that amine oxidases in developing tobacco tissues precede and overlap with nascent nuclear DNA and also with POXs and lignification. In mature and old tissues, flow cytometry indicates that amine oxidase and POX activities, as well as pao gene and PAO protein levels, coincide with G2 nuclear phase and endoreduplication. In young versus the older roots, amine oxidases and POX expression decrease with parallel inhibition of G2 advance and endoreduplication, whereas putrescine N-methyltransferase dramatically increases. In both hypergeous and hypogeous tissues, DAO and PAO expression occurs in cells destined to undergo lignification, suggesting a different in situ localization. DNA synthesis early in development and the advance in cell cycle/endocycle are temporally and spatially related to PA catabolism and vascular development.

DAO: !produces! Hydrogen Peroxide 
PAO: !produces! Hydrogen Peroxide 
POXs: !require! Hydrogen Peroxide 
DAO: !coincides with! G2 Nuclear Phase 
PAO: !coincides with! G2 Nuclear Phase 
POXs: !coincides with! G2 Nuclear Phase 
Putrescine N-methyltransferase: !increases! in Mature/Old Tissues 
DAO: !localizes to! Cells Destined to Lignify 
PAO: !localizes to! Cells Destined to Lignify 
DNA Synthesis: !precedes! PA Catabolism 
Cell Cycle/Endocycle: !related to! PA Catabolism 
Vascular Development: !related to! PA Catabolism