['16045770', 'Subunit G of photosystem I is a nuclear-encoded protein, predicted to form two  transmembrane alpha-helices separated by a loop region. We use in vitro import  assays to show that the positively charged loop domain faces the stroma, whilst  the N- and C-termini most likely face the lumen. PSI-G constructs in which a His-  or Strep-tag is placed at the C-terminus or in the loop region insert with the  same topology as wild-type photosystem I subunit G (PSI-G). However, the presence  of the tags in the loop make the membrane-inserted protein significantly more  sensitive to trypsin, apparently by disrupting the interaction between the loop  and the PSI core. Knock-out plants lacking PSI-G were transformed with constructs  encoding the C-terminal and loop-tagged PSI-G proteins. Experiments on thylakoids  from the transgenic lines show that the C-terminally tagged versions of PSI-G  adopt the same topology as wild-type PSI-G, whereas the loop-tagged versions  affect the sensitivity of the loop region to trypsin, thus confirming the in  vitro observations. Furthermore, purification of PSI complexes from transgenic  plants revealed that all the tagged versions of PSI-G are incorporated and  retained in the PSI complex, although the C-terminally tagged variants of PSI-G  were preferentially retained. This suggests that the loop region of PSI-G is  important for proper integration into the PSI core. Our experiments demonstrate  that it is possible to produce His- and Strep-tagged PSI in plants, and provide  further evidence that the topology of membrane proteins is dictated by the  distribution of positive charges, which resist translocation across membranes.', '2005 Aug', 'FEBS J', '10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04824.x', 'Jensen']

Subunit G: !faces! stroma 
Subunit G: !inserts with! same topology 
His-tag/Strep-tag: !disrupts! interaction between loop and PSI core 
Knock-out plants: !transformed with! constructs encoding C-terminal/loop-tagged PSI-G proteins 
Thylakoids: !confirm! in vitro observations 
Tagged versions of PSI-G: !incorporated and retained! in PSI complex 
Loop region of PSI-G: !important for! proper integration into PSI core 
Positive charges: !resist! translocation across membranes