['16045476', "Protecting crop yield under drought stress is a major challenge for modern  agriculture. One biotechnological target for improving plant drought tolerance is  the genetic manipulation of the stress response to the hormone abscisic acid  (ABA). Previous genetic studies have implicated the involvement of the  beta-subunit of Arabidopsis farnesyltransferase (ERA1) in the regulation of ABA  sensing and drought tolerance. Here we show that molecular manipulation of  protein farnesylation in Arabidopsis, through downregulation of either the alpha-  or beta-subunit of farnesyltransferase enhances the plant's response to ABA and  drought tolerance. To test the effectiveness of tailoring farnesylation in a crop  plant, transgenic Brassica napus carrying an ERA1 antisense construct driven by a  drought-inducible rd29A promoter was examined. In comparison with the  non-transgenic control, transgenic canola showed enhanced ABA sensitivity, as  well as significant reduction in stomatal conductance and water transpiration  under drought stress conditions. The antisense downregulation of canola  farnesyltransferase for drought tolerance is a conditional and reversible  process, which depends on the amount of available water in the soil. Furthermore,  transgenic plants were more resistant to water deficit-induced seed abortion  during flowering. Results from three consecutive years of field trial studies  suggest that with adequate water, transgenic canola plants produced the same  amount of seed as the parental control. However, under moderate drought stress  conditions at flowering, the seed yields of transgenic canola were significantly  higher than the control. Using protein farnesyltransferase as an effective  target, these results represent a successful demonstration of engineered drought  tolerance and yield protection in a crop plant under laboratory and field  conditions.", '2005 Aug', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02463.x', 'Huang']

ERA1: !affects! ABA sensing 
ERA1: !enhances! drought tolerance 
farnesyltransferase: !downregulated to! enhance ABA response 
farnesyltransferase: !enhances! drought tolerance 
transgenic canola: !shows! enhanced ABA sensitivity 
transgenic canola: !reduces! water transpiration 
transgenic canola: !resists! seed abortion 
transgenic canola: !produces! same amount of seed 
transgenic canola: !yields! higher seed under drought stress