['16055682', 'Members of the homeodomain leucine zipper (HDZip) family of transcription factors  are present in a wide range of plants, from mosses to higher plants, but not in  other eukaryotes. The HDZip genes act in developmental processes, including  vascular tissue and trichome development, and several of them have been suggested  to be involved in the mediation of external signals to regulate plant growth. The  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome contains 47 HDZip genes, which, based  on sequence criteria, have been grouped into four different classes: HDZip I to  IV. In this article, we present an overview of the class I HDZip genes in  Arabidopsis. We describe their expression patterns, transcriptional regulation  properties, duplication history, and phylogeny. The phylogeny of HDZip class I  genes is supported by data on the duplication history of the genes, as well as  the intron/exon patterning of the HDZip-encoding motifs. The HDZip class I genes  were found to be widely expressed and partly to have overlapping expression  patterns at the organ level. Further, abscisic acid or water deficit treatments  and different light conditions affected the transcript levels of a majority of  the HDZip I genes. Within the gene family, our data show examples of closely  related HDZip genes with similarities in the function of the gene product, but a  divergence in expression pattern. In addition, six HDZip class I proteins tested  were found to be activators of gene expression. In conclusion, several HDZip I  genes appear to regulate similar cellular processes, although in different organs  or tissues and in response to different environmental signals.', '2005 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.063461', 'Soderman']

HDZip: !present in! plants 
HDZip: !act in! developmental processes 
HDZip: !grouped into! four classes 
HDZip: !expressed in! organs 
HDZip: !affected by! abscisic acid/water deficit treatments 
HDZip: !affected by! light conditions 
HDZip: !similar in! function 
HDZip: !diverge in! expression pattern 
HDZip: !activate! gene expression