['16055629', 'In mammals, electron-transfer flavoprotein:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (ETFQO) and  electron-transfer flavoprotein (ETF) are functionally associated, and ETF accepts  electrons from at least nine mitochondrial matrix flavoprotein dehydrogenases and  transfers them to ubiquinone in the inner mitochondrial membrane. In addition,  the mammalian ETF/ETFQO system plays a key role in beta-oxidation of fatty acids  and catabolism of amino acids and choline. By contrast, nothing is known of the  function of ETF and ETFQO in plants. Sequence analysis of the unique Arabidopsis  thaliana homologue of ETFQO revealed high similarity to the mammalian ETFQO  protein. Moreover, green fluorescent protein cellular localization experiments  suggested a mitochondrial location for this protein. RNA gel blot analysis  revealed that Arabidopsis ETFQO transcripts accumulated in long-term dark-treated  leaves. Analysis of three independent insertional mutants of Arabidopsis ETFQO  revealed a dramatic reduction in their ability to withstand extended darkness,  resulting in senescence and death within 10 d after transfer, whereas wild-type  plants remained viable for at least 15 d. Metabolite profiling of dark-treated  leaves of the wild type and mutants revealed a dramatic decline in sugar levels.  In contrast with the wild type, the mutants demonstrated a significant  accumulation of several amino acids, an intermediate of Leu catabolism, and,  strikingly, high-level accumulation of phytanoyl-CoA. These data demonstrate the  involvement of a mitochondrial protein, ETFQO, in the catabolism of Leu and  potentially of other amino acids in higher plants and also imply a novel role for  this protein in the chlorophyll degradation pathway activated during dark-induced  senescence and sugar starvation.', '2005 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.035162', 'Leaver']

ETFQO: !accepts electrons from! nine mitochondrial matrix flavoprotein dehydrogenases 
ETFQO: !transfers electrons to! ubiquinone 
ETFQO: !plays a key role in! beta-oxidation of fatty acids and catabolism of amino acids and choline 
ETFQO: !localizes to! mitochondria 
ETFQO: !involved in! catabolism of Leu and other amino acids 
ETFQO: !implies a novel role in! chlorophyll degradation pathway