['16081530', 'ARGONAUTE (AGO) RNA-binding proteins are involved in RNA silencing. They bind to  short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) through a conserved PAZ  domain, and, in animals, they assemble into a multisubunit RNA-induced silencing  complex (RISC). The mammalian AGO2, termed Slicer, directs siRNA- and  miRNA-mediated cleavage of a target RNA. In Arabidopsis, there are 10 members of  the AGO family, and the AGO1 protein is potentially the Slicer component in  different RNA-silencing pathways. Here, we show that AGO1 selectively recruits  certain classes of short silencing-related RNA. AGO1 is physically associated  with miRNAs, transacting siRNAs, and transgene-derived siRNAs but excludes  virus-derived siRNAs and 24-nt siRNAs involved in chromatin silencing. We also  show that AGO1 has Slicer activity. It mediates the in vitro cleavage of a mir165  target RNA in a manner that depends on the sequence identity of amino acid  residues in the PIWI domain that are predicted by homology with animal  Slicer-competent AGO proteins to constitute the RNase catalytic center. However,  unlike animals, we find no evidence that AGO1 Slicer is in a high molecular  weight RNA-induced silencing complex. The Slicer activity fractionates as a  complex of approximately 150 kDa that likely constitutes the AGO1 protein and  associated RNA without any other proteins. Based on sequence similarity, we  predict that other Arabidopsis AGOs might have a similar catalytic activity but  recruit different subsets of siRNAs or miRNAs.', '2005 Aug 16', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0505461102', 'Baulcombe']

AGO1: !selectively recruits! short silencing-related RNA 
AGO1: !physically associated with! miRNAs, transacting siRNAs, and transgene-derived siRNAs 
AGO1: !excludes! virus-derived siRNAs and 24-nt siRNAs 
AGO1: !mediates! in vitro cleavage of a mir165 target RNA 
AGO1: !fractionates as! complex of approximately 150 kDa 
Arabidopsis AGOs: !predicted to have! similar catalytic activity