['16103374', 'Boron (B) is essential for plants but toxic when present in excess. Arabidopsis  thaliana BOR1 is a B exporter for xylem loading and is essential for efficient B  translocation from roots to shoots under B limitation. B translocation to shoots  was enhanced under B limitation in WT but not in bor1-1 mutant plants. The  enhanced translocation was suppressed upon resupply of high levels of B within  several hours. Unlike a number of transporters for essential mineral nutrients,  BOR1 mRNA accumulation was not strongly affected by B conditions. However,  accumulation of a constitutively expressed BOR1-GFP fusion protein was elevated  under conditions of limited B supply. Upon resupply of high levels of B, BOR1-GFP  was degraded within several hours. These findings demonstrate that  posttranscriptional mechanisms play a major role in regulation of BOR1  accumulation. Confocal laser scanning microscopy of root tip cells showed that  BOR1-GFP is localized to the plasma membrane under B limitation. Shortly after B  application, the protein was observed in dot-like structures in the cytoplasm  before degradation. Colocalization studies of the fusion protein with an  endocytic tracer FM4-64 and an endosomal Rab-GTPase Ara7 fused to monomeric red  fluorescent protein suggested that BOR1 is transferred from the plasma membrane  via the endosomes to the vacuole for degradation. These results establish that  endocytosis and degradation of BOR1 are regulated by B availability, to avoid  accumulation of toxic levels of B in shoots under high-B supply, while protecting  the shoot from B deficiency under B limitation.', '2005 Aug 23', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0502060102', 'Fujiwara']

BOR1: !exports! B 
BOR1: !accumulates! under B limitation 
BOR1: !degrades! upon resupply of high levels of B 
BOR1: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
BOR1: !transferred via! endosomes 
BOR1: !degraded in! vacuole 
B: !enhances! B translocation to shoots 
B: !suppresses! enhanced translocation upon resupply