['16126836', 'Cell-to-cell communication in plants involves the trafficking of macromolecules  through specialized intercellular organelles, termed plasmodesmata. This exchange  of proteins and RNA is likely regulated, and a role for protein phosphorylation  has been implicated, but specific components remain to be identified. Here, we  describe the molecular characterization of a plasmodesmal-associated protein  kinase (PAPK). A 34-kD protein, isolated from a plasmodesmal preparation,  exhibits calcium-independent kinase activity and displays substrate specificity  in that it recognizes a subset of viral and endogenous non-cell-autonomous  proteins. This PAPK specifically phosphorylates the C-terminal residues of  tobacco mosaic virus movement protein (TMV MP); this posttranslational  modification has been shown to affect MP function. Molecular analysis of purified  protein established that tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) PAPK is a member of the  casein kinase I family. Subcellular localization studies identified a possible  Arabidopsis thaliana PAPK homolog, PAPK1. TMV MP and PAPK1 are colocalized within  cross-walls in a pattern consistent with targeting to plasmodesmata. Moreover,  Arabidopsis PAPK1 also phosphorylates TMV MP in vitro at its C terminus. These  results strongly suggest that Arabidopsis PAPK1 is a close homolog of tobacco  PAPK. Thus, PAPK1 represents a novel plant protein kinase that is targeted to  plasmodesmata and may play a regulatory role in macromolecular trafficking  between plant cells.', '2005 Oct', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.034330', 'Lucas']

PAPK: !isolated from! plasmodesmal preparation 
PAPK: !recognizes! subset of viral and endogenous non-cell-autonomous proteins 
TMV MP: !phosphorylated by! PAPK 
TMV MP: !affects function of! PAPK 
PAPK: !member of! casein kinase I family 
PAPK1: !colocalized with! TMV MP 
PAPK1: !phosphorylates! TMV MP 
PAPK1: !close homolog of! tobacco PAPK 
PAPK1: !targeted to! plasmodesmata 
PAPK1: !may play role in! macromolecular trafficking