Arabidopsis thaliana plants grown from ethyl methane sulfonate-treated seeds were screened for so-called que mutants, which are affected in non-photochemical energy quenching. Based on video imaging of chlorophyll fluorescence an energy dissipation mutant, que1, was identified, isolated and characterized. Similar to the npq mutants, the que1 mutant showed a drastically reduced capacity for pH-dependent energy dissipation, qE, but without affecting the Delta pH-dependent conformational changes at 535 nm (DeltaA (535)), which have been supposed to be obligatorily correlated with qE and to reflect pH-regulated binding of zeaxanthin to the PsbS protein. Western blot and DNA sequence analysis revealed that neither a reduced expression of the PsbS protein nor a mutation in the PsbS gene was responsible for the missing qE in que1. Measurements of 9-aminoacridine fluorescence quenching showed that the acidification of the thylakoid lumen was also not affected in the mutant. Furthermore, que1 was able to convert violaxanthin to zeaxanthin. However, unusual characteristics of zeaxanthin formation in the mutant pointed at an altered availability of violaxanthin for de-epoxidation. This was further accompanied by a decrease of the photochemical quenching of chlorophyll fluorescence (qP), an increase of the portion of oxidized P700 and a reduction of the electron transport rate. These characteristics indicate changes in the organization of the thylakoid membrane that affect linear electron transport (but not lumen acidification) and the formation of energy dissipation in photosystem II. Preliminary genetic analysis revealed that the phenotype of que1 is related to two different mutations, mapped to the lower arms of chromosomes 1 and 4.

PsbS: !affects! qE
DeltaA (535): !reflects! pH-regulated binding of zeaxanthin to PsbS
que1: !reduces! capacity for pH-dependent energy dissipation
9-aminoacridine fluorescence quenching: !measures! acidification of thylakoid lumen
violaxanthin: !converts to! zeaxanthin
que1: !alters availability of! violaxanthin for de-epoxidation
qP: !decreases! photochemical quenching of chlorophyll fluorescence
P700: !increases! portion of oxidized P700
electron transport rate: !reduces! in que1
thylakoid membrane: !affects! linear electron transport