The major fatty acid component of castor (Ricinus communis L.) oil is ricinoleic acid (12-hydroxy-cis-9-octadecenoic acid), and unsaturated hydroxy acid accounts for >85% of the total fatty acids in triacylglycerol (TAG). TAG had a higher ricinoleate content at position 2 than at positions 1 and 3. Although lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.51), which catalyzes acylation of LPA at position 2, was expected to utilize ricinoleoyl-CoA preferentially over other fatty acyl-CoAs, no activity was found for ricinoleoyl-CoA in vitro at concentrations at which other unsaturated acyl-CoAs were incorporated rapidly. However, activity for ricinoleoyl-CoA appeared with addition of polyamines (putrescine, spermidine, and spermine), while polyamines decreased the rates of incorporation of other acyl-CoAs into position 2. The order of effect of polyamines on LPA acyltransferase activity was spermine > spermidine >> putrescine. At concentrations of spermine and spermidine of >0.1 mM, ricinoleoyl-CoA served as an effective substrate for LPA acyltransferase reaction. The concentrations of spermine and spermidine in the developing seeds were estimated at approximately 0.09 and approximately 0.63 mM, respectively. These stimulatory effects for incorporation of ricinoleate were specific to polyamines, but basic amino acids were ineffective as cations. In contrast, in microsomes from safflower seeds that do not contain ricinoleic acid, spermine and spermidine stimulated the LPA acyltransferase reaction for all acyl-CoAs tested, including ricinoleoyl-CoA. Although the fatty acid composition of TAG depends on both acyl-CoA composition in the cell and substrate specificity of acyltransferases, castor bean polyamines are crucial for incorporation of ricinoleate into position 2 of LPA. Polyamines are essential for synthesis of 2-ricinoleoyl phosphatidic acid in developing castor seeds.

LPA acyltransferase: !requires! polyamines 
polyamines: !stimulate! incorporation of ricinoleate 
ricinoleoyl-CoA: !incorporated by! LPA acyltransferase 
spermine: !more effective than! spermidine 
putrescine: !least effective of! polyamines 
basic amino acids: !ineffective as! cations