Six-month-old oleander (Nerium oleander L.) pot plants, derived from vegetative propagation by cuttings, were tested for their ability to cold hardening. Damage of the non-acclimated (NA) plants was visible when treated by low freezing temperatures (below -2 degrees C). The responses of total proteins, leucine aminopeptidase (LAP), esterase (EST) and acid phosphatase (ACP) isoforms of NA and cold-acclimated (CA; 4 degrees C for 14 days) plants were compared using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. These molecular markers were also compared in NA and CA plants which received for 2h temperatures of 0, -2, -4, -6 and -8 degrees C. A new 38-kDa polypeptide appeared from day 7 to 14 during the acclimation treatment in the bark extracts and on day 14 in the leaf extracts. The above-mentioned polypeptide band (38 kDa) strongly appeared in all freezing treatments (0, -2, -4, -6 and -8 degrees C) in both bark and leaf extracts of the CA plants. Alterations in the number and the intensity of LAP and EST isoforms as well as in the intensity of ACP isoforms were observed in both bark and leaf of the CA oleander plants. A newly expressed EST isoform is proposed as biochemical marker for the cold acclimation treatment. CO2 assimilation rates (A) as well as transpiration rates (E) in NA plants were positive in 0 degrees C and negative in all temperatures below zero in the freezing treatments. In contrast, CO2 assimilation rates (A) and transpiration rates (E) were positive in CA plants in all temperatures of freezing treatment. A significant decrease (P<0.05) in chlorophyll (Chl) a, Chl a+b concentration and Chl a/b ratio were noticed in oleander plants during the acclimation treatment (from day 0 to 14), while Chl b concentration was unchanged at the respective time. On the other hand, no significant (P<0.05) differences were observed in the freezing treatments.

Gene: !affects! Total proteins 
Gene: !affects! Leucine aminopeptidase 
Gene: !affects! Esterase 
Gene: !affects! Acid phosphatase 
Gene: !synthesizes! 38-kDa polypeptide 
Gene: !affects! CO2 assimilation rates 
Gene: !affects! Transpiration rates 
Gene: !affects! Chlorophyll a 
Gene: !affects! Chlorophyll a+b 
Gene: !affects! Chlorophyll a/b ratio