The temperature response of net CO(2) assimilation rate (A), the rate of whole-chain electron transport, the activity and activation state of Rubisco, and the pool sizes of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) and 3-phosphoglyceric acid (PGA) were assessed in sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) grown under greenhouse conditions. Above the thermal optimum of photosynthesis, the activation state of Rubisco declined with increasing temperature. Doubling CO(2) above 370 mubar further reduced the activation state, while reducing CO(2) by one-half increased it. At cool temperature (<16 degrees C), the activation state of Rubisco declined at CO(2) levels where photosynthesis was unaffected by a 90% reduction in O(2) content. Reduction of the partial pressure of CO(2) at cool temperature also enhanced the activation state of Rubisco. The rate of electron transport showed a pronounced temperature response with the same temperature optimum as A at elevated CO(2). RuBP pool size and the RuBP-to-PGA ratio declined with increasing temperature. Increasing CO(2) also reduced the RuBP pool size. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the reduction in the activation state of Rubisco at high and low temperature is a regulated response to a limitation in one of the processes contributing to the rate of RuBP regeneration. To further evaluate this possibility, we used measured estimates of Rubisco capacity, electron transport capacity, and the inorganic phosphate regeneration capacity to model the response of A to temperature. At elevated CO(2), the activation state of Rubisco declined at high temperatures where electron transport capacity was predicted to be limiting, and at cooler temperatures where the inorganic phosphate regeneration capacity was limiting. At low CO(2), where Rubisco capacity was predicted to limit photosynthesis, full activation of Rubisco was observed at all measurement temperatures.

Rubisco: !declines with! increasing temperature 
CO2: !reduces! activation state of Rubisco 
O2: !reduced by 90%! photosynthesis unaffected 
CO2: !reduces! RuBP pool size 
RuBP: !regeneration rate limited by! one of processes 
Rubisco capacity: !predicted to limit! photosynthesis at low CO2