Unlike monopodial plants, in which flowering terminates growth of a shoot, plants exhibiting sympodial shoot architecture maintain the potential for indeterminate growth even after converting to floral development. This vegetative indeterminacy is conferred by a special type of axillary meristem, the sympodial meristem, which exhibits precocious but determinate growth. The reiterative formation of sympodial meristems as the plant grows results in a shoot composed of a series of modules, each consisting of a limited number of vegetative nodes and terminated by a flower or inflorescence. To determine how sympodial meristems differ from other shoot meristems, we examined interactions between mutations that affect various shoot meristem types in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.). Analysis of double mutant combinations of jointless, lateral suppressor, self-pruning, blind, and anantha showed that sympodial meristems share regulatory features with inflorescence meristems. Genetic studies on the jointless mutation implicated this gene in suppressing sympodial meristem fate in the inflorescence. As this mutation has a second phenotype, the elimination of the pedicel abscission zone, we examined the expression pattern of JOINTLESS to test whether pedicel development is involved in directing shoot architecture. We found that this MADS box gene is expressed in a variety of shoot meristems, including inflorescence, floral, sympodial, and axillary meristems, as well as in early staged floral organs, in sporogenous tissues of anthers, and in ovules. Lack of expression in developing pedicels indicates abscission zone development does not rely on JOINTLESS transcription in the differentiating cells. We conclude that the primary role of JOINTLESS is to suppress sympodial meristem identity in inflorescence meristems.

Gene: !affects! Shoot Meristem Types 
Gene: !suppresses! Sympodial Meristem Fate 
Gene: !expresses in! Inflorescence Meristems 
Gene: !expresses in! Floral Meristems 
Gene: !expresses in! Sympodial Meristems 
Gene: !expresses in! Axillary Meristems 
Gene: !expresses in! Early Staged Floral Organs 
Gene: !expresses in! Sporogenous Tissues of Anthers 
Gene: !expresses in! Ovules 
Gene: !lacks expression in! Developing Pedicels