Abscission was studied in immature apple fruits (cv. Golden Delicious) during the physiological drop. Fruitlet populations, characterized by different abscission potential, were analysed. Non-abscising fruitlets (NAF) were obtained from central flowers borne in clusters where all the lateral flowers had been removed at bloom while abscising fruitlets (AF) were derived from lateral fruitlets of trees sprayed with benzylaminopurine (BAP) at 200 ppm, 17 d after petal fall (APF), when the fruit cross diameter was about 10-12 mm. Fruit shedding, monitored at the end of the June drop, was significantly different in the two populations, being less than 10%, and more than 90%, in NAF and AF, respectively. In AF, fruit drop peaked around 33 d after petal fall (APF) and was preceded by an increase in ethylene around 20 d APF. Transcript analysis was performed from 17-24 d APF, since preliminary experiments pointed out that major changes in expression of abscission related genes occurred within this period. Transcript accumulation of genes involved in ethylene biosynthesis (MdACS5B and MdACO) and action (MdERS1, MdETR1, and MdCTR1) was studied in the seed, cortex, peduncle, and abscission zone (AZ) of the two fruit populations. MdACS5B and MdACO transcripts accumulated along the experimental period in AF population, even though at a different magnitude, while ethylene evolution declined after peaking at day three. MdETR1, MdERS1, and MdCTR1 expression patterns depended on tissue and/or population. The ERS/ETR ratio was higher in AF than in NAF populations. Overall results pointed out that apple fruitlet drop is preceded by a stimulation of ethylene biosynthesis and a gain in sensitivity to the hormone.

MdACS5B: !accumulates in! AF population
MdACO: !accumulates in! AF population
MdETR1: !depends on! tissue/population
MdERS1: !depends on! tissue/population
MdCTR1: !depends on! tissue/population
MdERS1: !higher ratio in! AF population
MdETR1: !higher ratio in! AF population
ethylene: !evolves before! fruit drop
ethylene: !stimulates biosynthesis of! MdACS5B, MdACO