Accurate DNA replication is one of the most important events in the life of a cell. To perform this task, the cell utilizes several DNA polymerase complexes. We investigated the role of DNA polymerase epsilon during gametophyte and seed development using forward and reverse genetic approaches. In Arabidopsis, the catalytic subunit of this complex is encoded by two genes, AtPOL2a and AtPOL2b, whereas the second largest regulatory subunit AtDPB2 is present as a unique complete copy. Disruption of AtPOL2a or AtDPB2 resulted in a sporophytic embryo-defective phenotype, whilst mutations in AtPOL2b produced no visible effects. Loss of AtDPB2 function resulted in a severe reduction in nuclear divisions, both in the embryo and in the endosperm. Mutations in AtPOL2a allowed several rounds of mitosis to proceed, often with aberrant planes of division. Moreover, AtDPB2 was not expressed during development of the female gametophyte, which requires three post-meiotic nuclear divisions. Since a consensus binding site for E2F transcription factors was identified in the promoter region of both genes, the promoter-reporter fusion technique was used to show that luciferase activity was increased at specific phases of the cell cycle in synchronized tobacco BY-2 cells. Our results support the idea that fertilization may utilize the mechanisms of cell cycle transcriptional regulation of genes to reactivate the divisions of the oosphere and central cell.

AtPOL2a: !encodes! catalytic subunit 
AtPOL2b: !encodes! catalytic subunit 
AtDPB2: !encodes! regulatory subunit 
AtPOL2a: !disruption of! sporophytic embryo-defective phenotype 
AtPOL2b: !disruption of! no visible effects 
AtDPB2: !disruption of! severe reduction in nuclear divisions 
AtPOL2a: !allows! several rounds of mitosis 
AtDPB2: !not expressed during! female gametophyte development 
E2F transcription factors: !binds to! AtPOL2a and AtPOL2b promoters 
Tobacco BY-2 cells: !increased luciferase activity at! specific phases of cell cycle