['16236729', 'The maturation of c-type cytochromes requires the covalent ligation of the heme  cofactor to reduced cysteines of the CXXCH motif of apocytochromes. In contrast  to mitochondria of other eukaryotes, plant mitochondria follow a pathway close to  that found in alpha- and gamma-proteobacteria. We identified a nuclear-encoded  protein, AtCCMH, the Arabidopsis thaliana ortholog of bacterial CcmH/CycL  proteins. In bacteria, CcmH and the thioredoxin CcmG are components of a  periplasmic thio-reduction pathway proposed to maintain the apocytochrome c  cysteines in a reduced state. AtCCMH is located exclusively in mitochondria.  AtCCMH is an integral protein of the inner membrane with the conserved RCXXC  motif facing the intermembrane space. Reduction assays show that the cysteine  thiols in the RCXXC motif of AtCCMH can form a disulfide bond that can be reduced  by enzymatic thiol reductants. A reduced form of AtCCMH can reduce the  intra-disulfide bridge of a model peptide of apocytochrome c. When expressed in  Escherichia coli, AtCCMH coimmunoprecipitates with the bacterial CcmF, a proposed  component of the heme lyase. Blue-native PAGE of mitochondrial membrane complexes  reveals the colocalization of AtCCMH and AtCcmF(N2) in a 500-kDa complex. Yeast  two-hybrid assays show an interaction between the AtCCMH intermembrane space  domain and A. thaliana apocytochrome c. A. thaliana ccmh/ccmh knockout plants  show lethality at the torpedo stage of embryogenesis. Our results show that  AtCCMH is an essential mitochondrial protein with characteristics consistent with  its proposed apocytochrome c-reducing and heme lyase function.', '2005 Nov 1', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0503473102', 'Bonnard']

AtCCMH: !localizes to! mitochondria 
AtCCMH: !interacts with! AtCcmF(N2) 
AtCCMH: !reduces! intra-disulfide bridge of model peptide of apocytochrome c 
AtCCMH: !interacts with! A. thaliana apocytochrome c 
AtCCMH: !enhances! maturation of c-type cytochromes