To investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying susceptibility of legumes to the root pathogen Aphanomyces euteiches (oomycota), comparative proteomic studies have been carried out. In a first approach, we have analysed two Medicago truncatula lines of the French CORE collection (F83.005-5 (R2002) and F83.005-9 (R2002)), which showed either increased or decreased susceptibility to A. euteiches as compared to the widely adopted line A17. Several proteins were identified to be differentially induced after pathogen challenge in the two M. truncatula accessions with altered disease susceptibility, whereof proteins with increased abundances in the more resistant line F83.005-9 could be involved in mechanisms that lead to an improved disease resistance. Among these proteins, we identified two proteasome alpha subunits, which might be involved in defense response. To broaden our studies on A. euteiches-tolerance of M. truncatula, we investigated two other phenomena that lead to an either increased A. euteiches-resistance or to an enhanced susceptibility. The topic of an enhanced plant resistance to A. euteiches was studied in plants showing a bioprotective effect of a pre-established arbuscular mycorrhiza (AM) symbiosis. Evaluation of root fresh weights and pathogen spreading in the root system clearly indicate that mycorrhizal plants show increased A. euteiches-resistance as compared to non-mycorrhizal plants. Proteome analyses revealed the induction of similar protein patterns as in the M. truncatula accessions with comparatively high resistance level to A. euteiches. In a third approach, increased A. euteiches susceptibility was effected by exogenous abscisic acid (ABA) application prior to root infection. Evaluation of the abundance levels of a group of pathogenesis related class 10 (PR10)-like proteins, which were previously identified to be regulated after A. euteiches infection, revealed a correlation between the abundance levels of these proteins and the A. euteiches infection level or severity.

F83.005-5: !decreased susceptibility to! A. euteiches
F83.005-9: !increased susceptibility to! A. euteiches
AM symbiosis: !enhances resistance to! A. euteiches
ABA application: !enhances susceptibility to! A. euteiches
PR10 proteins: !correlate with! A. euteiches infection level