There is considerable variability among barley (Hordeum vulgare) genotypes in their ability to grow in soils containing a low level of plant available manganese (Mn). The physiological basis for the tolerance to low Mn availability is unknown. In this work, Mn2+ influx and compartmentation in roots of the Mn-efficient genotype Vanessa and the Mn-inefficient genotype Antonia were investigated. Two separate Mn transport systems, mediating high-affinity Mn2+ influx at concentrations up to 130 nm and low-affinity Mn2+ influx at higher concentrations, were identified in both genotypes. The two genotypes differed only in high-affinity kinetics with the Mn-efficient genotype Vanessa having almost 4 times higher V(max) than the inefficient Antonia, but similar K(m) values. Online inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry measurements verified that the observed differences in high-affinity influx resulted in a higher Mn net uptake of Vanessa compared to Antonia. Further evidence for the importance of the differences in high-affinity uptake kinetics for Mn acquisition was obtained in a hydroponic system with mixed cultivation of the two genotypes at a continuously low Mn concentration (10-50 nm) similar to that occurring in soil solution. Under these conditions, Vanessa had a competitive advantage and contained 55% to 75% more Mn in the shoots than did Antonia. Subcellular compartmentation analysis of roots based on 54Mn2+ efflux established that up to 93% and 83% of all Mn was present in the vacuole in Vanessa and Antonia, respectively. It is concluded that differential capacity for high-affinity Mn influx contributes to differences between barley genotypes in Mn efficiency.

Mn2+: !influxes with! high-affinity in Vanessa 
Mn2+: !influxes with! low-affinity in Antonia 
Vanessa: !has higher! V(max) than Antonia 
Vanessa: !has similar! K(m) to Antonia 
Vanessa: !has higher! net uptake than Antonia 
Vanessa: !has competitive advantage over! Antonia 
Vanessa: !contains more! Mn in shoots than Antonia 
Mn2+: !compartmentalizes to! vacuole in Vanessa 
Mn2+: !compartmentalizes to! vacuole in Antonia