Chloroplasts of maize (Zea mays) leaves differentiate into specific bundle sheath (BS) and mesophyll (M) types to accommodate C4 photosynthesis. Consequences for other plastid functions are not well understood but are addressed here through a quantitative comparative proteome analysis of purified M and BS chloroplast stroma. Three independent techniques were used, including cleavable stable isotope coded affinity tags. Enzymes involved in lipid biosynthesis, nitrogen import, and tetrapyrrole and isoprenoid biosynthesis are preferentially located in the M chloroplasts. By contrast, enzymes involved in starch synthesis and sulfur import preferentially accumulate in BS chloroplasts. The different soluble antioxidative systems, in particular peroxiredoxins, accumulate at higher levels in M chloroplasts. We also observed differential accumulation of proteins involved in expression of plastid-encoded proteins (e.g., EF-Tu, EF-G, and mRNA binding proteins) and thylakoid formation (VIPP1), whereas others were equally distributed. Enzymes related to the C4 shuttle, the carboxylation and regeneration phase of the Calvin cycle, and several regulators (e.g., CP12) distributed as expected. However, enzymes involved in triose phosphate reduction and triose phosphate isomerase are primarily located in the M chloroplasts, indicating that the M-localized triose phosphate shuttle should be viewed as part of the BS-localized Calvin cycle, rather than a parallel pathway.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !localizes to! M chloroplasts
Gene: !localizes to! BS chloroplasts
Gene: !enhances! Lipid biosynthesis
Gene: !enhances! Nitrogen import
Gene: !enhances! Tetrapyrrole and isoprenoid biosynthesis
Gene: !enhances! Starch synthesis
Gene: !enhances! Sulfur import
Gene: !enhances! Soluble antioxidative systems
Gene: !enhances! Expression of plastid-encoded proteins
Gene: !enhances! Thylakoid formation
Gene: !enhances! C4 shuttle
Gene: !enhances! Carboxylation and regeneration phase of Calvin cycle
Gene: !enhances! Triose phosphate reduction
Gene: !enhances! Triose phosphate isomerase