['16244868', 'The HP1 family proteins are involved in several aspects of chromatin function and  regulation in Drosophila, mammals and the fission yeast. Here we investigate the  localization of LHP1, the unique Arabidopsis thaliana HP1 homolog known at  present time, to approach its function. A functional LHP1-GFP fusion protein,  able to restore the wild-type phenotype in the lhp1 mutant, was used to analyze  the subnuclear distribution of LHP1 in both A. thaliana and Nicotiana tabacum. In  A. thaliana interphase nuclei, LHP1 was predominantly located outside the  heterochromatic chromocenters. No major aberrations were observed in  heterochromatin content or chromocenter organization in lhp1 plants. These data  indicate that LHP1 is mainly involved in euchromatin organization in A. thaliana.  In tobacco BY-2 cells, the LHP1 distribution, although in foci, slightly differed  suggesting that LHP1 localization is determined by the underlying genome  organization of plant species. Truncated LHP1 proteins expressed in vivo allowed  us to determine the function of the different segments in the localization. The  in foci distribution is dependent on the presence of the two chromo domains,  whereas the hinge region has some nucleolus-targeting properties. Furthermore,  like the animal HP1beta and HP1gamma subtypes, LHP1 dissociates from chromosomes  during mitosis. In transgenic plants expressing the LHP1-GFP fusion protein, two  major localization patterns were observed according to cell types suggesting that  localization evolves with age or differentiation states. Our results show  conversed characteristics of the A. thaliana HP1 homolog with the mammal HP1gamma  isoform, besides specific plant properties.', '2005 Nov', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-005-0129-4', 'Gaudin']

LHP1: !localizes to! euchromatin 
LHP1: !dissociates from! chromosomes during mitosis 
LHP1: !differs in! localization according to plant species 
LHP1: !depends on! presence of chromo domains 
LHP1: !has nucleolus-targeting properties! hinge region 
LHP1: !evolves with! age or differentiation states