The Arabidopsis thaliana transparent testa10 (tt10) mutant exhibits a delay in developmentally determined browning of the seed coat, also called the testa. Seed coat browning is caused by the oxidation of flavonoids, particularly proanthocyanidins, which are polymers of flavan-3-ol subunits such as epicatechin and catechin. The tt10 mutant seeds accumulate more epicatechin monomers and more soluble proanthocyanidins than wild-type seeds. Moreover, intact testa cells of tt10 cannot trigger H2O2-independent browning in the presence of epicatechin and catechin, in contrast with wild-type cells. UV-visible light detection and mass spectrometry revealed that the major oxidation products obtained with epicatechin alone are yellow dimers called dehydrodiepicatechin A. These products differ from proanthocyanidins in the nature and position of their interflavan linkages. Flavonol composition was also affected in tt10 seeds, which exhibited a higher ratio of quercetin rhamnoside monomers versus dimers than wild-type seeds. We identified the TT10 gene by a candidate gene approach. TT10 encodes a protein with strong similarity to laccase-like polyphenol oxidases. It is expressed essentially in developing testa, where it colocalizes with the flavonoid end products proanthocyanidins and flavonols. Together, these data establish that TT10 is involved in the oxidative polymerization of flavonoids and functions as a laccase-type flavonoid oxidase.

tt10 mutant: !exhibits! delay in developmentally determined browning
tt10 mutant: !accumulates! more epicatechin monomers and soluble proanthocyanidins
testa cells of tt10: !cannot trigger! H2O2-independent browning
UV-visible light detection: !revealed! yellow dimers called dehydrodiepicatechin A
tt10 seeds: !exhibited! higher ratio of quercetin rhamnoside monomers versus dimers
TT10 gene: !identified by! candidate gene approach
TT10 gene: !encodes! protein with strong similarity to laccase-like polyphenol oxidases
TT10 gene: !expressed! essentially in developing testa
TT10 gene: !colocalizes with! flavonoid end products proanthocyanidins and flavonols
TT10: !involved in! oxidative polymerization of flavonoids
TT10: !functions as! laccase-type flavonoid oxidase