['16244149', 'Programmed cell death, developmental senescence, and responses to pathogens are  linked through complex genetic controls that are influenced by redox regulation.  Here we show that the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) low vitamin C mutants,  vtc1 and vtc2, which have between 10% and 25% of wild-type ascorbic acid, exhibit  microlesions, express pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins, and have enhanced basal  resistance against infections caused by Pseudomonas syringae. The mutants have a  delayed senescence phenotype with smaller leaf cells than the wild type at  maturity. The vtc leaves have more glutathione than the wild type, with higher  ratios of reduced glutathione to glutathione disulfide. Expression of green  fluorescence protein (GFP) fused to the nonexpressor of PR protein 1 (GFP-NPR1)  was used to detect the presence of NPR1 in the nuclei of transformed plants.  Fluorescence was observed in the nuclei of 6- to 8-week-old GFP-NPR1 vtc1 plants,  but not in the nuclei of transformed GFP-NPR1 wild-type plants at any  developmental stage. The absence of senescence-associated gene 12 (SAG12) mRNA at  the time when constitutive cell death and basal resistance were detected confirms  that elaboration of innate immune responses in vtc plants does not result from  activation of early senescence. Moreover, H2O2-sensitive genes are not induced at  the time of systemic acquired resistance execution. These results demonstrate  that ascorbic acid abundance modifies the threshold for activation of plant  innate defense responses via redox mechanisms that are independent of the natural  senescence program.', '2005 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.067686', 'Foyer']

vtc1/vtc2: !exhibit! microlesions 
vtc1/vtc2: !express! PR proteins 
vtc1/vtc2: !have enhanced! basal resistance 
vtc1/vtc2: !have delayed! senescence phenotype 
vtc1/vtc2: !have more! glutathione 
GFP-NPR1 vtc1: !observed in! nuclei 
GFP-NPR1 wild-type: !not observed in! nuclei 
vtc plants: !do not activate! early senescence 
ascorbic acid: !modifies threshold for! innate defense responses