Calvin cycle enzymes glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and phosphoribulokinase (PRK) form together with the regulatory peptide CP12 a supramolecular complex in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) that could be reconstituted in vitro using purified recombinant proteins. Both enzyme activities were strongly influenced by complex formation, providing an effective means for regulation of the Calvin cycle in vivo. PRK and CP12, but not GapA (A(4) isoform of GAPDH), are redox-sensitive proteins. PRK was reversibly inhibited by oxidation. CP12 has no enzymatic activity, but it changed conformation depending on redox conditions. GapA, a bispecific NAD(P)-dependent dehydrogenase, specifically formed a binary complex with oxidized CP12 when bound to NAD. PRK did not interact with either GapA or CP12 singly, but oxidized PRK could form with GapA/CP12 a stable ternary complex of about 640 kD (GapA/CP12/PRK). Exchanging NADP for NAD, reducing CP12, or reducing PRK were all conditions that prevented formation of the complex. Although GapA activity was little affected by CP12 alone, the NADPH-dependent activity of GapA embedded in the GapA/CP12/PRK complex was 80% inhibited in respect to the free enzyme. The NADH activity was unaffected. Upon binding to GapA/CP12, the activity of oxidized PRK dropped from 25% down to 2% the activity of the free reduced enzyme. The supramolecular complex was dissociated by reduced thioredoxins, NADP, 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPGA), or ATP. The activity of GapA was only partially recovered after complex dissociation by thioredoxins, NADP, or ATP, and full GapA activation required BPGA. NADP, ATP, or BPGA partially activated PRK, but full recovery of PRK activity required thioredoxins. The reversible formation of the GapA/CP12/PRK supramolecular complex provides novel possibilities to finely regulate GapA ("non-regulatory" GAPDH isozyme) and PRK (thioredoxin sensitive) in a coordinated manner.

GapA/CP12: !form! supramolecular complex
PRK: !influenced by! complex formation
PRK: !inhibited by! oxidation
CP12: !changes conformation! depending on redox conditions
GapA/CP12/PRK: !stable ternary complex! formed
GapA: !NADPH-dependent activity inhibited! in complex
PRK: !activity dropped! upon binding to GapA/CP12
GapA/CP12/PRK: !dissociated by! reduced thioredoxins, NADP, BPGA, or ATP
GapA: !partially activated! after complex dissociation
PRK: !fully recovered! with thioredoxins