The major basic peroxidase from Zinnia elegans (ZePrx) suspension cell cultures was purified and cloned, and its properties and organ expression were characterized. The ZePrx was composed of two isoforms with a M(r) (determined by matrix-assisted laser-desorption ionization time of flight) of 34,700 (ZePrx34.70) and a M(r) of 33,440 (ZePrx33.44). Both isoforms showed absorption maxima at 403 (Soret band), 500, and 640 nm, suggesting that both are high-spin ferric secretory class III peroxidases. M(r) differences between them were due to the glycan moieties, and were confirmed from the total similarity of the N-terminal sequences (LSTTFYDTT) and by the 99.9% similarity of the tryptic fragment fingerprints obtained by reverse-phase nano-liquid chromatography. Four full-length cDNAs coding for these peroxidases were cloned. They only differ in the 5'-untranslated region. These differences probably indicate different ways in mRNA transport, stability, and regulation. According to the k(cat) and apparent K(m)(RH) values shown by both peroxidases for the three monolignols, sinapyl alcohol was the best substrate, the endwise polymerization of sinapyl alcohol by both ZePrxs yielding highly polymerized lignins with polymerization degrees > or =87. Western blots using anti-ZePrx34.70 IgGs showed that ZePrx33.44 was expressed in tracheary elements, roots, and hypocotyls, while ZePrx34.70 was only expressed in roots and young hypocotyls. None of the ZePrx isoforms was significantly expressed in either leaves or cotyledons. A neighbor-joining tree constructed for the four full-length cDNAs suggests that the four putative paralogous genes encoding the four cDNAs result from duplication of a previously duplicated ancestral gene, as may be deduced from the conserved nature and conserved position of the introns.

ZePrx34.70: !synthesizes! highly polymerized lignins
ZePrx33.44: !localizes to! tracheary elements, roots, and hypocotyls
ZePrx34.70: !localizes to! roots and young hypocotyls
Four cDNAs: !result from! duplication of a previously duplicated ancestral gene