In order to study the effect of salt stress on the Rhizobium-common bean symbiosis, we investigated the response of both partners, separately and in symbiosis. The comparison of the behaviour of five cultivars of Phaseolus vulgaris differing in seed colour, growing on nitrates and different concentrations of NaCl, showed genotypic variation with respect to salt tolerance. Coco Blanc was the most sensitive cultivar, whereas SMV 29-21 was the most tolerant one. At the Rhizobium level, two strains previously selected for their salt tolerance were used: Rhizobium tropici strain RP163 and Rhizobium giardinii strain RP161. Their relative growth was moderately decreased at 250mM NaCl, but they were able to grow at a low rate in the presence of 342 mM NaCl. Their viability at the minimal inhibitory concentration was slightly affected. The effect of salinity on Rhizobium-plant association was studied by using the tolerant variety SMV 29-21 and the sensitive one Coco Blanc inoculated separately with both strains. In the absence of salinity, the strains induced a significantly higher number of nodules on the roots of the cultivar SMV 29-21 compared to those of Coco Blanc. Concerning effectiveness, both strains were similarly effective with SMV 29-21, but not with Coco Blanc. In the presence of salinity, Coco Blanc was more severely affected when associated with RP163 than with RP161. Salinity affected the nodulation development more than it affected the infection steps. Neither of the two strains was able to nodulate SMV 29-21 under saline conditions, in spite of the fact that this was considered the most salt-tolerant variety. The unsuccessful nodulation of SMV 29-21 could be related to the inhibition by salt of one or more steps of the early events of the infection process. In conclusion, N-fixing plants were found to be more sensitive to salt stress than those depending on mineral nitrogen. Evidence presented here suggests that a best symbiotic N2 fixation under salinity conditions could be achieved if both symbiotic partners, as well as the different steps of their interaction (early events, nodule formation, activity, etc.), are all tolerant to this stress.

Rhizobium: !induces! Nodules 
Coco Blanc: !more sensitive to! Salt Stress 
SMV 29-21: !more tolerant to! Salt Stress 
Rhizobium tropici strain RP163: !moderately decreased growth at! 250mM NaCl 
Rhizobium giardinii strain RP161: !moderately decreased growth at! 250mM NaCl 
Rhizobium tropici strain RP163: !severely affected! Coco Blanc 
Rhizobium giardinii strain RP161: !less severely affected! Coco Blanc 
SMV 29-21: !unable to nodulate under! Saline Conditions 
N-fixing plants: !more sensitive to! Salt Stress