Mutation in the Arabidopsis thaliana QUASIMODO 1 gene (QUA1), which encodes a putative glycosyltransferase, reduces cell wall pectin content and cell adhesion. Suspension-cultured calli were generated from roots of wild-type (wt) and qua1-1 A. thaliana plants. The altered cell adhesion phenotype of the qua1-1 plant was also found with its suspension-cultured calli. Cell walls of both wt and qua1-1 calli were analysed by chemical, enzymatic and immunohistochemical techniques in order to assess the role of pectic polysaccharides in the mutant phenotype. Compared with the wt, qua1-1 calli cell walls contained more arabinose (23.6 versus 21.6 mol%), rhamnose (3.1 versus 2.7 mol%), and fucose (1.4 versus 1.2 mol%) and less uronic acid (24.2 versus 27.6 mol%), and they were less methyl-esterified (DM: 22.9% versus 30.3%). When sequential pectin extraction of calli cell walls was performed, qua1-1 water-soluble and chelator-soluble extracts contained more arabinose and less uronic acid than wt. Water-soluble pectins were less methyl-esterified in qua1-1 than in wt. Chelator-soluble pectins were more acetyl-esterified in qua1-1. Differences in the cell wall chemistry of wt and mutant calli were supported by a reduction in JIM7 labelling (methyl-esterified homogalacturonan) of the whole wall in small cells and particularly by a reduced labelling with 2F4 (calcium-associated homogalacturonan) in the middle lamella at tricellular junctions of large qua1-1 cells. Differences in the oligosaccharide profile obtained after endopolygalacturonase degradation of alkali extracts from qua1-1 and wt calli indicated variations in the structure of covalently bonded homogalacturonan. About 29% more extracellular polymers rich in pectins were recovered from the calli culture medium of qua1-1 compared with wt. These results show that perturbation of QUASIMODO 1-1 gene expression in calli resulted in alterations of homogalacturonan content and cell wall location. The consequences of these structural variations are discussed with regard to plant cell adhesion.

Mutation in QUA1: !reduces! cell wall pectin content and cell adhesion
QUA1: !encodes! putative glycosyltransferase
wt and qua1-1 A. thaliana plants: !differ in! cell adhesion phenotype
wt and qua1-1 calli cell walls: !contain different! arabinose, rhamnose, fucose, uronic acid, and methyl-esterification
JIM7 labelling: !reduced in! qua1-1 small cells
2F4 labelling: !reduced in! qua1-1 tricellular junctions
Endopolygalacturonase degradation: !indicates variations in! covalently bonded homogalacturonan
qua1-1 calli culture medium: !recovers more! extracellular polymers rich in pectins
Alterations of homogalacturonan content and cell wall location: !consequences of! perturbation of QUASIMODO 1-1 gene expression