The cause of the strong non-photochemical fluorescence quenching was examined in maize (Zea mays L.) plants that were treated with lincomycin during the 72 h period of greening. They were deficient in core complexes but seemed to contain the full complement of antennae. The following results were obtained: (1) High F(o) could not be attributed to the dark reduction of Q(A) but to the presence of a high amount of not properly organized antenna complexes due to the inhibited synthesis of reaction centres. (2) On illumination fluorescence intensity dropped considerably below F(o) within 20 s, and reached a steady state still below F(o). (3) Slowly relaxing part of non-photochemical quenching was significantly higher than in control plants. (4) De-epoxidation state was constant, and corresponded to the maximal value of the control. (5) Free Lhca1/4 dimers could be detected in all submembrane fractions, including the grana, obtained by digitonin fractionation. (6) Increase in the 679 and 700 nm fluorescence emissions could be attributed to the monomerisation of part of LHCII and to the presence of free Lhca2 or LHCII aggregates, respectively. (7) LHCII or PSII+LHCII and Lhca1/4 interaction may contribute to the increase of long-wavelength fluorescence in the granal fraction. We assume that the elevated fluorescence quenching of monomeric LHCII as well as the interaction between LHCII or PSII+LHCII and Lhca1/4 can be considered as an explanation for the extensive non-photochemical fluorescence quenching in lincomycin treated plants. The permanent presence of zeaxanthin may have contributed to the fast formation of quenching.

LHCII: !interacts with! Lhca1/4 
PSII+LHCII: !interacts with! Lhca1/4 
Q(A): !reduced by! dark 
F(o): !attributed to! high amount of not properly organized antenna complexes 
Fluorescence intensity: !dropped below! F(o) 
Non-photochemical quenching: !increased by! inhibited synthesis of reaction centres 
De-epoxidation state: !constant and! corresponded to maximal value of control 
Lhca1/4 dimers: !detected in! all submembrane fractions 
679 and 700 nm fluorescence emissions: !increased by! monomerisation of part of LHCII 
Long-wavelength fluorescence: !increased by! interaction between LHCII or PSII+LHCII and Lhca1/4 
Fluorescence quenching: !explained by! elevated quenching of monomeric LHCII and interaction between LHCII or PSII+LHCII and Lhca1/4 
Zeaxanthin: !cont