['16299170', 'The alternative oxidase (AOX) pathway of plant mitochondria uncouples respiration  from mitochondrial ATP production and may ameliorate plant performance under  stressful environmental conditions, such as cold temperatures, by preventing  excess accumulation of reactive oxygen species. We tested this model in whole  tissues by growing AtAOX1a-transformed Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants  at 12 degrees C. For the first time, to our knowledge, in plants genetically  engineered for AOX, we identified a vegetative shoot growth phenotype. Compared  with wild type at day 21 after sowing, anti-sense and overexpressing lines  showed, on average, 27% reduced leaf area and 25% smaller rosettes versus 30%  increased leaf area and 33% larger rosette size, respectively. Lines  overexpressing a mutated, constitutively active AOX1a showed smaller phenotypic  effects. These phenotypic differences were not the result of a major alteration  of the tissue redox state because the changes in levels of lipid peroxidation  products, reflecting oxidative damage, and the expression of genes encoding  antioxidant and electron transfer chain redox enzymes did not correspond with the  shoot phenotypes. However, the observed phenotypes were correlated with the  amount of total shoot anthocyanin at low temperature and with the transcription  of the flavonoid pathway genes PAL1 and CHS. These results demonstrate that (1)  AOX activity plays a role in shoot acclimation to low temperature in Arabidopsis,  and that (2) AOX not only functions to prevent excess reactive oxygen species  formation in whole tissues under stressful environmental conditions but also  affects metabolism through more pervasive effects, including some that are  extramitochondrial.', '2005 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.070789', 'Siedow']

AOX: !affects! Shoot acclimation 
AOX: !prevents! Reactive oxygen species formation 
AOX: !affects! Metabolism 
AOX: !correlates with! Total shoot anthocyanin 
AOX: !transcribes! Flavonoid pathway genes