['16299173', 'Degradation of lipid peroxides leads to the formation of cytotoxic 2-alkenals and  oxenes (collectively designated reactive carbonyls). The novel NADPH-dependent  oxidoreductase 2-alkenal reductase (AER; EC 1.3.1.74) from Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana), which is encoded by the gene At5g16970, catalyzes the  reduction of the alpha,beta-unsaturated bond of reactive carbonyls, and hence is  presumed to function in antioxidative defense in plants. Here we show that  Arabidopsis AER (At-AER) has a broad substrate spectrum to biologically relevant  reactive carbonyls. Besides 2-alkenals, the enzyme recognized as substrates the  lipid peroxide-derived oxenes 9-oxo-octadeca-(10E),(12Z)-dienoic acid and  13-oxo-octadeca-(9E),(11Z)-dienoic acid, as well as the potent genotoxin  4-oxo-(2E)-nonenal, altogether suggesting AER has a key role in the  detoxification of reactive carbonyls. To validate this conclusion by in vivo  studies, transgenic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) plants that had 100- to 250-fold  higher AER activity levels than control plants were generated. The engineered  plants exhibited significantly less damage from either (1) the exogenously  administered 4-hydroxy-(2E)-nonenal, (2) treatment with methyl viologen plus  light, or (3) intense light. We further show that the At-AER protein fused with  the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein localizes in cytosol and the  nucleus in Bright-Yellow 2 cells. These results indicate that reactive carbonyls  mediate photooxidative injury in leaf cells, and At-AER in the cytosol protects  the cells by reducing the alpha,beta-unsaturated bond of the photoproduced  reactive carbonyls.', '2005 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.070391', 'Kushnir']

Degradation of lipid peroxides: !leads to! reactive carbonyls 
At-AER: !catalyzes reduction of! alpha,beta-unsaturated bond 
At-AER: !has key role in! detoxification of reactive carbonyls 
transgenic tobacco plants: !have higher AER activity levels than! control plants 
At-AER protein: !localizes in! cytosol and nucleus 
reactive carbonyls: !mediate photooxidative injury in! leaf cells 
At-AER: !protects cells by reducing! alpha,beta-unsaturated bond