Lignin and lignans share monolignols as common precursors and are both potentially involved in plant defence against pathogens. In this study, we investigated the effects of fungal elicitors on lignin and lignan metabolism in flax (Linum usitatissimum) cell suspensions. Cell suspension cultures of flax were treated with elicitor preparations made from mycelium extracts of Botrytis cinerea, Phoma exigua and Fusarium oxysporum F ssp lini. Elicitors induced a rapid stimulation of the monolignol pathway, as confirmed by the increase in PAL (phenylalanine ammonia-lyase, EC 4.1.3.5), CCR (cinnamoyl-CoA reductase EC 1.2.1.44) and CAD (cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase EC 1.1.1.195) gene expression and PAL activity. At the same time, CCR activity only increased significantly in F. oxysporum-treated cells 24 h post elicitation. On the other hand, CAD activity measured for coniferyl alcohol formation was transiently decreased but a substrate-specific activation of CAD activity was observed in F. oxysporum-treated cells when using sinapyl alcohol as substrate. The accumulation of monolignol-derived products varied according to the elicitor used. B. cinerea or P. exigua-elicited cell cultures were characterised by a reinforcement of the cell wall by a deposit of 8-O-4'-linked non-condensed lignin structures and phenolic monomers, while at the same time no stimulation of 8-8'-linked lignan or 8-5'-linked phenylcoumaran lignan accumulation was observed. Additionally, elicitation of cell cultures with F. oxysporum extracts even triggered a strong incorporation of monolignols in the non condensed labile ether-linked lignin fraction concomitantly with a decrease in lignan and phenylcoumaran lignan accumulation. Several hypotheses are proposed to explain the putative role of these compounds in the defence response of flax cells against pathogens.

PAL: !increases expression of! CCR 
CCR: !increases activity of! CAD 
CAD: !activates with! sinapyl alcohol 
B. cinerea: !induces! 8-O-4'-linked non-condensed lignin structures 
P. exigua: !prevents! 8-8'-linked lignan accumulation 
F. oxysporum: !triggers! incorporation of monolignols in labile ether-linked lignin fraction