['16297072', 'Genes and proteins related to patatin, the major storage protein of potato  tubers, have been identified in many plant species and shown to be induced by a  variety of environmental stresses. The Arabidopsis patatin-like gene family  (PLPs) comprises nine members, two of which (PLP2 and PLP7) are strongly induced  in leaves challenged with fungal and bacterial pathogens. Here we show that  accumulation of PLP2 protein in response to Botrytis cinerea or Pseudomonas  syringae pv. tomato (avrRpt2) is dependent on jasmonic acid and ethylene  signaling, but is not dependent on salicylic acid. Expression of a PLP2-green  fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion protein and analysis of recombinant PLP2  indicates that PLP2 encodes a cytoplasmic lipid acyl hydrolase with wide  substrate specificity. Transgenic plants with altered levels of PLP2 protein were  generated and assayed for pathogen resistance. Plants silenced for PLP2  expression displayed enhanced resistance to B. cinerea, whereas plants  overexpressing PLP2 were much more sensitive to this necrotrophic fungus. We also  established a positive correlation between the level of PLP2 expression in  transgenic plants and cell death or damage in response to paraquat treatment or  infection by avirulent P. syringae. Interestingly, repression of PLP2 expression  increased resistance to avirulent bacteria, while PLP2-overexpressing plants  multiplied avirulent bacteria close to the titers reached by virulent bacteria.  Collectively, the data indicate that PLP2-encoded lipolytic activity can be  exploited by pathogens with different lifestyles to facilitate host colonization.  In particular PLP2 potentiates plant cell death inflicted by Botrytis and reduces  the efficiency of the hypersensitive response in restricting the multiplication  of avirulent bacteria. Both effects are possibly mediated by providing fatty acid  precursors of bioactive oxylipins.', '2005 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02578.x', 'Heitz']

PLP2: !induced by! environmental stresses 
PLP2: !dependent on! jasmonic acid and ethylene signaling 
PLP2: !encodes! cytoplasmic lipid acyl hydrolase 
PLP2: !correlated with! cell death or damage 
PLP2: !potentiates! plant cell death 
PLP2: !reduces! hypersensitive response 
PLP2: !provides! fatty acid precursors