['16306062', 'Myrosin cells in Capparales plants are idioblasts that accumulate thioglucoside  glucohydrolase (TGG, also called myrosinase), which hydrolyzes glucosinolates to  produce toxic compounds for repelling pests. Here, we show that AtVAM3 is  involved in development of myrosin cells. It has been shown that yeast VAM3 is a  Q(a)-SNARE that is involved in vesicle transport of vacuolar proteins and  vacuolar assembly. We found that two Arabidopsis atvam3 alleles, atvam3-3 and  atvam3-4/ssm, accumulate large amounts of TGG1 and TGG2 that are enzymatically  active. An immunogold analysis revealed that TGGs were specifically localized in  the vacuole of myrosin cells in atvam3 mutants. This result indicates that TGGs  are normally transported to vacuoles in these mutants and that AtVAM3 is not  essential for vacuolar transport of the proteins. We developed a staining method  with Coomassie brilliant blue that detects myrosin cells in whole leaves by their  high TGG content. This method showed that atvam3 leaves have a larger number of  myrosin cells than do wild-type leaves. Myrosin cells were scattered along leaf  veins in wild-type leaves, while they were abnormally distributed in atvam3  leaves. The mutants developed a network of myrosin cells throughout the leaves:  myrosin cells were not only distributed continuously along leaf veins, but were  also observed independent of leaf veins. The excess of myrosin cells in atvam3  mutants might be responsible for the abnormal abundance of TGGs and the reduction  of elongation of inflorescence stems and leaves in these mutants. Our results  suggest that AtVAM3 has a plant-specific function in development of myrosin  cells.', '2006 Jan', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pci232', 'Hara-Nishimura']

AtVAM3: !affects! development of myrosin cells 
TGGs: !localize to! vacuole in atvam3 mutants 
AtVAM3: !represses! TGG accumulation 
AtVAM3: !enhances! normal distribution of myrosin cells 
AtVAM3: !has a plant-specific function in! development of myrosin cells