Internal breakdown in mango fruits has become a major concern in recent years. This disorder renders the fruits unfit for human consumption. The overall loss due to this disorder is about 35-55%. Environmental and physiological factors like high temperature, humidity, respiration and low transpiration rates have been attributed to cause spongy tissue due to reduced loss of heat from fruits. Biochemical studies have shown that there is a reduction in pH, total soluble solids, ascorbic acid, total sugars and carotenoids, low reducing and non-reducing sugar contents, lower amylase and invertase activities and high acid and starch content in spongy tissue affected pulp. There are no reports on molecular studies to determine changes in gene expression in these tissues. The present study was conducted using PCR based subtractive hybridization and RNA gel blot analysis of a few selected genes. The latter showed a higher expression of catalase, ubiquitin, alcohol dehydrogenase, coproporphyrinogen oxidase and keratin associated protein. A lower expression of ribosomal gene, fructose bisphosphate aldolase and cysthathionine gamma synthase was also noticed in spongy tissue. Biochemical studies indicated a lower amylase activity and a lower content of the total and reducing sugars in spongy tissue as compared to healthy tissue. Analyses of results indicate that oxidative stress may be one of the causes for formation of spongy tissue, which affects the expression of many genes. The role of these genes in spongy tissue formation is discussed.

catalase: !enhances! Oxidative stress 
ubiquitin: !enhances! Oxidative stress 
alcohol dehydrogenase: !enhances! Oxidative stress 
coproporphyrinogen oxidase: !enhances! Oxidative stress 
keratin associated protein: !enhances! Oxidative stress 
ribosomal gene: !represses! Oxidative stress 
fructose bisphosphate aldolase: !represses! Oxidative stress 
cysthathionine gamma synthase: !represses! Oxidative stress 
amylase activity: !represses! Oxidative stress 
total sugars: !represses! Oxidative stress 
reducing sugars: !represses! Oxidative stress