['16317039', 'The functional properties of inwardly conducting plant cyclic nucleotide-gated  cation channels (CNGCs) have not been thoroughly characterized due in part to the  recalcitrance of their functional expression in heterologous systems. Here, K+  uptake-deficient mutants of yeast (trk1,2) and Escherichia coli (LB650), as well  as the Ca2+-uptake yeast mutant mid1,cch1, were used for functional  characterization of Arabidopsis thaliana CNGCs, with the aim of identifying some  of the cultural and physiological conditions that impact on plant CNGC function  in heterologous systems. Use of the Ca2+-uptake yeast mutant provided the first  evidence consistent with Ca2+ conduction by the A. thaliana CNGC AtCNGC1.  Expression of AtCNGC1 in LB650 demonstrated that mutants of Escherichia coli  (which has no endogenous calmodulin) can also be used to study functional  properties of CNGCs. Expression of AtCNGC2 and AtCNGC4 enhanced growth of trk1,2  in the presence of hygromycin; AtCNGC1 has less of an effect. Deletion of the  AtCNGC1 calmodulin-binding domain enhanced growth of trk1,2 at low external K+  but not of LB650, suggesting that yeast calmodulin may bind to, and down-regulate  this plant channel. In vitro binding studies confirmed this physical interaction.  Northern analysis, green fluorescent protein:AtCNGC1 fusion protein expression,  as well as an antibody raised against a portion of AtCNGC1, were used to monitor  expression of AtCNGC1 and deletion constructs of the channel in the heterologous  systems. In the presence of the activating ligand cAMP, expression of the AtCNGC1  channel with the calmodulin-binding domain deleted increased intracellular [K+]  of trk1,2. Trk1,2 is hypersensitive to the toxic cations spermine,  tetramethylamine, and NH4+. These compounds, as well as amiloride, inhibited  trk1,2 growth and thereby improved the efficacy of this yeast mutant as a  heterologous expression system for CNGCs. In addition to characterizing mutants  of yeast and E. coli as assay systems for plant CNGCs, work presented in this  report demonstrates, for the first time, that a plant CNGC can retain ion channel  function despite (partial) deletion of its calmodulin-binding domain and that  yeast calmodulin can bind to and possibly down-regulate a plant CNGC.', '2006', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erj012', 'Berkowitz']

AtCNGC1: !conducts! Ca2+ 
AtCNGC1: !binds to! yeast calmodulin 
AtCNGC2/4: !enhances growth of! trk1,2 
AtCNGC1: !represses growth of! trk1,2 
AtCNGC1: !increases intracellular K+ of! trk1,2 
trk1,2: !hypersensitive to! toxic cations 
toxic cations: !inhibit growth of! trk1,2