We analysed the technique of grafting as a tool to increase salt-stress resistance in tobacco plants. With this aim, we performed two experiments. First, we selected, from among 6 commercial tobacco cultivars (cv. BB-162, cv. H-20, cv. Jarandilla, cv. ZB-3, cv. Havana II and cv. Havana 307) those most tolerant and sensitive to salinity, studying the response of certain nutritional and biochemical indicators of resistance in these plants. In the second experiment, we analysed the response to salinity in grafted tobacco plants using the rootstock of the most tolerant plants, and the scion of the most sensitive ones. In addition, these plants were subjected to salinity to test the viability and efficiency of this grafting technique, assessing the production of foliar biomass and the different quality parameters in this crop. In the first experiment, we found that the most tolerant tobacco cultivars were cv. BB-162 and cv. H-20, which were characterized by reduced uptake and foliar accumulation of Na(+) and Cl(-), together with greater synthesis of sucrose and proline, thereby reducing lipid peroxidation and thus oxidative damage, reflected in higher foliar biomass with respect to the other cultivars studied (primarily cv. Jarandilla, defined as the most salt-sensitive). In the second, we demonstrated that the grafting of salt-sensitive tobacco scions to salt-tolerant rootstocks improves the production and quality of tobacco leaves under conditions of saline stress. Our results show that the rootstocks cv. BB-162 and cv. H-20 best induced salt resistance in tobacco cv. Jarandilla, registering the lowest foliar concentrations of Na(+) and Cl(+), the lowest lipid peroxidation, and the highest proline and sugar concentrations. Overall, this is reflected in better biomass production and quality of the aerial part of the plant.

cv. BB-162: !tolerant to! salinity
cv. H-20: !tolerant to! salinity
cv. Jarandilla: !sensitive to! salinity
cv. BB-162: !induces! salt resistance
cv. H-20: !induces! salt resistance
Na(+): !accumulated in! foliar biomass
Cl(-): !accumulated in! foliar biomass
sucrose: !synthesized by! tolerant cultivars
proline: !synthesized by! tolerant cultivars
lipid peroxidation: !reduced by! tolerant cultivars
foliar biomass: !increased by! tolerant cultivars
Na(+): !lowest in! grafted plants
Cl(-): !lowest in! grafted plants
lipid peroxidation: !lowest in! grafted plants
proline: !highest in! grafted plants
sugar: !highest in! grafted plants
foliar biomass: !highest in! grafted plants