Although IBA is a naturally occurring auxin, its role in plant development is still under debate. In this study a set of Arabidopsis mutants was used to analyze the biosynthesis of IBA in vitro. The mutants chosen for this study can be classified as: (1) involvement in auxin metabolism, transport or synthesis (amt1, aux1, ilr1, nit1, rib1, sur1, trp1-100); (2) other hormones possibly involved in the regulation of IBA synthesis (aba1, aba3, eto2, fae1, hls1, jar1); (3) photomorphogenesis (det1, det2, det3); and (4) root architecture (cob1, cob2, scr1). In addition, two transgenic lines overexpressing the IAA glucose synthase (iaglu) gene from maize were analyzed. The ecotypes No-0 and Wassilewskija showed the highest IBA synthetase activity under control conditions, followed by Columbia, Enkheim and Landsberg erecta. In the mutant lines IBA synthetase activity differed in most cases from the wild type, however no particular pattern of up- or down-regulation, which could be correlated to their possible function, was found. For rib1 mutant seedlings it was tested whether reduced IBA synthetase activity correlates with the endogenous IBA levels. Free IBA differed only depending on the culture conditions, but gave no clear correlation with IBA synthetase activity compared to the wild type. Since drought and osmotic stress as well as abscisic acid (ABA) application enhanced IBA synthesis in maize, it was tested whether IBA synthetase from Arabidopsis is also inducible by drought stress conditions. This was confirmed for the two ecotypes Col and Ler which showed different IBA synthetase activity when cultivated with various degrees of drought stress. IBA synthetase was also determined in photomorphogenic mutants under different light regimes. Induction of IBA synthetase in det1 and det3 plants was found under short day plus a red light pulse or in the dark, respectively. The results are discussed with respect to the functions of the mutated genes.

amt1: !affects! IBA synthesis
aux1: !affects! IBA synthesis
ilr1: !affects! IBA synthesis
nit1: !affects! IBA synthesis
rib1: !affects! IBA synthesis
sur1: !affects! IBA synthesis
trp1-100: !affects! IBA synthesis
aba1: !affects! IBA synthesis
aba3: !affects! IBA synthesis
eto2: !affects! IBA synthesis
fae1: !affects! IBA synthesis
hls1: !affects! IBA synthesis
jar1: !affects! IBA synthesis
det1: !affects! IBA synthesis
det2: !affects! IBA synthesis
det3: !affects! IBA synthesis
cob1: !affects! IBA synthesis
cob2: !affects! IBA synthesis
scr1: !affects! IBA synthesis
iaglu: !enhances! IBA synthesis
No-0: !sy