['16339855', 'Plant resistance to disease is controlled by the combination of defense response  pathways that are activated depending on the nature of the pathogen. We  identified the Arabidopsis thaliana BOTRYTIS-INDUCED KINASE1 (BIK1) gene that is  transcriptionally regulated by Botrytis cinerea infection. Inactivation of BIK1  causes severe susceptibility to necrotrophic fungal pathogens but enhances  resistance to a virulent strain of the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv  tomato. The response to an avirulent bacterial strain is unchanged, limiting the  role of BIK1 to basal defense rather than race-specific resistance. The  jasmonate- and ethylene-regulated defense response, generally associated with  resistance to necrotrophic fungi, is attenuated in the bik1 mutant based on the  expression of the plant defensin PDF1.2 gene. bik1 mutants show altered root  growth, producing more and longer root hairs, demonstrating that BIK1 is also  required for normal plant growth and development. Whereas the pathogen responses  of bik1 are mostly dependent on salicylic acid (SA) levels, the nondefense  responses are independent of SA. BIK1 is membrane-localized, suggesting possible  involvement in early stages of the recognition or transduction of pathogen  response. Our data suggest that BIK1 modulates the signaling of cellular factors  required for defense responses to pathogen infection and normal root hair growth,  linking defense response regulation with that of growth and development.', '2006 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.035576', 'Mengiste']

BIK1: !transcriptionally regulated by! Botrytis cinerea 
BIK1: !causes susceptibility to! necrotrophic fungal pathogens 
BIK1: !enhances resistance to! Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato 
BIK1: !attenuates! jasmonate- and ethylene-regulated defense response 
BIK1: !regulates expression of! plant defensin PDF1.2 gene 
BIK1: !alters root growth! producing more and longer root hairs 
BIK1: !modulates signaling of! cellular factors required for defense responses 
BIK1: !links defense response regulation with! growth and development 
BIK1: !membrane-localized! suggesting involvement in early stages of pathogen response