['16359394', 'Light signals perceived by the phytochrome (phy) family of sensory photoreceptors  control multiple aspects of plant development. Recently, PIF1, a phy-interacting  basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, has been shown to negatively  regulate facets of the photomorphogenesis of seedlings. Moreover, the  transcriptional activation activity of PIF1 is reduced in a phy-dependent manner.  In this study we use the luciferase (LUC) activity of the LUC-PIF1 fusion protein  as an indicator of the stability of PIF1 in various light conditions. We found  that the activity of LUC-PIF1 in both transient and stable transgenic lines is  rapidly reduced in light, while the LUC-only control is stable under the same  conditions, suggesting that PIF1 is degraded in response to light. Fluence-rate  response curves indicate that PIF1 degradation is very sensitive to the quality  and quantity of light. The half-life of PIF1 is about 16 min under 10 micromol  m-2 sec-1 red light. PIF1 reaccumulates in the subsequent dark period after  light-induced degradation, signifying that PIF1 not only functions in the dark  and during the transition from etiolated to de-etiolated growth, but may also  function during diurnal cycles. Inhibitors of the 26S proteasome increased the  stability of PIF1, indicating that degradation of PIF1 is mediated by the  ubiquitin-26S proteasome pathway. Further, de novo protein synthesis is not  required for degradation of PIF1, as the presence of cycloheximide does not  prevent degradation of PIF1 in the light. Taken together, these results suggest  that the light signals perceived by phys induce the degradation of PIF1 and other  phy-interacting factors to optimize photomorphogenesis.', '2005 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02606.x', 'Huq']

phy: !induces degradation of! PIF1 
PIF1: !degraded by! ubiquitin-26S proteasome pathway 
PIF1: !stabilized by! inhibitors of 26S proteasome 
PIF1: !not affected by! de novo protein synthesis