['16359389', "In many plant species, seed dormancy is broken by cold stratification, a  pre-chilling treatment of fully imbibed seeds. Although the ecological importance  of seed response to cold temperature is well appreciated, the mechanisms  underlying the physiological changes during cold stratification is unknown. Here  we show that the GATA zinc finger protein expressed in Arabidopsis seeds during  cold stratification plays a critical role in germination. Characterization of an  enhancer-trap population identified multiple lines that exhibited  beta-glucuronidase (GUS) expression in the micropylar end of the seed (named Blue  Micropylar End, BME lines). One of these lines, BME3, had a T-DNA insertion site  in the 5' upstream region of a GATA-type zinc finger transcription factor gene  (termed BME3-ZF). The BME3-ZF mRNA accumulated in seeds during cold  stratification. Characterization of the BME3-ZF promoter indicated that this gene  was activated specifically in the embryonic axis, which was still enclosed by the  endosperm. The zinc finger gene knockout plants produced seeds exhibiting deeper  dormancy, which showed reduced response to cold stratification. The ungerminated  knockout seeds exhibited testa rupture, but failed to penetrate the endosperm  layer. Application of gibberellic acid (GA3) rescued impaired germination of  knockout seeds without cold stratification, indicating that the normal GA signal  transduction pathway is present in the knockout mutants. Expression of  GA20-oxidase and GA3-oxidase genes was greatly reduced in the knockout seeds,  suggesting the potential involvement of the zinc finger protein in GA  biosynthesis. These results suggest that the GATA zinc finger protein is a  positive regulator of seed germination.", '2005 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02588.x', 'Nonogaki']

GATA zinc finger protein: !activates! BME3-ZF mRNA 
BME3-ZF mRNA: !localizes to! embryonic axis 
GATA zinc finger protein: !represses! germination 
GATA zinc finger protein: !enhances! GA signal transduction 
GATA zinc finger protein: !synthesizes! GA20-oxidase and GA3-oxidase