Pto kinase of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) confers resistance to bacterial speck disease caused by Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato expressing avrPto or avrPtoB. Pto interacts directly with these type-III secreted effectors, leading to induction of defence responses including the hypersensitive response (HR). Signalling by Pto requires the nucleotide-binding site-leucine-rich repeat (NBS-LRR) protein Prf. Little is known of how Pto is controlled prior to or during stimulation, although kinase activity is required for Avr-dependent activation. Here we demonstrate a role for the N-terminus in signalling by Pto. N-terminal residues outside the kinase domain were required for induction of the HR in Nicotiana benthamiana. The N-terminus also contributed to both AvrPto-binding and phosphorylation abilities. Pto residues 1-10 comprise a consensus motif for covalent attachment of myristate, a hydrophobic 14-carbon saturated fatty acid, to the Gly-2 residue. Several lines of evidence indicate that this motif is important for Pto function. A heterologous N-myristoylation motif complemented N-terminal deletion mutants of Pto for Prf-dependent signalling. Signalling by wild-type and mutant forms of Pto was strictly dependent on the Gly-2 residue. The N-myristoylation motif of Pto complemented the cognate motif of AvrPto for avirulence function and membrane association. Furthermore, Pto was myristoylated in vivo dependent on the presence of Gly-2. The subcellular localization of Pto was independent of N-myristoylation, indicating that N-myristoylation is required for some function other than membrane affinity. Consistent with this idea, AvrPtoB was also found to be a soluble protein. The data indicate an important role(s) for the myristoylated N-terminus in Pto signalling.

Pto: !interacts with! AvrPto/AvrPtoB 
Pto: !requires! Prf 
Pto: !induction of HR requires! N-terminus 
N-terminus: !contributes to! AvrPto-binding/phosphorylation 
N-terminus: !complemented by! N-myristoylation motif 
Gly-2: !required for! signalling by Pto 
N-myristoylation motif: !complements! AvrPto for avirulence/membrane association 
Pto: !myristoylated in vivo dependent on! Gly-2 
Subcellular localization: !independent of! N-myristoylation