['16361394', 'Plants possess a single gene for the structurally related HETEROCHROMATIN  PROTEIN1 (HP1), termed LIKE-HP1 (LHP1). We investigated the subnuclear  localization, binding properties, and dynamics of LHP1 proteins in Arabidopsis  thaliana cells. Transient expression assays showed that tomato (Solanum  lycopersicum) LHP1 fused to green fluorescent protein (GFP; Sl LHP1-GFP) and  Arabidopsis LHP1 (At LHP1-GFP) localized to heterochromatic chromocenters and  showed punctuated distribution within the nucleus; tomato but not Arabidopsis  LHP1 was also localized within the nucleolus. Mutations of aromatic cage residues  that recognize methyl K9 of histone H3 abolished their punctuated distribution  and localization to chromocenters. Sl LHP1-GFP plants displayed cell  type-dependent subnuclear localization. The diverse localization pattern of  tomato LHP1 did not require the chromo shadow domain (CSD), whereas the  chromodomain alone was insufficient for localization to chromocenters; a  nucleolar localization signal was identified within the hinge region.  Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching showed that Sl LHP1 is a highly mobile  protein whose localization and retention are controlled by distinct domains;  retention at the nucleolus and chromocenters is conferred by the CSD. Our results  imply that LHP1 recruitment to chromatin is mediated, at least in part, through  interaction with methyl K9 and that LHP1 controls different nuclear processes via  transient binding to its nuclear sites.', '2006 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.036855', 'Grafi']

LHP1: !localizes to! chromocenters 
LHP1: !localizes to! nucleolus 
Methyl K9 of histone H3: !recognized by! aromatic cage residues 
CSD: !required for! tomato LHP1 localization 
Chromodomain: !insufficient for! chromocenter localization 
Hinge region: !contains! nucleolar localization signal 
Sl LHP1-GFP: !highly mobile! 
CSD: !confer retention at! nucleolus and chromocenters 
Methyl K9: !mediates recruitment of! LHP1 to chromatin