Cell wall proteins (CWPs) play important roles in various processes, including cell elongation. However, relatively little is known about the composition of CWPs in growing regions. We are using a proteomics approach to gain a comprehensive understanding of the identity of CWPs in the maize (Zea mays) primary root elongation zone. As the first step, we examined the effectiveness of a vacuum infiltration-centrifugation technique for extracting water-soluble and loosely ionically bound (fraction 1) CWPs from the root elongation zone. The purity of the CWP extract was evaluated by comparing with total soluble proteins extracted from homogenized tissue. Several lines of evidence indicated that the vacuum infiltration-centrifugation technique effectively enriched for CWPs. Protein identification revealed that 84% of the CWPs were different from the total soluble proteins. About 40% of the fraction 1 CWPs had traditional signal peptides and 33% were predicted to be nonclassical secretory proteins, whereas only 3% and 11%, respectively, of the total soluble proteins were in these categories. Many of the CWPs have previously been shown to be involved in cell wall metabolism and cell elongation. In addition, maize has type II cell walls, and several of the CWPs identified in this study have not been identified in previous cell wall proteomics studies that have focused only on type I walls. These proteins include endo-1,3;1,4-beta-D-glucanase and alpha-L-arabinofuranosidase, which act on the major polysaccharides only or mainly present in type II cell walls.

Vacuum infiltration-centrifugation: !enriches for! CWPs 
CWPs: !differ from! total soluble proteins 
CWPs: !have traditional signal peptides! 40% 
CWPs: !predicted to be nonclassical secretory proteins! 33% 
CWPs: !involved in cell wall metabolism and cell elongation! many 
CWPs: !not identified in type I walls! several 
Endo-1,3;1,4-beta-D-glucanase: !acts on! major polysaccharides only or mainly present in type II cell walls