Most seeds are anhydrobiotes, relying on an array of protective and repair mechanisms, and seed mitochondria have previously been shown to harbor stress proteins probably involved in desiccation tolerance. Since temperature stress is a major issue for germinating seeds, the temperature response of pea (Pisum sativum) seed mitochondria was examined in comparison with that of mitochondria from etiolated epicotyl, a desiccation-sensitive tissue. The functional analysis illustrated the remarkable temperature tolerance of seed mitochondria in response to both cold and heat stress. The mitochondria maintained a well-coupled respiration between -3.5 degrees C and 40 degrees C, while epicotyl mitochondria were not efficient below 0 degrees C and collapsed above 30 degrees C. Both mitochondria exhibited a similar Arrhenius break temperature at 7 degrees C, although they differed in phospholipid composition. Seed mitochondria had a lower phosphatidylethanolamine-to-phosphatidylcholine ratio, fewer unsaturated fatty acids, and appeared less susceptible to lipid peroxidation. They also accumulated large amounts of heat shock protein HSP22 and late-embryogenesis abundant protein PsLEAm. The combination of membrane composition and stress protein accumulation required for desiccation tolerance is expected to lead to an unusually wide temperature tolerance, contributing to the fitness of germinating seeds in adverse conditions. The unique oxidation of external NADH at low temperatures found with several types of mitochondria may play a central role in maintaining energy homeostasis during cold shock, a situation often encountered by sessile and ectothermic higher plants.

seed mitochondria: !maintain! respiration
seed mitochondria: !exhibit! Arrhenius break temperature
epicotyl mitochondria: !not efficient below! 0 degrees C
epicotyl mitochondria: !collapse above! 30 degrees C
seed mitochondria: !have lower! phosphatidylethanolamine-to-phosphatidylcholine ratio
seed mitochondria: !accumulate! heat shock protein HSP22
seed mitochondria: !accumulate! late-embryogenesis abundant protein PsLEAm
NADH: !oxidize! external NADH