['16377748', 'Cytochromes P450 monooxygenases from the CYP98 family catalyze the  meta-hydroxylation step in the phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathway. The ref8  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutant, with a point mutation in the CYP98A3  gene, was previously described to show developmental defects, changes in lignin  composition, and lack of soluble sinapoyl esters. We isolated a T-DNA insertion  mutant in CYP98A3 and show that this mutation leads to a more drastic inhibition  of plant development and inhibition of cell growth. Similar to the ref8 mutant,  the insertion mutant has reduced lignin content, with stem lignin essentially  made of p-hydroxyphenyl units and trace amounts of guaiacyl and syringyl units.  However, its roots display an ectopic lignification and a substantial proportion  of guaiacyl and syringyl units, suggesting the occurrence of an alternative  CYP98A3-independent meta-hydroxylation mechanism active mainly in the roots.  Relative to the control, mutant plantlets produce very low amounts of sinapoyl  esters, but accumulate flavonol glycosides. Reduced cell growth seems correlated  with alterations in the abundance of cell wall polysaccharides, in particular  decrease in crystalline cellulose, and profound modifications in gene expression  and homeostasis reminiscent of a stress response. CYP98A3 thus constitutes a  critical bottleneck in the phenylpropanoid pathway and in the synthesis of  compounds controlling plant development. CYP98A3 cosuppressed lines show a  gradation of developmental defects and changes in lignin content (40% reduction)  and structure (prominent frequency of p-hydroxyphenyl units), but content in  foliar sinapoyl esters is similar to the control. The purple coloration of their  leaves is correlated to the accumulation of sinapoylated anthocyanins.', '2006 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.069690', 'Werck-Reichhart']

CYP98A3: !catalyzes! meta-hydroxylation 
CYP98A3: !inhibits! plant development 
CYP98A3: !affects! lignin composition 
CYP98A3: !reduces! cell growth 
CYP98A3: !alters! abundance of cell wall polysaccharides 
CYP98A3: !modifies! gene expression and homeostasis 
CYP98A3: !constitutes! critical bottleneck in phenylpropanoid pathway 
CYP98A3: !accumulates! flavonol glycosides 
CYP98A3: !correlates to! purple coloration of leaves