MICROTUBULE ORGANIZATION 1 (MOR1) is a plant member of the highly conserved MAP215/Dis1 family of microtubule-associated proteins. Prior studies with the temperature-sensitive mor1 mutants of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), which harbor single amino acid substitutions in an N-terminal HEAT repeat, proved that MOR1 regulates cortical microtubule organization and function. Here we demonstrate by use of live cell imaging and immunolabeling that the mor1-1 mutation generates specific defects in the microtubule arrays of dividing vegetative cells. Unlike the universal cortical microtubule disorganization in elongating mor1-1 cells, disruption of mitotic and cytokinetic microtubule arrays was not detected in all dividing cells. Nevertheless, quantitative analysis identified distinct defects in preprophase bands (PPBs), spindles, and phragmoplasts. In nearly one-half of dividing cells at the restrictive temperature of 30 degrees C, PPBs were not detected prior to spindle formation, and those that did form were often disrupted. mor1-1 spindles and phragmoplasts were short and abnormally organized and persisted for longer times than in wild-type cells. The reduced length of these arrays predicts that the component microtubule lengths are also reduced, suggesting that microtubule length is a critical determinant of spindle and phragmoplast structure, orientation, and function. Microtubule organizational defects led to aberrant chromosomal arrangements, misaligned or incomplete cell plates, and multinucleate cells. Antiserum raised against an N-terminal MOR1 sequence labeled the full length of microtubules in interphase arrays, PPBs, spindles, and phragmoplasts. Continued immunolabeling of the disorganized and short microtubules of mor1-1 at the restrictive temperature demonstrated that the mutant mor1-1(L174F) protein loses function without dissociating from microtubules, providing important insight into the mechanism by which MOR1 may regulate microtubule length.

MOR1: !regulates! cortical microtubule organization
mor1-1 mutation: !generates! specific defects in microtubule arrays
PPBs: !disrupted! in mor1-1 cells
spindles: !short and abnormally organized! in mor1-1 cells
phragmoplasts: !persist for longer times! in mor1-1 cells
microtubule length: !critical determinant! of spindle and phragmoplast structure
aberrant chromosomal arrangements: !result from! microtubule organizational defects
N-terminal MOR1 sequence: !labels! full length of microtubules
mutant mor1-1(L174F) protein: !loses function without dissociating! from microtubules