Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3) has been implicated in the early signaling events of plants linking gravity sensing to the initiation of the gravitropic response. However, at present, the contribution of the phosphoinositide signaling pathway in plant gravitropism is not well understood. To delineate the role of InsP3 in plant gravitropism, we generated Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants constitutively expressing the human type I inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase (InsP 5-ptase), an enzyme that specifically hydrolyzes InsP3. The transgenic plants show no significant differences in growth and life cycle compared to wild-type plants, although basal InsP3 levels are reduced by greater than 90% compared to wild-type plants. With gravistimulation, InsP3 levels in inflorescence stems of transgenic plants show no detectable change, whereas in wild-type plant inflorescences, InsP3 levels increase approximately 3-fold within the first 5 to 15 min of gravistimulation, preceding visible bending. Furthermore, gravitropic bending of the roots, hypocotyls, and inflorescence stems of the InsP 5-ptase transgenic plants is reduced by approximately 30% compared with the wild type. Additionally, the cold memory response of the transgenic plants is attenuated, indicating that InsP3 contributes to gravisignaling in the cold. The transgenic roots were shown to have altered calcium sensitivity in controlling gravitropic response, a reduction in basipetal indole-3-acetic acid transport, and a delay in the asymmetric auxin-induced beta-glucuronidase expression with gravistimulation as compared to the controls. The compromised gravitropic response in all the major axes of growth in the transgenic Arabidopsis plants reveals a universal role for InsP3 in the gravity signal transduction cascade of plants.

InsP3: !implicated in! early signaling events of plants 
InsP3: !hydrolyzed by! human type I inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase 
InsP3: !reduces! gravitropic bending 
InsP3: !alters! calcium sensitivity 
InsP3: !attenuates! cold memory response 
InsP3: !reduces! basipetal indole-3-acetic acid transport 
InsP3: !delays! asymmetric auxin-induced beta-glucuronidase expression