['16415209', 'The outermost epidermal cell wall is specialized to withstand pathogens and  natural stresses, and lipid-based cuticular polymers are the major barrier  against incursions. The Arabidopsis thaliana mutant bodyguard (bdg), which  exhibits defects characteristic of the loss of cuticle structure not attributable  to a lack of typical cutin monomers, unexpectedly accumulates significantly more  cell wall-bound lipids and epicuticular waxes than wild-type plants. Pleiotropic  effects of the bdg mutation on growth, viability, and cell differentiation are  also observed. BDG encodes a member of the alpha/beta-hydrolase fold protein  superfamily and is expressed exclusively in epidermal cells. Using Strep-tag  epitope-tagged BDG for mutant complementation and immunolocalization, we show  that BDG is a polarly localized protein that accumulates in the outermost cell  wall in the epidermis. With regard to the appearance and structure of the  cuticle, the phenotype conferred by bdg is reminiscent of that of transgenic  Arabidopsis plants that express an extracellular fungal cutinase, suggesting that  bdg may be incapable of completing the polymerization of carboxylic esters in the  cuticular layer of the cell wall or the cuticle proper. We propose that BDG codes  for an extracellular synthase responsible for the formation of cuticle. The  alternative hypothesis proposes that BDG controls the  proliferation/differentiation status of the epidermis via an unknown mechanism.', '2006 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.036079', 'Yephremov']

BDG: !encodes! member of alpha/beta-hydrolase fold protein superfamily 
BDG: !localizes to! outermost cell wall in epidermis 
BDG: !synthesizes! cuticle 
mutant bdg: !exhibits! defects characteristic of loss of cuticle structure 
mutant bdg: !accumulates! significantly more cell wall-bound lipids and epicuticular waxes 
mutant bdg: !conveys! pleiotropic effects on growth, viability, and cell differentiation 
transgenic Arabidopsis plants: !express! extracellular fungal cutinase 
BDG: !controls! proliferation/differentiation status of epidermis via unknown mechanism