['16428597', 'The circadian system of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) includes feedback  loops of gene regulation that generate 24-h oscillations. Components of these  loops remain to be identified; none of the known components is completely  understood, including ZEITLUPE (ZTL), a gene implicated in regulated protein  degradation. ztl mutations affect both circadian and developmental responses to  red light, possibly through ZTL interaction with PHYTOCHROME B (PHYB). We  conducted a large-scale genetic screen that identified additional clock-affecting  loci. Other mutants recovered include 11 new ztl alleles encompassing mutations  in each of the ZTL protein domains. Each mutation lengthened the circadian  period, even in dark-grown seedlings entrained to temperature cycles. A mutation  of the LIGHT, OXYGEN, VOLTAGE (LOV)/Period-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain was unique in  retaining wild-type responses to red light both for the circadian period and for  control of hypocotyl elongation. This uncoupling of ztl phenotypes indicates that  interactions of ZTL protein with multiple factors must be disrupted to generate  the full ztl mutant phenotype. Protein interaction assays showed that the ztl  mutant phenotypes were not fully explained by impaired interactions with  previously described partner proteins Arabidopsis S-phase kinase-related protein  1, TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1, and PHYB. Interaction with PHYB was unaffected by  mutation of any ZTL domain. Mutation of the kelch repeat domain affected protein  binding at both the LOV/PAS and the F-box domains, indicating that interaction  among ZTL domains leads to the strong phenotypes of kelch mutations. Forward  genetics continues to provide insight regarding both known and newly discovered  components of the circadian system, although current approaches have saturated  mutations at some loci.', '2006 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.074864', 'Millar']

ZTL: !affects! circadian and developmental responses
ZTL: !interacts with! PHYB
ZTL: !interacts with! Arabidopsis S-phase kinase-related protein 1
ZTL: !interacts with! TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1
ZTL: !interacts with! LOV/PAS domain
ZTL: !interacts with! F-box domain