['16429265', 'Protein tyrosine phosphorylation plays an important role in cell growth,  development and oncogenesis. No classical protein tyrosine kinase has hitherto  been cloned from plants. Does protein tyrosine kinase exist in plants? To address  this, we have performed a genomic survey of protein tyrosine kinase motifs in  plants using the delineated tyrosine phosphorylation motifs from the animal  system. The Arabidopsis thaliana genome encodes 57 different protein kinases that  have tyrosine kinase motifs. Animal non-receptor tyrosine kinases, SRC, ABL, LYN,  FES, SEK, KIN and RAS have structural relationship with putative plant tyrosine  kinases. In an extended analysis, animal receptor and non-receptor kinases, Raf  and Ras kinases, mixed lineage kinases and plant serine/threonine/tyrosine (STY)  protein kinases, form a well-supported group sharing a common origin within the  superfamily of STY kinases. We report that plants lack bona fide tyrosine  kinases, which raise an intriguing possibility that tyrosine phosphorylation is  carried out by dual-specificity STY protein kinases in plants. The distribution  pattern of STY protein kinase families on Arabidopsis chromosomes indicates that  this gene family is partly a consequence of duplication and reshuffling of the  Arabidopsis genome and of the generation of tandem repeats. Genome-wide analysis  is supported by the functional expression and characterization of At2g24360 and  phosphoproteomics of Arabidopsis. Evidence for tyrosine phosphorylated proteins  is provided by alkaline hydrolysis, anti-phosphotyrosine immunoblotting,  phosphoamino acid analysis and peptide mass fingerprinting. These results report  the first comprehensive survey of genome-wide and tyrosine phosphoproteome  analysis of plant STY protein kinases.', '2006 Jan', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-005-4109-7', 'Rajasekharan']

Protein tyrosine phosphorylation: !plays role in! cell growth, development and oncogenesis 
Animal system: !delineates! tyrosine phosphorylation motifs 
Arabidopsis thaliana genome: !encodes! 57 different protein kinases 
Animal non-receptor tyrosine kinases: !structurally related to! putative plant tyrosine kinases 
Animal receptor and non-receptor kinases: !form group with! plant STY protein kinases 
Plants: !lack! bona fide tyrosine kinases 
STY protein kinase families: !distributed on! Arabidopsis chromosomes 
At2g24360: !functionally expressed and characterized! 
Alkaline hydrolysis: !provides evidence for! tyrosine phosphorylated proteins