['16430916', 'Calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) are a class of calcium-binding sensory  proteins that are found in plants and certain protozoa, including the causative  agent of malaria, Plasmodium falciparum. CDPKs have diverse regulatory functions,  including involvement in the triggering of the lytic cycle of malarial infection.  CDPKs contain an autoinhibitory junction (J) region whose calcium-dependent  interaction with the tethered regulatory calmodulin-like domain (CaM-LD)  activates the catalytic kinase domain. We report here the X-ray crystal structure  of the J-CaM-LD region of CDPK from Arabidopsis thaliana (AtCPK1), determined to  2.0 A resolution using multiple-wavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD). The  structure reveals a symmetric dimer of calcium-bound J-CaM-LD with domain-swap  interactions, in which the J region of one protomer interacts extensively with  the carboxy-terminal EF-hand domain (C-lobe) of the partner protomer. However, as  the J-CaM-LD is monomeric in solution, the activated monomer was modelled to  account for the intra-molecular recognition of the two domains. While the  J-CaM-LD segment mimics certain aspects of target motif recognition by CaM other  features are specific to CDPKs, in particular the combination of the strong  interaction between the N and C-lobes of the CaM-LD and the exclusive use of only  the C-lobe in the recognition of the covalently tethered target region. Combined  with our previous observations showing that there is likely to be strong  interactions between this tethered J region and the CaM-LD even at basal Ca(2+)  concentrations, the new structural data indicate that the response to calcium of  CDPKs is clearly unique among the CaM family.', '2006 Mar 24', 'J Mol Biol', '10.1016/j.jmb.2005.11.093', 'Christodoulou']

CDPKs: !contain! autoinhibitory junction region 
autoinhibitory junction region: !interacts with! tethered regulatory calmodulin-like domain 
tethered regulatory calmodulin-like domain: !recognizes! covalently tethered target region 
CDPKs: !respond uniquely to! calcium