Callus cells of Arabidopsis thaliana (cv. Landsberg erecta) were exposed for 8 h to a horizontal clinostat rotation (H, simulated weightlessness), a vertical clinostat rotation (V, clinostat control), or a stationary control (S) growth condition. The amount of glucose and fructose apparently decreased, while starch content increased in the H compared with the V- and S-treated cells. In order to investigate the influences of clinostat rotation on the cellular proteome further, the proteome alterations induced by horizontal and vertical clinostat rotation have been comparatively analysed by high-resolution two-dimensional (2-D) gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. Image analysis of silver-stained 2-D gels revealed that 80 protein spots showed quantitative and qualitative variations that were significantly (P <0.01) and reproducibly different between the clinorotated (H or V) and the stationary control samples. Protein spots excised from 2-D gels were analysed by microbe high performance liquid chromatography-ion trap-mass spectrometry (LC-IT-MS) to obtain the tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra. 18 protein spots, which showed significant expression alteration only under the H condition compared with those under V and S conditions, were identified. Of these proteins, seven were involved in stress responses, and four protein spots were identified as key enzymes in carbohydrate metabolism and lipid biosynthesis. Two reversibly glycosylated cell wall proteins were down-regulated in the H samples. Other proteins such as protein disulphide isomerase, transcription initiation factor IIF, and two ribosomal proteins also exhibited altered expression under the H condition. The data presented in this study illustrate that clinostat rotation of Arabidopsis callus cells has a significant impact on the expression of proteins involved in general stress responses, metabolic pathways, gene activation/transcription, protein synthesis, and cell wall biosynthesis.

H: !affects! Stress responses
H: !affects! Metabolic pathways
H: !affects! Gene activation/transcription
H: !affects! Protein synthesis
H: !affects! Cell wall biosynthesis
V: !compared to! H
S: !compared to! H