['16443695', 'Low phosphorus (P) availability is one of the most limiting factors for plant  productivity in many natural and agricultural ecosystems. Plants display a wide  range of adaptive responses to cope with low P stress, which generally serve to  enhance P availability in the soil and to increase its uptake by roots. In  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), primary root growth inhibition and increased  lateral root formation have been reported to occur in response to P limitation.  To gain knowledge of the genetic mechanisms that regulate root architectural  responses to P availability, we designed a screen for identifying Arabidopsis  mutants that fail to arrest primary root growth when grown under low P  conditions. Eleven low phosphorus insensitive (lpi) mutants that define at least  four different complementation groups involved in primary root growth responses  to P availability were identified. The lpi mutants do not show the typical  determinate developmental program induced by P stress in the primary root. Other  root developmental aspects of the low P rescue system, including increased root  hair elongation and anthocyanin accumulation, remained unaltered in lpi mutants.  In addition to the insensitivity of primary root growth inhibition, when  subjected to P deprivation, lpi mutants show a reduced induction in the  expression of several genes involved in the P starvation rescue system (PHOSPHATE  TRANSPORTER 1 and 2, PURPLE ACID PHOSPHATASE 1, ACID PHOSPHATASE 5, and INDUCED  BY PHOSPHATE STARVATION 1). Our results provide genetic support for the role of P  as an important signal for postembryonic root development and root meristem  maintenance and show a crosstalk in developmental and biochemical responses to P  deprivation.', '2006 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.073825', 'Herrera-Estrella']

Low P: !limits! Plant productivity 
Arabidopsis: !displays! Adaptive responses 
Primary root growth: !inhibited by! Low P 
lpi mutants: !fail to! Arrest primary root growth 
lpi mutants: !show reduced induction of! Genes involved in P starvation rescue system