['16455656', 'CpNifS, a cysteine desulfurase required to supply sulfur for ironsulfur cluster  biogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplasts, belongs to a class of NifS-like  enzymes with low endogenous cysteine desulfurase activity. Its bacterial  homologue SufS is stimulated by SufE. Here we characterize the Arabidopsis  chloroplast protein CpSufE, which has an N-terminal SufE-like domain and a  C-terminal BolA-like domain unique to higher plants. CpSufE is targeted to the  chloroplast stroma, indicated by green fluorescent protein localization and  immunoblot experiments. Like CpNifS, CpSufE is expressed in all major tissues,  with higher expression in green parts. Its expression is light-dependent and  regulated at the mRNA level. The addition of purified recombinant CpSufE  increased the Vmax for the cysteine desulfurase activity of CpNifS over 40-fold  and decreased the KM toward cysteine from 0.1 to 0.043 mm. In contrast, CpSufE  addition decreased the affinity of CpNifS for selenocysteine, as indicated by an  increase in the KM from 2.9 to 4.17 mm, and decreased the Vmax for selenocysteine  lyase activity by 30%. CpSufE forms dynamic complexes with CpNifS, indicated by  gel filtration, native PAGE, and affinity chromatography experiments. A mutant of  CpSufE in which the single cysteine was changed to serine was not active in  stimulating CpNifS, although it did compete with WT CpSufE. The iron-sulfur  cluster reconstitution activity of the CpNifS-CpSufE complex toward apoferredoxin  was 20-fold higher than that of CpNifS alone. We conclude that CpNifS and CpSufE  together form a cysteine desulfurase required for iron-sulfur cluster formation  in chloroplasts.', '2006 Mar 31', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M512737200', 'Pilon']

CpNifS: !requires! CpSufE 
CpSufE: !localizes to! chloroplast stroma 
CpSufE: !enhances! cysteine desulfurase activity of CpNifS 
CpSufE: !decreases! affinity of CpNifS for selenocysteine 
CpSufE: !forms dynamic complexes with! CpNifS 
CpNifS-CpSufE complex: !increases! iron-sulfur cluster reconstitution activity