['16460512', 'N-glycosylation is one of the major post-translational modifications of proteins  in eukaryotes; however, the processing reactions of oligomannosidic N-glycan  precursors leading to hybrid-type and finally complex-type N-glycans are not  fully understood in plants. To investigate the role of Golgi alpha-mannosidase II  (GMII) in the formation of complex N-glycans in plants, we identified a putative  GMII from Arabidopsis thaliana (AtGMII; EC 3.2.1.114) and characterized the  enzyme at a molecular level. The putative AtGMII cDNA was cloned, and its deduced  amino acid sequence revealed a typical type II membrane protein of 1173 amino  acids. A soluble recombinant form of the enzyme produced in insect cells was  capable of processing different physiologically relevant hybrid N-glycans.  Furthermore, a detailed N-glycan analysis of two AtGMII knockout mutants revealed  the predominant presence of unprocessed hybrid N-glycans. These results provide  evidence that AtGMII plays a central role in the formation of complex N-glycans  in plants. Furthermore, conclusive evidence was obtained that alternative routes  in the conversion of hybrid N-glycans to complex N-glycans exist in plants.  Transient expression of N-terminal AtGMII fragments fused to a GFP reporter  molecule demonstrated that the transmembrane domain and 10 amino acids from the  cytoplasmic tail are sufficient to retain a reporter molecule in the Golgi  apparatus and that lumenal sequences are not involved in the retention mechanism.  A GFP fusion construct containing only the transmembrane domain was predominantly  retained in the ER, a result that indicates the presence of a motif promoting ER  export within the last 10 amino acids of the cytoplasmic tail of AtGMII.', '2006 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02648.x', 'Steinkellner']

AtGMII: !synthesizes! complex N-glycans 
AtGMII: !localizes to! Golgi apparatus 
AtGMII: !interacts with! GFP reporter molecule 
GFP reporter molecule: !retains in! ER 
Transmembrane domain: !retains in! Golgi apparatus 
Cytoplasmic tail: !contains motif promoting ER export!