Diurnal variations in nitrate reductase (NR) activity and nitrogen metabolites were examined in wild-type Nicotiana plumbaginifolia and transformants with various degrees of NR deregulation. In the C1 line, NR was only deregulated at the transcriptional level by placing the NR gene under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S RNA promoter. In the Del8 and S521D lines, NR was additionally deregulated at the posttranslational level either by a deletion mutation in the N-terminal domain or by a mutation of the regulatory phosphorylation site (serine-521). Posttranslational regulation was essential for pronounced diurnal variations in NR activity. Low nitrate content was related to deregulation of NR, whereas the level of total free amino acids was much higher in plants with fully deregulated NR. Abolishing transcriptional and posttranslational regulation (S521D plants) resulted in an increase of glutamine and asparagine by a factor of 9 and 14, respectively, compared with wild type, whereas abolishing transcriptional regulation (C1 plants) only resulted in increases of glutamine and asparagine by factors <2. Among the minor amino acids, isoleucine and threonine, in particular, showed enhanced levels in S521D. Nitrate uptake rates were the same in S521D and wild type as determined with (15)N feeding. Deregulation of NR appears to set the level of certain amino acids, whereas diurnal variations were still determined by light/dark. Generally, deregulation of NR at the transcriptional level did not have much influence on metabolite levels, but additional deregulation at the posttranslational level resulted in profound changes of nitrogen metabolite levels.

NR: !affects! Diurnal variations 
NR: !deregulated at! Transcriptional level 
NR: !deregulated at! Posttranslational level 
NR: !enhances! Nitrate content 
NR: !increases! Total free amino acids 
NR: !increases! Glutamine and asparagine 
NR: !increases! Isoleucine and threonine 
NR: !sets! Level of certain amino acids 
Light/Dark: !determines! Diurnal variations