Plastoglobules (PGs) are oval or tubular lipid-rich structures present in all plastid types, but their specific functions are unclear. PGs contain quinones, alpha-tocopherol, and lipids and, in chromoplasts, carotenoids as well. It is not known whether PGs contain any enzymes or regulatory proteins. Here, we determined the proteome of PGs from chloroplasts of stressed and unstressed leaves of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) as well as from pepper (Capsicum annuum) fruit chromoplasts using mass spectrometry. Together, this showed that the proteome of chloroplast PGs consists of seven fibrillins, providing a protein coat and preventing coalescence of the PGs, and an additional 25 proteins likely involved in metabolism of isoprenoid-derived molecules (quinines and tocochromanols), lipids, and carotenoid cleavage. Four unknown ABC1 kinases were identified, possibly involved in regulation of quinone monooxygenases. Most proteins have not been observed earlier but have predicted N-terminal chloroplast transit peptides and lack transmembrane domains, consistent with localization in the PG lipid monolayer particles. Quantitative differences in PG composition in response to high light stress and degreening were determined by differential stable-isotope labeling using formaldehyde. More than 20 proteins were identified in the PG proteome of pepper chromoplasts, including four enzymes of carotenoid biosynthesis and several homologs of proteins observed in the chloroplast PGs. Our data strongly suggest that PGs in chloroplasts form a functional metabolic link between the inner envelope and thylakoid membranes and play a role in breakdown of carotenoids and oxidative stress defense, whereas PGs in chromoplasts are also an active site for carotenoid conversions.

Plastoglobules: !contain! quinones, alpha-tocopherol, and lipids 
Plastoglobules: !contain! carotenoids in chromoplasts
Plastoglobules: !consist of! seven fibrillins
Plastoglobules: !involve! 25 proteins in metabolism
Plastoglobules: !contain! four unknown ABC1 kinases
Plastoglobules: !localize to! lipid monolayer particles
Plastoglobules: !differ in! composition in response to stress
Plastoglobules: !contain! more than 20 proteins in pepper chromoplasts
Plastoglobules: !form a functional metabolic link between! inner envelope and thylakoid membranes
Plastoglobules: !play a role in! breakdown of carotenoids and oxidative stress defense
Plastoglobules: !are an active site for! carotenoid conversions