['16489133', 'Secreted peptide ligands are known to play key roles in the regulation of plant  growth, development, and environmental responses. However, phenotypes for  surprisingly few such genes have been identified via loss-of-function mutant  screens. To begin to understand the processes regulated by the CLAVATA3  (CLV3)/ESR (CLE) ligand gene family, we took a systems approach to gene  identification and gain-of-function phenotype screens in transgenic plants. We  identified four new CLE family members in the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  genome sequence and determined their relative transcript levels in various  organs. Overexpression of CLV3 and the 17 CLE genes we tested resulted in  premature mortality and/or developmental timing delays in transgenic Arabidopsis  plants. Overexpression of 10 CLE genes and the CLV3 positive control resulted in  arrest of growth from the shoot apical meristem (SAM). Overexpression of nearly  all the CLE genes and CLV3 resulted in either inhibition or stimulation of root  growth. CLE4 expression reversed the SAM proliferation phenotype of a clv3 mutant  to one of SAM arrest. Dwarf plants resulted from overexpression of five CLE  genes. Overexpression of new family members CLE42 and CLE44 resulted in  distinctive shrub-like dwarf plants lacking apical dominance. Our results  indicate the capacity for functional redundancy of many of the CLE ligands.  Additionally, overexpression phenotypes of various CLE family members suggest  roles in organ size regulation, apical dominance, and root growth. Similarities  among overexpression phenotypes of many CLE genes correlate with similarities in  their CLE domain sequences, suggesting that the CLE domain is responsible for  interaction with cognate receptors.', '2006 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.075515', 'Hudson']

CLV3: !regulates! Plant growth
CLE: !regulates! Plant development
CLE: !regulates! Environmental responses
CLV3: !causes! Premature mortality
CLE: !causes! Developmental timing delays
CLV3: !inhibits! Shoot apical meristem (SAM) growth
CLE: !inhibits/stimulates! Root growth
CLE4: !reverses! SAM proliferation phenotype of clv3 mutant
CLE: !causes! Dwarf plants
CLE42/CLE44: !causes! Shrub-like dwarf plants
CLE domain: !interacts with! Cognate receptors