The molecular basis of salt tolerance of L-myo-inositol 1-P synthase (MIPS; EC 5.5.1.4) from Porteresia coarctata (Roxb.) Tateoka (PcINO1, AF412340) earlier reported from this laboratory, has been analyzed by in vitro mutant and hybrid generation and subsequent biochemical and biophysical studies of the recombinant proteins. A 37-amino acid stretch between Trp-174 and Ser-210 has been confirmed as the salt-tolerance determinant domain in PcINO1 both by loss or gain of salt tolerance by either deletion or by addition to salt-sensitive MIPS(s) of Oryza (OsINO1) and Brassica juncea (BjINO1). This was further verified by growth analysis under salt environment of Schizosaccharomyces pombe transformed with the various gene constructs and studies on the differential behavior of mutant and wild proteins by Trp fluorescence, aggregation, and circular dichroism spectra in the presence of salt. 4,4'-Dianilino-1,1'-binaphthyl-5,5-disulfonic acid binding experiments revealed a lower hydrophobic surface on PcINO1 than OsINO1, contributed by this 37-amino acid stretch explaining the differential behavior of OsINO1 and PcINO1 both with respect to their enzymatic functions and thermodynamic stability in high salt environment. Detailed amino acid sequence comparison and modeling studies revealed the interposition of polar and charged residues and a well-connected hydrogen-bonding network formed by Ser and Thr in this stretch of PcINO1. On the contrary, hydrophobic residues clustered in two continuous stretches in the corresponding region of OsINO1 form a strong hydrophobic patch on the surface. It is conceivable that salt-tolerant MIPS proteins may be designed out of the salt-sensitive plant MIPS proteins by replacement of the corresponding amino acid stretch by the designated 37-amino acid stretch of PcINO1.

PcINO1: !enhances! salt tolerance
37-amino acid stretch: !localizes to! PcINO1
37-amino acid stretch: !affects! salt tolerance
OsINO1: !lacks! 37-amino acid stretch
BjINO1: !lacks! 37-amino acid stretch
Trp fluorescence: !reveals! differential behavior of mutant and wild proteins
4,4'-Dianilino-1,1'-binaphthyl-5,5-disulfonic acid binding experiments: !reveal! lower hydrophobic surface on PcINO1
Ser and Thr: !form! hydrogen-bonding network
hydrophobic residues: !cluster in! two continuous stretches in OsINO1