Cold acclimation of plants affects many aspects of metabolism. Changes in plasma membrane lipids have always been considered to be important for development of frost resistance and survival at subzero temperatures. We studied different cultivars of winter wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) that differed in frost resistance induced either by cold acclimation or treatment with the plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA). Plasma membranes were isolated from non-acclimated and cold- as well as from ABA-acclimated plants, and were subjected to detailed lipid analysis. Cold acclimation affected virtually all plasma membrane lipid components and their constituents, resulting in both increases and decreases, which varied between the three groups of plants investigated. Including the cold-induced variations observed in the few plant species studied in detail previously, cerebrosides were the only components reduced by cold acclimation in all plants. In wheat, more uniform and consistent patterns were obtained when considering colligative parameters such as total free sterols, phospholipids or glycolipids, either as the proportion of total lipids or based on plasma membrane protein. The parameter which changed most significantly in parallel to the increase of inducible frost resistance in the three groups of plants was the ratio of free sterols/glycolipids, which increased. ABA treatment resulted in qualitatively similar effects in only one cultivar, but in general these changes were less pronounced. Compared to changes in transcription rates of several cold-induced genes and in the concentration of various compatible solutes reported for other plants, the observed changes in plasma membrane lipids are minor ones. This may indicate that acclimation-induced changes can be accomplished by posttranscriptional regulation of enzymatic activities, which is in agreement with the failure to detect significant changes in transcription of the corresponding genes during cold induction.

Cold acclimation: !affects! Metabolism 
Plasma membrane lipids: !vary between! Cold-acclimated and ABA-acclimated plants 
Cerebrosides: !reduced by! Cold acclimation 
Free sterols/glycolipids ratio: !increases with! Increase of inducible frost resistance 
ABA treatment: !results in! Qualitatively similar effects 
Transcription rates: !fail to detect significant changes in! Cold induction