The glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)/SHAGGY-like kinases (GSKs) are non-receptor serine/threonine protein kinases that are involved in a variety of biological processes. In contrast to the two members of the GSK3 family in mammals, plants appear to have a much larger set of divergent GSK genes. Plant GSKs are encoded by a multigene family; analysis of the Arabidopsis genome revealed the existence of 10 GSK genes that fall into four major groups. Here we characterized the structure of Arabidopsis and rice GSK genes and conducted the first broad phylogenetic analysis of the plant GSK gene family, covering a taxonomically diverse array of algal and land plant sequences. We found that the structure of GSK genes is generally conserved in Arabidopsis and rice, although we documented examples of exon expansion and intron loss. Our phylogenetic analyses of 139 sequences revealed four major clades of GSK genes that correspond to the four subgroups initially recognized in Arabidopsis. ESTs from basal angiosperms were represented in all four major clades; GSK homologs from the basal angiosperm Persea americana (avocado) appeared in all four clades. Gymnosperm sequences occurred in clades I, III, and IV, and a sequence of the red alga Porphyra was sister to all green plant sequences. Our results indicate that (1) the plant-specific GSK gene lineage was established early in the history of green plants, (2) plant GSKs began to diversify prior to the origin of extant seed plants, (3) three of the four major clades of GSKs present in Arabidopsis and rice were established early in the evolutionary history of extant seed plants, and (4) diversification into four major clades (as initially reported in Arabidopsis) occurred either just prior to the origin of the angiosperms or very early in angiosperm history.

GSK3/SHAGGY-like kinases: !involved in! biological processes 
Arabidopsis and rice GSKs: !conserved in! structure 
Arabidopsis GSKs: !fall into! four major groups 
ESTs from basal angiosperms: !represented in! all four major clades 
Persea americana: !appeared in! all four clades 
Gymnosperm sequences: !occurred in! clades I, III, and IV 
Porphyra: !sister to! green plant sequences 
plant-specific GSK gene lineage: !established early in! history of green plants 
plant GSKs: !began to diversify prior to! origin of extant seed plants 
three of four major clades: !established early in! evolutionary history of extant seed plants 
four major clades: !diversified either just prior to! origin of angiosperms or early in angiosperm history