['16514016', 'To date, the function of most genes in the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  genome is unknown. Here we present the first analysis of the novel,  plant-specific BRX (BREVIS RADIX) gene family. BRX has been identified as a  modulator of root growth through a naturally occurring loss-of-function allele.  The biochemical function of BRX is enigmatic, however several domains in BRX are  conserved in the proteins encoded by the related BRX-like (BRXL) genes. The  similarity between Arabidopsis BRXL proteins within these domains ranges from 84%  to 93%. Nevertheless, analysis of brx brx-like multiple mutants indicates that  functional redundancy of BRXLs is limited. This results mainly from differences  in protein activity, as demonstrated by assaying the propensity of constitutively  expressed BRXL cDNAs to rescue the brx phenotype. Among the genes tested, only  BRXL1 can replace BRX in this assay. Nevertheless, BRXL1 does not act redundantly  with BRX in vivo, presumably because it is expressed at a much lower level than  BRX. BRX and BRXL1 similarity is most pronounced in a characteristic tandem  repeat domain, which we named BRX domain. One copy of this domain is also present  in the PRAF (PH, RCC1, and FYVE)-like family proteins. The BRX domain mediates  homotypic and heterotypic interactions within and between the BRX and PRAF  protein families in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), and therefore likely  represents a novel protein-protein interaction domain. The importance of this  domain for BRX activity in planta is underscored by our finding that expression  of the C-terminal fragment of BRX, comprising the two BRX domains, is largely  sufficient to rescue the brx phenotype.', '2006 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.105.075382', 'Hardtke']

BRX: !modulates! root growth 
BRXL: !replaces! BRX 
BRXL: !interacts with! BRX 
BRX domain: !mediates! homotypic and heterotypic interactions 
BRX domain: !interacts with! PRAF family proteins 
BRX C-terminal fragment: !rescues! brx phenotype