L- Aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase catalyzes the decarboxylation of L -aspartate to generate Beta-alanine and carbon dioxide. This is an unusual pyruvoyl-dependent enzyme unique to prokaryotes that undergoes limited self-processing. The Escherichia coli pan D gene encoding L- aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase was expressed under a constitutive promoter in transgenic tobacco. Transgene expression was verified by assays based on RNA blots, immunoblots and enzyme activity in vitro. The pan D lines had increased levels of leaf Beta-alanine (1.2- to 4-fold), pantothenate (3.2- to 4.1-fold) and total free amino acids (up to 3.7-fold) compared to wild-type and vector controls. Growth of homozygous lines expressing E. coli L- aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase was less affected than that of the control lines when the plants were stressed for 1 week at 35 degrees C. When transferred from 35 to 30 degrees C for 3 weeks, the Pan D transgenic lines recovered significantly (P <or= 0.001) better than the controls: Pan D lines had on an average 54% and 84% greater fresh and dry weights respectively, compared to the controls. Homozygous lines expressing E. coli L- aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase had significantly greater thermotolerance (P<or=0.05) during germination. At 42 degrees C, 95% of two T3 Pan D transgenic line seeds germinated after 12 days compared to 73% for the wild-type seeds. Our results indicated that E. coli L-aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase was correctly processed and active in the transgenic eukaryotic host and its expression resulted in increased thermotolerance in tobacco.

L-Aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase: !catalyzes! Decarboxylation 
E. coli pan D gene: !encodes! L-Aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase 
Transgene expression: !verified by! Assays 
Pan D transgenic lines: !had increased levels of! Leaf Beta-alanine, Pantothenate, Total free amino acids 
Pan D transgenic lines: !recovered significantly better than! Controls 
Pan D transgenic lines: !had greater thermotolerance than! Wild-type seeds