Monogalactosyldiacylglyceride (MGDG) and digalactosyldiacylglyceride (DGDG) are the major membrane lipids of chloroplasts. The question of the specialized functions of these unique lipids has received limited attention. One function is to support violaxanthin de-epoxidase (VDE) activity, an enzyme of the violaxanthin cycle. To understand better the properties of this system, the effects of galactolipids and phosphatidylcholines on VDE activity were examined by two independent methods. The results show that the micelle-forming lipid (MGDG) and bilayer forming lipids (DGDG and phosphatidylcholines) support VDE activity differently. MGDG supported rapid and complete de-epoxidation starting at a threshold lipid concentration (10 microM) coincident with complete solubilization of violaxanthin. In contrast, DGDG supported slow but nevertheless complete to nearly complete de-epoxidation at a lower lipid concentration (6.7 microM) that did not completely solubilize violaxanthin. Phosphotidylcholines showed similar effects as DGDG except that de-epoxidation was incomplete. Since VDE requires solubilized violaxanthin, aggregated violaxanthin in DGDG at low concentration must become solubilized as de-epoxidation proceeds. High lipid concentrations had lower activity possibly due to formation of multilayered structures (liposomes) that restrict accessibility of violaxanthin to VDE. MGDG micelles do not present such restrictions. The results indicate VDE operates throughout the lipid phase of the single bilayer thylakoid membrane and is not limited to putative MGDG micelle domains. Additionally, the results also explain the differential partitioning of violaxanthin between the envelope and thylakoid as due to the relative solubilities of violaxanthin and zeaxanthin in MGDG, DGDG and phospholipids. The violaxanthin cycle is hypothesized to be a linked system of the thylakoid and envelope for signal transduction of light stress.

MGDG: !supports! VDE activity 
DGDG: !supports! VDE activity 
Phosphatidylcholines: !supports! VDE activity 
VDE: !requires! solubilized violaxanthin 
Lipid concentration: !affects! VDE activity 
Multilayered structures: !restricts! accessibility of violaxanthin to VDE 
MGDG micelles: !do not present! such restrictions 
VDE: !operates throughout! lipid phase of thylakoid membrane 
Violaxanthin: !differentially partitions! between envelope and thylakoid 
MGDG, DGDG, phospholipids: !relative solubilities of! violaxanthin and zeaxanthin