Glutathione (GSH) has been implicated in maintaining the cell cycle within plant meristems and protecting proteins during seed dehydration. To assess the role of GSH during development of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana [L.] Heynh.) embryos, we characterized T-DNA insertion mutants of GSH1, encoding the first enzyme of GSH biosynthesis, gamma-glutamyl-cysteine synthetase. These gsh1 mutants confer a recessive embryo-lethal phenotype, in contrast to the previously described GSH1 mutant, root meristemless 1(rml1), which is able to germinate, but is deficient in postembryonic root development. Homozygous mutant embryos show normal morphogenesis until the seed maturation stage. The only visible phenotype in comparison to wild type was progressive bleaching of the mutant embryos from the torpedo stage onward. Confocal imaging of GSH in isolated mutant and wild-type embryos after fluorescent labeling with monochlorobimane detected residual amounts of GSH in rml1 embryos. In contrast, gsh1 T-DNA insertion mutant embryos could not be labeled with monochlorobimane from the torpedo stage onward, indicating the absence of GSH. By using high-performance liquid chromatography, however, GSH was detected in extracts of mutant ovules and imaging of intact ovules revealed a high concentration of GSH in the funiculus, within the phloem unloading zone, and in the outer integument. The observation of high GSH in the funiculus is consistent with a high GSH1-promoterbeta-glucuronidase reporter activity in this tissue. Development of mutant embryos could be partially rescued by exogenous GSH in vitro. These data show that at least a small amount of GSH synthesized autonomously within the developing embryo is essential for embryo development and proper seed maturation.

GSH1: !synthesizes! GSH 
GSH1: !affects! embryo development 
GSH1: !localizes to! funiculus 
GSH1: !interacts with! monochlorobimane 
GSH1: !enhances! seed maturation 
GSH1: !represses! postembryonic root development 
GSH: !essential for! embryo development