['16531497', 'Recent findings indicate that proteins in the SNARE superfamily are essential for  cell signaling, in addition to facilitating vesicle traffic in plant cell  homeostasis, growth, and development. We previously identified SNAREs SYP121/Syr1  from tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) and the Arabidopsis thaliana homolog SYP121  associated with abscisic acid and drought stress. Disrupting tobacco SYP121  function by expressing a dominant-negative Sp2 fragment had severe effects on  growth, development, and traffic to the plasma membrane, and it blocked K(+) and  Cl(-) channel responses to abscisic acid in guard cells. These observations raise  questions about SNARE control in exocytosis and endocytosis of ion channel  proteins and their organization within the plane of the membrane. We have used a  dual, in vivo tagging strategy with a photoactivatable green fluorescent protein  and externally exposed hemagglutinin epitopes to monitor the distribution and  trafficking dynamics of the KAT1 K(+) channel transiently expressed in tobacco  leaves. KAT1 is localized to the plasma membrane within positionally stable  microdomains of approximately 0.5 microm in diameter; delivery of the K(+)  channel, but not of the PMA2 H(+)-ATPase, to the plasma membrane is suppressed by  Sp2 fragments of tobacco and Arabidopsis SYP121, and Sp2 expression leads to  profound changes in KAT1 distribution and mobility within the plane of the plasma  membrane. These results offer direct evidence for SNARE-mediated traffic of the  K(+) channel and a role in its distribution within subdomains of the plasma  membrane, and they implicate a role for SNAREs in positional anchoring of the  K(+) channel protein.', '2006 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.105.038950', 'Blatt']

SNAREs: !facilitate! Vesicle traffic 
SNAREs: !associated with! Abscisic acid and drought stress 
Sp2 fragment: !blocks! K(+) and Cl(-) channel responses 
Photoactivatable green fluorescent protein: !monitors! Distribution and trafficking dynamics of KAT1 
KAT1: !localized to! Plasma membrane 
Sp2 fragments: !suppress! Delivery of K(+) channel 
Sp2 expression: !leads to! Changes in KAT1 distribution and mobility 
SNAREs: !implicated in! Positional anchoring of K(+) channel