Photosystem I and Photosystem II activities, as well as polypeptide content of chlorophyll (Chl)-protein complexes were analyzed in mesophyll (M) and bundle sheath (BS) chloroplasts of maize (Zea mays L.) growing under moderate and very low irradiance. This paper discusses the application of two techniques: mechanical and enzymatic, for separation of M and BS chloroplasts. The enzymatic isolation method resulted in depletion of polypeptides of oxygen evolving complex (OEC) and alphaCF1 subunit of coupling factor; D1 and D2 polypeptides of PSII were reduced by 50%, whereas light harvesting complex of photosystem II (LHCII) proteins were still detectable. Loss of PSII polypeptides correlated with the decreasing of Chl fluorescence measured at room temperature. Using mechanical isolation of chloroplasts from BS cells, all tested polypeptides could be detected. We found a total lack of O2 evolution in BS chloroplasts, but dichlorophenolindophenol (DCPIP) was photoreduced. PSI activity of chloroplasts isolated from 14- and 28-day-old plants was similar in BS chloroplasts in moderate light (ML), but in low light (LL) it was reduced by about 20%. PSI and PSII activities in M chloroplasts of plants growing in ML decreased with aging of plants. In older LL-grown plants, activities of both photosystems were higher than those observed in chloroplasts from ML-grown plants. We suggest that in BS chloroplasts of maize, PSII complex is assembled typically for the agranal membranes (containing mainly stroma thylakoids) and is able to perform very limited electron transport activity. This in turn suggests the role of PSII for poising the redox state of PSI.

Photosystem I: !affects! Photosystem II
Photosystem II: !affects! Photosystem I
Oxygen evolving complex: !depleted by! Enzymatic isolation method
AlphaCF1 subunit of coupling factor: !depleted by! Enzymatic isolation method
D1 and D2 polypeptides of PSII: !reduced by! 50%
Light harvesting complex of photosystem II (LHCII) proteins: !detectable! By mechanical isolation
O2 evolution: !lack of! In BS chloroplasts
Dichlorophenolindophenol (DCPIP): !photoreduced! In BS chloroplasts
PSI activity: !similar in! BS chloroplasts in moderate light
PSI and PSII activities: !decrease with! Aging of plants