Brassica napus (cultivar Reston) seed proteins were analyzed at 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 weeks after flowering in biological quadruplicate using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Developmental expression profiles for 794 protein spot groups were established and hierarchical cluster analysis revealed 12 different expression trends. Tryptic peptides from each spot group were analyzed in duplicate using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The identity of 517 spot groups was determined, representing 289 nonredundant proteins. These proteins were classified into 14 functional categories based upon the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome classification scheme. Energy and metabolism related proteins were highly represented in developing seed, accounting for 24.3% and 16.8% of the total proteins, respectively. Analysis of subclasses within the metabolism group revealed coordinated expression during seed filling. The influence of prominently expressed seed storage proteins on relative quantification data is discussed and an in silico subtraction method is presented. The preponderance of energy and metabolic proteins detected in this study provides an in-depth proteomic view on carbon assimilation in B. napus seed. These data suggest that sugar mobilization from glucose to acetyl-coenzyme A [corrected] is a collaboration between the cytosol and plastids and that temporal control of enzymes and pathways extends beyond transcription. This study provides a systematic analysis of metabolic processes operating in developing B. napus seed from the perspective of protein expression. Data generated from this study have been deposited into a web database (http://oilseedproteomics.missouri.edu) that is accessible to the public domain.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Process: !involves! Energy and Metabolism 
Energy and Metabolism: !coordinates! Expression 
Expression: !controls! Enzymes and Pathways 
Enzymes and Pathways: !extends beyond! Transcription