A study quantifying the physiological threshhold at which Spartina alterniflora plants are able to tolerate the interactive effects of salinity and soil drying was conducted in a climate controlled greenhouse. The experiment consisted of two levels of salinity (3-5 ppt, L and 35-38 ppt, H) as well as four dynamic water levels: flooding (water level maintained 3-5 cm above the soil surface at high tide and 10 cm below the soil surface at low tide for entire study duration, F), 8-day drought (water level maintained at least 20 cm below the soil surface at high tide for 8 days then flooded, 8 days), 16-day drought (water level maintained at least 20 cm below the soil surface at high tide for 16 days then flooded, 16 days), and 24-day drought (water level maintained at least 20 cm below the soil surface at high tide for 24 days then flooded, 24 days). Plant gas exchange and growth responses were measured along with soil conditions of redox potential and water potential. Significant decreases were seen in plant gas exchange and growth in response to increases in salinity and soil drying. Survival was 100% for all flooded treatments while increased salinity combined with soil drying decreased survival to 86% in both low salt/24-day drought plants (LD24) and high salt/16-day drought plants (HD16). The lowest survival rate was seen in the high salt/24-day drought treatment (HD24) at 29%. Therefore, it appears that the critical time for recovery from the combined effects of increased salinity and soil drying may greatly diminish after two weeks from the onset of stress conditions. Consequently, if salinity continues to increase along the MRDP, marshes dominated by S. alterniflora may be more susceptible to short-term drought and likewise large-scale marsh browning.

Salinity: !affects! Plant gas exchange and growth
Salinity: !decreases! Survival rate
Soil Drying: !affects! Plant gas exchange and growth
Soil Drying: !decreases! Survival rate
High Salt/24-day Drought Treatment: !has lowest! Survival rate