Different formae speciales of the grass powdery mildew fungus Blumeria graminis undergo basic-compatible or basic-incompatible (nonhost) interactions with barley. Background resistance in compatible interactions and nonhost resistance require common genetic and mechanistic elements of plant defense. To build resources for differential screening for genes that potentially distinguish a compatible from an incompatible interaction on the level of differential gene expression of the plant, we constructed eight dedicated cDNA libraries, established 13.000 expressed sequence tag (EST) sequences and designed DNA macroarrays. Using macroarrays based on cDNAs derived from epidermal peels of plants pretreated with the chemical resistance activating compound acibenzolar-S-methyl, we compared the expression of barley gene transcripts in the early host interaction with B. graminis f.sp. hordei or the nonhost pathogen B. graminis f.sp. tritici, respectively. We identified 102 spots corresponding to 94 genes on the macroarray that gave significant B. graminis-responsive signals at 12 and/or 24 h after inoculation. In independent expression analyses, we confirmed the macroarray results for 11 selected genes. Although the majority of genes showed a similar expression profile in compatible versus incompatible interactions, about 30 of the 94 genes were expressed on slightly different levels in compatible versus incompatible interactions.

Different formae speciales of Blumeria graminis: !undergo! basic-compatible or basic-incompatible interactions with barley
Barley: !requires! common genetic and mechanistic elements of plant defense
cDNA libraries: !constructed! to build resources for differential screening
Macroarrays: !compared! expression of barley gene transcripts in host/nonhost interaction
102 spots: !correspond to! 94 genes on macroarray
11 selected genes: !confirmed! macroarray results in independent expression analyses
30 of 94 genes: !expressed differently! in compatible vs. incompatible interactions