The plasma membrane H+-ATPase plays an important role in the plant response to nutrient and environmental stresses. However, the involvement of plant root plasma membrane H+-ATPase in adaptation to phosphate (P) starvation is not yet fully elucidated. In this study, experiments were performed with soybean roots in low-P nutrient solution (10 microM). Treatment with fusicoccin, an activator of the plasma membrane H+-ATPase, increased P uptake by 35%, while vanadate, an inhibitor of plasma membrane H+-ATPase, severely suppressed it. These results suggested that P uptake might be regulated via the modulation of the activity of plasma membrane H+-ATPase under P starvation. The relationship between P uptake and the activity of plasma membrane H+-ATPase was examined further by using plasma membrane H+-ATPase transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana under low-P conditions. Transgenic plants absorbed more P compared with wild-type Arabidopsis. Results from real-time RT-PCR, western-blotting and immunolocalization analysis indicated that the increase in activity of the plasma membrane H+-ATPase by P starvation was caused by its transcriptional and translational regulation. A higher expression was observed at the translational level than at the transcriptional level. P starvation could induce a transient increase of endogenous indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) in soybean roots. The exogenous application of IAA stimulated the activity of plasma membrane H+-ATPase and P uptake, while naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA), an IAA transport inhibitor, blocked IAA effects. Taken together, these results suggested an involvement of root plasma membrane H+-ATPase in the adaptation of soybean to P starvation. IAA might be involved in signal transduction of P starvation by activating the plasma membrane H+-ATPase in soybean roots.

Plasma membrane H+-ATPase: !regulates! P uptake 
Fusicoccin: !activates! Plasma membrane H+-ATPase 
Vanadate: !inhibits! Plasma membrane H+-ATPase 
Transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana: !absorbs more! P 
Real-time RT-PCR, western-blotting and immunolocalization analysis: !indicate! Transcriptional and translational regulation of plasma membrane H+-ATPase 
P starvation: !induces! Endogenous indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) 
Exogenous IAA: !stimulates! Plasma membrane H+-ATPase and P uptake 
Naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA): !blocks! IAA effects