['16554365', 'Differential growth of tissues during lateral organ development is essential for  producing variation in shape and size. Previous studies have identified JAGGED  (JAG), a gene that encodes a putative C2H2 zinc-finger transcription factor, as a  key regulator of shape that promotes growth in lateral organs. Although JAG  expression is detected in all floral organs, loss-of-function jag alleles have  their strongest effects on sepal and petal development, suggesting that JAG may  act redundantly with other factors in stamens and carpels. Here, we show that  NUBBIN (NUB), a gene closely related to JAG, is responsible for this redundancy.  Unlike JAG, NUB is exclusively expressed in leaves, stamens and carpels, and  briefly in petal primordia. Furthermore, whereas JAG expression extends into all  cell layers of lateral organs, NUB is restricted to the interior adaxial side.  Our analysis focuses on stamen and gynoecium development, where we find that NUB  acts redundantly with JAG to promote the growth of the pollen-bearing  microsporangia of the anthers and the carpel walls of the gynoecium, which  enclose the ovules. JAG and NUB also act redundantly to promote the  differentiation of adaxial cell types in the carpel walls, and in the  establishment of the correct number of cell layers. The important role these two  factors play in regulating organ growth is further demonstrated by  gain-of-function experiments showing that ectopic NUB expression is sufficient to  drive the proliferation of tissues and the amplification of cell-layer number.', '2006 May', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.02335', 'Yanofsky']

JAG: !promotes growth in! lateral organs
NUB: !acts redundantly with! JAG
JAG: !extends into! all cell layers
NUB: !is restricted to! interior adaxial side
JAG: !promotes growth of! microsporangia
NUB: !promotes growth of! carpel walls
JAG: !promotes differentiation of! adaxial cell types
NUB: !promotes establishment of! correct number of cell layers
NUB: !is sufficient to drive! proliferation of tissues