Changes in the contents of polyamines (PAs) in tobacco leaves (Nicotiana tabacum L. cv. Wisconsin 38) grown under 16 h photoperiod were correlated with arginine and ornithine decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.19 and EC 4.1.1.17) and diamine oxidase (EC 1.4.3.6) activities. The maximum of free and soluble conjugated forms of PAs occurred 1-2 h after the middle of the light period and was followed by two distinct peaks at the end of the light and at the beginning of the dark phase. Putrescine was the most abundant and cadaverine the least abundant PA in both free and PCA-soluble forms. However, cadaverine was predominant in PCA-insoluble conjugates, followed by putrescine, spermidine, and spermine. Both arginine and ornithine decarboxylases are involved in putrescine biosynthesis in tobacco leaves. Light dramatically stimulated the activity of ornithine decarboxylase, while no photoinduction of arginine decarboxylase activity was observed. Ornithine decarboxylase was found mainly in the particulate fraction. Only one peak, just after light induction, occurred in the cytosolic fraction, with 35% of the total ornithine decarboxylase activity. By contrast, the total arginine decarboxylase activity was equally divided between the soluble and pellet fractions. A sharp increase in diamine oxidase activity occurred 1 h after exposure to light, concomitant with the light-induced increase in ornithine decarboxylase activity. After a decline, diamine oxidase activity increased again, together with the rise in the amount of free Put. The roles of both conjugation of PAs with hydroxycinnamic acids and oxidative degradation of putrescine in maintaining free PA levels during the 24 h light/dark cycle are discussed. The presented results have shown that the parameters studied here followed rhythmical changes and were not only affected by light.

Arginine decarboxylase: !synthesizes! Putrescine 
Ornithine decarboxylase: !synthesizes! Putrescine 
Light: !stimulates! Ornithine decarboxylase 
Putrescine: !conjugates with! Hydroxycinnamic acids 
Putrescine: !oxidatively degraded by! Diamine oxidase