Changes in gene expression within roots of Glycine max (soybean), cv. Kent, susceptible to infection by Heterodera glycines (the soybean cyst nematode [SCN]), at 6, 12, and 24 h, and 2, 4, 6, and 8 days post-inoculation were monitored using microarrays containing more than 6,000 cDNA inserts. Replicate, independent biological samples were examined at each time point. Gene expression was analyzed statistically using T-tests, ANOVA, clustering algorithms, and online analytical processing (OLAP). These analyses allow the user to query the data in several ways without importing the data into third-party software. RT-PCR confirmed that WRKY6 transcription factor, trehalose phosphate synthase, EIF4a, Skp1, and CLB1 were differentially induced across most time-points. Other genes induced across most timepoints included lipoxygenase, calmodulin, phospholipase C, metallothionein-like protein, and chalcone reductase. RT-PCR demonstrated enhanced expression during the first 12 h of infection for Kunitz trypsin inhibitor and sucrose synthase. The stress-related gene, SAM-22, phospholipase D and 12-oxophytodienoate reductase were also induced at the early time-points. At 6 and 8 dpi there was an abundance of transcripts expressed that encoded genes involved in transcription and protein synthesis. Some of those genes included ribosomal proteins, and initiation and elongation factors. Several genes involved in carbon metabolism and transport were also more abundant. Those genes included glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase and sucrose synthase. These results identified specific changes in gene transcript levels triggered by infection of susceptible soybean roots by SCN.

WRKY6: !induces! RT-PCR
trehalose phosphate synthase: !induces! RT-PCR
EIF4a: !induces! RT-PCR
Skp1: !induces! RT-PCR
CLB1: !induces! RT-PCR
lipoxygenase: !induces! RT-PCR
calmodulin: !induces! RT-PCR
phospholipase C: !induces! RT-PCR
metallothionein-like protein: !induces! RT-PCR
chalcone reductase: !induces! RT-PCR
Kunitz trypsin inhibitor: !induces! RT-PCR
sucrose synthase: !induces! RT-PCR
SAM-22: !induces! RT-PCR
phospholipase D: !induces! RT-PCR
12-oxophytodienoate reductase: !induces! RT-PCR
ribosomal proteins: !induces! RT-PCR
initiation factors: !induces! RT-PCR
elong