Hot and dry air (harmattan or xerothermic climate) greatly inhibits plant growth, particularly flowering and seed setting of crops. Little is known about the mechanism of plant response to this extreme environmental stress due to the lack of valuable genetic resource. Here, we report the isolation and characteristics of a unique Arabidopsis mutant, hat1 (harmattan tolerant 1), which shows high tolerance to hot and dry air. Under normal growth conditions, the mutant does not differ in morphology and soil drought tolerance compared to the wild type. When subjected to high temperature (42 degrees C) and low humidity (10-15%), however, it could survive up to 6 days, while the wild type (Col-0) died after 24 h. The hat1 mutant also exhibits enhanced tolerance to soil drought, but only under xerothermic conditions. Mutant plants tightly close their stomata to retain water under xerothermic stress, and are more tolerant to high salinity at all developmental stages, accumulating less Na+ and more K+ than wild-type plants during NaCl treatment. Interestingly, hat1 plants are also ABA-hypersensitive. Genetic analysis revealed that the hat1 phenotype is caused by a dominant mutation at a single nuclear locus. Mapping studies indicate that Hat1 is located at an interval of 168 kb on chromosome 5 in which 21 genes are known to be regulated by diverse abiotic stresses. A mutant of this kind, to our knowledge, has not been previously reported. Thus, this report serves as a starting point in the genetic dissection of the plant response to xerothermic stress, and provides physiological and genetic evidence of the existence of a novel abiotic stress response pathway that is also ABA-dependent.

hat1: !exhibits! high tolerance to hot and dry air 
hat1: !caused by! dominant mutation 
hat1: !located at! interval of 168 kb on chromosome 5 
hat1: !tightly closes! stomata 
hat1: !more tolerant to! soil drought 
hat1: !accumulates less! Na+ 
hat1: !accumulates more! K+ 
hat1: !ABA-hypersensitive!