Cellular oxalate, widely distributed in many plants, is implicated to play important roles in various functions and is also known to affect food qualities adversely in fruits and vegetables. How oxalate is regulated in plants is currently not well understood. Glycolate oxidase (GLO) has long been considered as an important player in oxalate accumulation in plants. To gain further insight into the biochemical and molecular mechanisms, the possible roles of GLO in the process were studied. Drastically different levels of oxalate could be achieved by treating rice with various nitrogen forms (nitrate versus ammonium). While nitrate stimulated oxalate accumulation, ammonium reduced its level. Such treatments resulted in similar pattern changes for some other related organic acids, such as glycolate, oxaloacetate, and malate. By feeding plants with exogenous glycolate it was possible almost completely to restore the ammonium-decreased oxalate level. Under the two treatments few differences were observed for GLO mRNA levels, protein levels, and in vitro activities. Both K(m) for glycolate/glyoxylate and K(i) for oxalate remained almost the same for GLO purified from either nitrate- or ammonium-fed leaves. A further in vivo study, with transgenic plants carrying an estradiol-inducible GLO antisense gene, showed that, while the estradiol-induced antisense expression remarkably reduced both GLO protein levels and activities, oxalate levels were not significantly altered in the estradiol-treated transgenic plants. Taken together, it is suggested that oxalate accumulation and regulation is independent of GLO in rice leaves.

Glycolate oxidase: !implicated in! oxalate accumulation
Nitrate: !stimulates! oxalate accumulation
Ammonium: !reduces! oxalate accumulation
Exogenous glycolate: !restores! ammonium-decreased oxalate level
GLO mRNA/protein/activity: !remains unchanged! under nitrate/ammonium treatments
Estradiol-induced GLO antisense gene: !reduces! GLO protein levels/activities
Oxalate: !independent of! GLO in rice leaves