This study examined the activity, species richness, and species composition of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal (AMF) community of Populus-Salix stands on the Verde River (Arizona, USA), quantified patterns of AMF richness and colonization along complex floodplain gradients, and identified environmental variables responsible for structuring the AMF community. Samples from 61 Populus-Salix stands were analyzed for AMF and herbaceous composition, AMF colonization, gravimetric soil moisture, soil texture, per cent organic matter, pH, and concentrations of nitrate, bicarbonate phosphorus and exchangeable potassium. AMF species richness declined with stand age and distance from and elevation above the channel and was positively related to perennial species cover and richness and gravimetric soil moisture. Distance from and elevation above the active channel, forest age, annual species cover, perennial species richness, and exchangeable potassium concentration all played a role in structuring the AMF community in this riparian area. Most AMF species were found across a wide range of soil conditions, but a subset of species tended to occur more often in hydric areas. This group of riparian affiliate AMF species includes several not previously encountered in the surrounding Sonoran desert.

Stand age: !affects! AMF species richness 
Distance from channel: !affects! AMF species richness 
Elevation above channel: !affects! AMF species richness 
Perennial species cover: !enhances! AMF species richness 
Perennial species richness: !enhances! AMF species richness 
Gravimetric soil moisture: !enhances! AMF species richness 
Distance from channel: !structures! AMF community 
Elevation above channel: !structures! AMF community 
Forest age: !structures! AMF community 
Annual species cover: !structures! AMF community 
Perennial species richness: !structures! AMF community 
Exchangeable potassium concentration: !structures! AMF community 
Hydric areas: !favors! Riparian affiliate AMF species