A comparative transcriptome analysis for successive stages of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) developmental leaf senescence (NS), darkening-induced senescence of individual leaves attached to the plant (DIS), and senescence in dark-incubated detached leaves (DET) revealed many novel senescence-associated genes with distinct expression profiles. The three senescence processes share a high number of regulated genes, although the overall number of regulated genes during DIS and DET is about 2 times lower than during NS. Consequently, the number of NS-specific genes is much higher than the number of DIS- or DET-specific genes. The expression profiles of transporters (TPs), receptor-like kinases, autophagy genes, and hormone pathways were analyzed in detail. The Arabidopsis TPs and other integral membrane proteins were systematically reclassified based on the Transporter Classification system. Coordinate activation or inactivation of several genes is observed in some TP families in all three or only in individual senescence types, indicating differences in the genetic programs for remobilization of catabolites. Characteristic senescence type-specific differences were also apparent in the expression profiles of (putative) signaling kinases. For eight hormones, the expression of biosynthesis, metabolism, signaling, and (partially) response genes was investigated. In most pathways, novel senescence-associated genes were identified. The expression profiles of hormone homeostasis and signaling genes reveal additional players in the senescence regulatory network.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Gene: !localizes to! X 
Gene: !interacts with! Y 
Gene: !enhances! Z 
Gene: !represses! U 
Gene: !synthesizes! I 
Transporters: !reclassified! Systematically 
TP Families: !coordinate activation/inactivation! All Three Senescence Types 
Signaling Kinases: !expression profiles! Characteristic Senescence Type-Specific Differences 
Hormone Pathways: !expression profiles! Novel Senescence-Associated Genes 
Hormone Homeostasis: !expression profiles! Additional Players in Regulatory Network