['16602701', 'Plasma membrane proteins are displayed through diverse mechanisms, including  anchoring in the extracellular leaflet via glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)  molecules. GPI-anchored membrane proteins (GPI-APs) are a functionally and  structurally diverse protein family, and their importance is well-recognized as  they are candidate cell surface biomarker molecules with potential diagnostic and  therapeutic applications in molecular medicine. GPI-APs have also attracted  interest in plant biotechnology because of their role in root development and  cell remodeling. Using a shave-and-conquer concept, we demonstrate that  phospholipase D (PLD) treatment of human and plant plasma membrane fractions  leads to the release of GPI-anchored proteins that were identified and  characterized by capillary liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. In  contrast to phospholipase C, the PLD enzyme is not affected by structural  heterogeneity of the GPI moiety, making PLD a generally useful reagent for  proteomic investigations of GPI-anchored proteins in a variety of cells, tissues,  and organisms. A total of 11 human GPI-APs and 35 Arabidopsis thaliana GPI-APs  were identified, representing a significant addition to the number of  experimentally detected GPI-APs in both species. Computational GPI-AP sequence  analysis tools were investigated for the characterization of the identified  GPI-APs, and these demonstrated that there is some discrepancy in their  efficiency in classification of GPI-APs and the exact assignment of omega-sites.  This study highlights the efficiency of an integrative proteomics approach that  combines experimental and computational methods to provide the selectivity,  specificity, and sensitivity required for characterization of  post-translationally modified membrane proteins.', '2006 Apr', 'J Proteome Res', '10.1021/pr050419u', 'Jensen']

GPI-APs: !are displayed through! diverse mechanisms 
GPI-APs: !have potential! diagnostic and therapeutic applications 
GPI-APs: !play a role in! root development and cell remodeling 
PLD enzyme: !releases! GPI-anchored proteins 
PLD enzyme: !is not affected by! structural heterogeneity of the GPI moiety 
Human GPI-APs: !were identified and characterized by! capillary liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry 
Arabidopsis thaliana GPI-APs: !were identified and characterized by! capillary liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry 
Computational GPI-AP sequence analysis tools: !were investigated for! characterization of the identified GPI-APs 
Integrative proteomics approach: !combines! experimental and computational methods