Comparative genomics provides insight into the evolutionary dynamics that shape discrete sequences as well as whole genomes. To advance comparative genomics within the Brassicaceae, we have end sequenced 23,136 medium-sized insert clones from Boechera stricta, a wild relative of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). A significant proportion of these sequences, 18,797, are nonredundant and display highly significant similarity (BLASTn e-value < or = 10(-30)) to low copy number Arabidopsis genomic regions, including more than 9,000 annotated coding sequences. We have used this dataset to identify orthologous gene pairs in the two species and to perform a global comparison of DNA regions 5' to annotated coding regions. On average, the 500 nucleotides upstream to coding sequences display 71.4% identity between the two species. In a similar analysis, 61.4% identity was observed between 5' noncoding sequences of Brassica oleracea and Arabidopsis, indicating that regulatory regions are not as diverged among these lineages as previously anticipated. By mapping the B. stricta end sequences onto the Arabidopsis genome, we have identified nearly 2,000 conserved blocks of microsynteny (bracketing 26% of the Arabidopsis genome). A comparison of fully sequenced B. stricta inserts to their homologous Arabidopsis genomic regions indicates that indel polymorphisms >5 kb contribute substantially to the genome size difference observed between the two species. Further, we demonstrate that microsynteny inferred from end-sequence data can be applied to the rapid identification and cloning of genomic regions of interest from nonmodel species. These results suggest that among diploid relatives of Arabidopsis, small- to medium-scale shotgun sequencing approaches can provide rapid and cost-effective benefits to evolutionary and/or functional comparative genomic frameworks.

Gene: !affects! Evolutionary dynamics 
Gene: !localizes to! Arabidopsis genome 
Gene: !interacts with! Brassica oleracea 
Gene: !enhances! Identification and cloning of genomic regions 
Gene: !represses! Genome size difference 
Gene: !synthesizes! Comparative genomics