The Myrothamnus flabellifolius leaf cell wall and its response to desiccation were investigated using electron microscopic, biochemical, and immunocytochemical techniques. Electron microscopy revealed desiccation-induced cell wall folding in the majority of mesophyll and epidermal cells. Thick-walled vascular tissue and sclerenchymous ribs did not fold and supported the surrounding tissue, thereby limiting the extent of leaf shrinkage and allowing leaf morphology to be rapidly regained upon rehydration. Isolated cell walls from hydrated and desiccated M. flabellifolius leaves were fractionated into their constituent polymers and the resulting fractions were analyzed for monosaccharide content. Significant differences between hydrated and desiccated states were observed in the water-soluble buffer extract, pectin fractions, and the arabinogalactan protein-rich extract. A marked increase in galacturonic acid was found in the alkali-insoluble pectic fraction. Xyloglucan structure was analyzed and shown to be of the standard dicotyledonous pattern. Immunocytochemical analysis determined the cellular location of the various epitopes associated with cell wall components, including pectin, xyloglucan, and arabinogalactan proteins, in hydrated and desiccated leaf tissue. The most striking observation was a constitutively present high concentration of arabinose, which was associated with pectin, presumably in the form of arabinan polymers. We propose that the arabinan-rich leaf cell wall of M. flabellifolius possesses the necessary structural properties to be able to undergo repeated periods of desiccation and rehydration.

Cell wall: !contains! arabinan polymers 
Cell wall: !folds! upon desiccation 
Vascular tissue: !supports! surrounding tissue 
Sclerenchymous ribs: !limit! leaf shrinkage 
Water-soluble buffer extract: !differs between! hydrated and desiccated states 
Pectin fractions: !differ between! hydrated and desiccated states 
Arabinogalactan protein-rich extract: !differs between! hydrated and desiccated states 
Galacturonic acid: !increases in! alkali-insoluble pectic fraction 
Xyloglucan structure: !follows! dicotyledonous pattern 
Pectin: !localizes to! cell walls 
Xyloglucan: !localizes to! cell walls 
Arabinogalactan proteins: !localizes to! cell walls