Pseudomonas cichorii causes necrotic leaf spots (NLS), while Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci induces a hypersensitive response (HR) in eggplant. P. cichorii induced cell death at 9 h after inoculation (HAI), reaching a maximum of around 24-30 HAI. On the other hand, cell death was induced 6 HAI with P. syringae pv. tabaci, reaching a maximum of around 12-18 HAI. Superoxide generation was observed in eggplant inoculated with both bacteria. DNA fragmentation, cytochrome c release into the cytosol and expression of defense-related genes such as PR-1 and hsr203J was also induced by inoculation with both bacteria, but these plant reactions were more rapidly induced in eggplant inoculated with P. syringae pv. tabaci rather than those with P. cichorii. Lipid peroxidation and induction of lipoxygenase (LOX) was drastically induced in eggplant inoculated with P. syringae pv. tabaci compared to P. cichorii-inoculated eggplant. Pharmacological studies showed that induction of the cell death, and the NLS or the HR in response to both bacteria was commonly associated with de novo protein synthesis, reactive oxygen species and caspase III-like protease. Interestingly, involvement of lipid peroxidation, LOX, serine protease, and DNase differed between induction of NLS and HR. These results suggest that programmed cell death might be closely associated not only with the HR but also NLS. However, there may be differences not only in the induction kinetics and level of plant responses but also in the infection-related responses between HR and NLS.

Pseudomonas cichorii: !induces! NLS
Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci: !induces! HR
Superoxide generation: !induced by! both bacteria
DNA fragmentation: !induced by! both bacteria
PR-1 and hsr203J: !expressed by! both bacteria
Lipid peroxidation: !induced by! P. syringae pv. tabaci
LOX: !induced by! P. syringae pv. tabaci
Cell death: !associated with! de novo protein synthesis
ROS: !associated with! cell death
Caspase III-like protease: !associated with! cell death
Lipid peroxidation: !involved in! HR & NLS
LOX: !involved in! HR & NLS
Serine protease: !involved in! HR & NLS
DNase: !involved in! HR & NLS