['16617180', "Phylloquinone is a compound present in all photosynthetic plants serving as  cofactor for Photosystem I-mediated electron transport. Newly identified  seedling-lethal Arabidopsis thaliana mutants impaired in the biosynthesis of  phylloquinone possess reduced Photosystem I activity. The affected gene, called  PHYLLO, consists of a fusion of four previously individual eubacterial genes,  menF, menD, menC, and menH, required for the biosynthesis of phylloquinone in  photosynthetic cyanobacteria and the respiratory menaquinone in eubacteria. The  fact that homologous men genes reside as polycistronic units in eubacterial  chromosomes and in plastomes of red algae strongly suggests that PHYLLO derived  from a plastid operon during endosymbiosis. The principle architecture of the  fused PHYLLO locus is conserved in the nuclear genomes of plants, green algae,  and the diatom alga Thalassiosira pseudonana. The latter arose from secondary  endosymbiosis of a red algae and a eukaryotic host indicating selective driving  forces for maintenance and/or independent generation of the composite gene  cluster within the nuclear genomes. Besides, individual menF genes, encoding  active isochorismate synthases (ICS), have been established followed by splitting  of the essential 3' region of the menF module of PHYLLO only in genomes of higher  plants. This resulted in inactivation of the ICS activity encoded by PHYLLO and  enabled a metabolic branch from the phylloquinone biosynthetic route to  independently regulate the synthesis of salicylic acid required for plant  defense. Therefore, gene fusion, duplication, and fission events adapted a  eubacterial multienzymatic system to the metabolic requirements of plants.", '2006 Jun 23', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M601754200', 'Meurer']

PHYLLO: !consists of! four eubacterial genes 
menF, menD, menC, and menH: !required for! phylloquinone biosynthesis 
plastid operon: !derived from! endosymbiosis 
nuclear genomes: !contain! PHYLLO locus 
higher plants: !split! 3' region of menF module 
ICS activity: !inactivated by! splitting 
metabolic branch: !enabled by! splitting 
salicylic acid: !synthesized by! metabolic branch