['16622707', 'Pectin methylesterases (PME, EC. 3.1.1.11) are enzymes that demethylesterify  plant cell wall pectins in muro. In Arabidopsis thaliana, putative PME proteins  are thought to be encoded by a 66-member gene family. This study used real-time  RT-PCR to gain an overview of the expression of the entire family at eight  silique developmental stages, in flower buds and in vegetative tissue in the  Arabidopsis. Only 15% of the PMEs were not expressed at any of the developmental  stages studied. Among expressed PMEs, expression data could be clustered into  five distinct groups: 19 PMEs highly or uniquely expressed in floral buds, 4 PMEs  uniquely expressed at mid-silique developmental stages, 16 PMEs highly or  uniquely expressed in silique at late developmental stages, 16 PMEs mostly  ubiquitously expressed, and 1 PME with a specific expression pattern, i.e. not  expressed during early silique development. Comparison of expression and  phylogenetic profiles showed that, within phylogenetic group 2, all but one PME  belong to the floral bud expression group. Similar results were shown for a  subset of one of the phylogenetic group, which differed from others by containing  most of the PMEs that do not possess any PRO part next to their catalytic part.  Expression data were confirmed by two promoter:GUS transgenic plant analysis  revealing a PME expressed in pollen and one in young seeds. Our results highlight  the high diversity of PME expression profiles. They are discussed with regard to  the role of PMEs in fruit development and cell growth.', '2006 Sep', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-006-0261-9', 'Pelloux']

Pectin methylesterases: !demethylesterify! Plant cell wall pectins 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !encodes! 66-member gene family 
Real-time RT-PCR: !gains overview of! Expression of entire family 
Expression data: !clustered into! Five distinct groups 
Phylogenetic group 2: !contains! All but one PME 
Promoter:GUS transgenic plant analysis: !reveals! PME expressed in pollen and young seeds 
High diversity of PME expression profiles: !highlighted! Role of PMEs in fruit development and cell growth