['16668615', 'We have characterized the occurrence and expression of multiple acyl carrier  protein (ACP) isoforms in Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh ecotype Columbia.  Immunoblot analysis of ACPs from Arabidopsis tissues separated by native  polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and 1 molar urea polyacrylamide gel  electrophoresis revealed a complex pattern of multiple ACP isoforms. All tissues  examined (leaves, roots, and seeds) expressed at least three forms of ACP. The  immunoblot identifications of ACP bands were confirmed by acylation of ACP  extracts with Escherichia coli acyl-ACP synthetase. A full-length cDNA clone has  been isolated that has 70% identity with a previously characterized Arabidopsis  genomic ACP clone (ACP-1) (MA Post-Beittenmiller, A Hlousek-Radojcic, JB Ohlrogge  [1989] Nucleic Acids Res 17: 1777). Based on RNA blot analysis, the cDNA clone  represents an ACP that is expressed in leaves, seeds, and roots. In order to  identify the protein products of each known ACP gene, their mature coding  sequences have been expressed in E. coli. Using polymerase chain reactions, exons  II and III of the genomic ACP-1 clone and the mature coding sequences of the  ACP-2 cDNA clone were subcloned into E. coli expression vectors. Site-directed  mutagenesis was used to convert the amino acid sequence of the ACP-2 cDNA clone  to that of the A2 clone of Lamppa and Jacks ([1991] Plant Mol Biol 16: 469-474),  ACP-3. The three E. coli-expressed proteins have different mobilities on  polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels and each comigrates with a different  Arabidopsis ACP isoform expressed in leaves, seeds, and roots. Thus, all of the  three cloned ACPs appear to be constitutively expressed Arabidopsis ACPs. In  addition to these three ACP isoforms, protein blots indicate that seed, leaf, and  root each express one or more tissue-specific isoforms.', '1992 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.98.1.206', 'Ohlrogge']

Gene: !synthesizes! ACP isoforms 
Gene: !expresses in! leaves, roots, and seeds 
Gene: !confirms! immunoblot identifications 
Gene: !isolates! full-length cDNA clone 
Gene: !subclones! exons II and III 
Gene: !mutagenizes! amino acid sequence 
Gene: !expresses! E. coli proteins 
Gene: !comigrates with! Arabidopsis ACP isoform 
Gene: !indicates! tissue-specific isoforms