['16668923', 'Reports from a number of laboratories describe the presence of a family of  proteins (the major intrinsic protein family) in a variety of organisms. These  proteins are postulated to form channels that function in metabolite transport.  In plants, this family is represented by the product of NOD26, a nodulation gene  in soybean that encodes a protein of the peribacteroid membrane, and tonoplast  intrinsic protein (TIP), an abundant protein in the tonoplast of protein storage  vacuoles of bean seeds (KD Johnson, H Hofte, MJ Chrispeels [1990] Plant Cell 2:  525-532). Other homologs that are induced by water stress in pea and in  Arabidopsis thaliana and that are expressed in the roots of tobacco have been  reported, but the location of the proteins they encode is not known. We now  report the presence and derived amino acid sequences of two different TIP  proteins in A. thaliana. alpha-TIP is a seed-specific protein that has 68% amino  acid sequence identity with bean seed TIP; gamma-TIP is expressed in the entire  vegetative body of A. thaliana and has 58% amino acid identity with bean seed  TIP. Both proteins are associated with the tonoplast. Comparisons of the derived  amino acid sequences of the seven known plant proteins in the major intrinsic  protein family show that genes with similar expression patterns (e.g. water  stress-induced or seed specific) are more closely related to each other than the  three A. thaliana homologs are related. We propose that the nonoverlapping gene  expression patterns reported here, and the evolutionary relationships indicated  by the phylogenetic tree, suggest a functional specialization of these proteins.', '1992 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.99.2.561', 'Chrispeels']

NOD26: !encodes! protein 
TIP: !abundant in! tonoplast 
alpha-TIP: !seed-specific! A. thaliana 
gamma-TIP: !expressed in! entire vegetative body of A. thaliana 
major intrinsic protein family: !represented by! NOD26 
major intrinsic protein family: !function in! metabolite transport 
A. thaliana homologs: !related to! similar expression patterns 
A. thaliana homologs: !suggest! functional specialization