Drought and high-temperature stresses have been extensively studied; however, little is known about their combined impact on plants. In the present study, we determined the photosynthetic gas exchange, chlorophyll fluorescence, nitrogen level, and lipid peroxidation of the leaves of a perennial grass (Leymus chinensis (Trin.) Tzvel.) subjected to three constant temperatures (23, 29 and 32 degrees C), and five soil-moisture levels (75-80%, 60-65%, 50-55%, 35-40% and 25-30% of field capacity, respectively). High temperature significantly decreased plant biomass, leaf green area, leaf water potential, photosynthetic rate (A), maximal efficiency of PSII photochemistry (F (v)/F (m)), actual PSII efficiency (Phi(PSII)), the activities of nitrate reductase (NR; EC 1.6.6.1) and glutamine synthetase (GS; EC 6.3.1.2), but markedly increased the ratio of leaf area to leaf weight (SLA), endopeptidase (EP; EC 3.4.24.11) activity, and malondialdehyde (MDA) content, especially under severe water stress conditions. The A and F (v)/F (m) were significantly and positively correlated with leaf-soluble protein content, and the activities of NR and GS. However, both photosynthesis parameters were significantly and negatively correlated with EP activity and MDA content (P < 0.05). It is suggested that high temperature, combined with severe soil drought, might reduce the function of PSII, weaken nitrogen anabolism, strengthen protein catabolism, and provoke lipid peroxidation. The results also indicate that severe water stress might exacerbate the adverse effects of high temperature, and their combination might reduce the plant productivity and distribution range of L. chinensis in the future.

High Temperature: !decreases! Plant Biomass
High Temperature: !decreases! Leaf Water Potential
High Temperature: !increases! Ratio of Leaf Area to Leaf Weight
High Temperature: !decreases! Photosynthetic Rate
High Temperature: !decreases! Maximal Efficiency of PSII Photochemistry
High Temperature: !decreases! Actual PSII Efficiency
High Temperature: !increases! Endopeptidase Activity
High Temperature: !increases! Malondialdehyde Content
Photosynthetic Rate: !positively correlates with! Leaf-Soluble Protein Content
Maximal Efficiency of PSII Photochemistry: !positively correlates with! Leaf-Soluble Protein Content
Actual PSII Efficiency: !positively correlates with! Leaf-Soluble Protein Content
Endopeptidase Activity: !negatively correlates with! Photosynthetic Rate
Malondialdehyde Content: !negatively correlates with! Photosynthetic Rate