['16697077', 'The Sec14 protein (Sec14p) and its homologs are involved in the transfer of  phosphatidylinositol/phosphatidylcholine phospholipids in eukaryotic cells. In  the completely sequenced genome of Arabidopsis thaliana, multiple genes encoding  putative Sec14p homologs have been predicted based on bioinformatic analysis.  Here we report the identification of two yeast Sec14-like genes (designated as  AtSFH3 and AtSFH12, respectively) that are predominately transcribed in  Arabidopsis flowers. The deduced amino acid sequences of AtSfh3p and AtSfh12p  exhibited high similarity to that of Sec14p. Ectopic expression of AtSfh3p or  AtSfh12p corrected the high temperature sensitive phenotype caused by Sec14p  functional deficiency in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, indicating that the two plant  homologs are functional in the intracellular environment. AtSFH3 transcripts were  detected in flowers, stems and immature siliques but not roots and leaves, with a  relatively higher transcript level in the flowers. In contrast, AtSFH12  transcripts were only detectable in the flowers. Based on histochemical staining  of beta-glucuronidase (GUS) activities in the transgenic Arabidopsis plants  harboring promoter::GUS constructs, AtSFH3 transcription was first detected in  the stigma papillae of the flowers at stage 11, and then in the pollen grains  before and after fertilization. On the other hand, AtSFH12 transcription was only  found in the mature and germinating pollen grains. The information from this  study may provide useful clue for further analysis of the function of plant  Sec14p homologs in the development of the male gametic cells and/or the  fertilization process in higher plants.', '2007 Apr', 'J Plant Physiol', '10.1016/j.jplph.2006.03.014', 'Wang']

Sec14p: !involved in! transfer of phospholipids 
AtSFH3/AtSFH12: !correct! Sec14p functional deficiency 
AtSFH3: !transcribed in! flowers, stems, immature siliques 
AtSFH12: !transcribed in! flowers 
AtSFH3: !detected in! stigma papillae, pollen grains 
AtSFH12: !detected in! mature, germinating pollen grains