['16709198', 'Cytokinins are a class of phytohormones that play a critical role in plant growth  and development. sob5-D, an activation-tagging mutant, shows phenotypes typical  of transgenic plants expressing the Agrobacterium tumefaciens  isopentenyltransferase (ipt) gene that encodes the enzyme catalyzing the first  step of cytokinin biosynthesis. The sob5-D mutant phenotypes are caused by  over-expression of a novel gene, SOB5. Sequence analysis places SOB5 in a  previously uncharacterized family of plant-specific proteins. A translational  fusion between SOB5 and the green fluorescent protein reporter was localized in  the cytoplasm as well as associated with the plasma membrane when transiently  expressed in onion epidermal cells. Analysis of transgenic plants harboring an  SOB5:SOB5-beta-glucuronidase (GUS) translational fusion under the control of the  SOB5 promoter region showed GUS activity in vegetative tissues (hydathodes and  trichomes of leaves, shoot meristems and roots) as well as in floral tissues  (pistil tips, developing anthers and sepal vasculature). Cytokinin quantification  analysis revealed that adult sob5-D plants accumulated higher levels of  trans-zeatin riboside, trans-zeatin riboside monophosphate and isopentenyladenine  9-glucoside when compared to the wild-type. Consistent with this result, AtIPT3  and AtIPT7 were found to be up-regulated in a tissue-specific manner in sob5-D  mutants. Physiological analysis of the sob5-D mutant demonstrated reduced  responsiveness to exogenous cytokinin in both root-elongation and  callus-formation assays. Taken together, our data suggest a role for the novel  gene SOB5 in cytokinin-mediated plant development.', '2006 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02745.x', 'Neff']

SOB5: !affects! Plant growth and development 
ipt gene: !encodes! Enzyme catalyzing first step of cytokinin biosynthesis 
SOB5: !localizes to! Cytoplasm and plasma membrane 
SOB5: !enhances! GUS activity in vegetative and floral tissues 
sob5-D mutants: !accumulate higher levels of! Trans-zeatin riboside, trans-zeatin riboside monophosphate and isopentenyladenine 9-glucoside 
AtIPT3 and AtIPT7: !up-regulated in! Tissue-specific manner in sob5-D mutants 
sob5-D mutant: !reduced responsiveness to! Exogenous cytokinin