Two relatively rare fatty acids, gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) and stearidonic acid (STA), have attracted much interest due to their nutraceutical and pharmaceutical potential. STA, in particular, has been considered a valuable alternative source for omega-3 fatty acids due to its enhanced conversion efficiency in animals to eicosapentaenoic acid when compared with the more widely consumed omega-3 fatty acid, alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), present in most vegetable oils. Exploiting the wealth of information currently available on in planta oil biosynthesis and coupling this information with the tool of genetic engineering it is now feasible to deliberately perturb fatty acid pools to generate unique oils in commodity crops. In an attempt to maximize the STA content of soybean oil, a borage Delta(6) desaturase and an Arabidopsis Delta(15) desaturase were pyramided by either sexual crossing of transgenic events, re-transformation of a Delta(6) desaturase event with the Delta(15) desaturase or co-transformation of both desaturases. Expression of both desaturases in this study was under the control of the seed-specific soybean beta-conglycinin promoter. Soybean events that carried only the Delta(15 )desaturase possessed a significant elevation of ALA content, while events with both desaturases displayed a relative STA abundance greater than 29%, creating a soybean with omega-3 fatty acids representing over 60% of the fatty acid profile. Analyses of the membrane lipids in a subset of the transgenic events suggest that soybean seeds compensate for enhanced production of polyunsaturated fatty acids by increasing the relative content of palmitic acid in phosphatidylcholine and other phospholipids.

Delta(6) desaturase: !pyramided with! Delta(15) desaturase
beta-conglycinin promoter: !controls expression of! Delta(6) and Delta(15) desaturases
Delta(15) desaturase: !elevates! ALA content
Delta(15) and Delta(6) desaturases: !generate! STA abundance greater than 29%
Soybean seeds: !compensate for enhanced production of! polyunsaturated fatty acids