The CMSII mutant of Nicotiana sylvestris, which lacks a functional mitochondrial complex I, was used to investigate chloroplast-mitochondria interactions in light acclimation of photosynthetic carbon assimilation. CMSII and wild-type (WT) plants were grown at 80 micromol m(-2) s(-1) photosynthetic active radiation (PAR; 80) and 350 micromol m(-2) s(-1) PAR (350). Carbon assimilation at saturating PFD was markedly higher in WT 350 leaves as compared with WT 80 leaves, but was similar in CMS 80 and CMS 350 leaves, suggesting that the mutant is unable to adjust photosynthesis to higher growth irradiance. WT 350 leaves showed several general characteristic light acclimation responses [increases in leaf specific area (LSA), total chlorophyll content, and chlorophyll a/b ratio, and a higher light compensation point]. In contrast, a similar chlorophyll content and chlorophyll a/b ratio were measured for both CMS 80 and CMS 350 leaves, while LSA and the light compensation point acclimated as in the WT. The failure of CMSII to adjust photosynthesis to growth PFD did not result from lower quantum efficiency of PSII, lower whole-chain electron transport rates (ETRs), or lower ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase oxygenase (Rubisco) and sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS) capacities. Excess ETR not used for carbon assimilation was even higher in CMS 350 than in WT 350. Since photochemical fluorescence quenching and the initial activity of NADP malate dehydrogenase (NADP-MDH) were identical in WT 350 and CMS 350 leaves but the activation state of NADP-MDH was different, redox signals from primary ETR are not involved in the signal transduction of light acclimation, while a contribution of stromal redox state cannot be excluded. When mature plants were transferred between 350 and 80 conditions, the mutant showed acclimatory tendencies, although adjustments were not as rapid or as marked as in the WT, and the response of the initial activities of Rubisco and NADP-MDH was impaired or altered. Initial activities of Rubisco and SPS at limiting concentration were also affected in CMS 350 as compared with WT plants when compared at growth irradiance or after in situ activation at 1000 micromol m(-2) s(-1) PAR. The data demonstrate that chloroplast-mitochondria interactions are important in light acclimation, and modulation of the activation state of key photosynthetic enzymes could be an important mechanism in this cross-talk.

CMSII mutant: !lacks! functional mitochondrial complex I
WT plants: !grow at! 80 & 350 micromol m(-2) s(-1) PAR
CMSII: !unable to adjust! photosynthesis to higher growth irradiance
WT 350 leaves: !show! light acclimation responses
CMSII: !failure to adjust! photosynthesis not due to lower quantum efficiency of PSII
Excess ETR: !higher in! CMS 350 than WT 350
Redox signals: !not involved in! signal transduction of light acclimation
Mature plants: !transferred between! 350 & 80 conditions
Chloroplast-mitochondria interactions: !important in! light acclimation
Modulation of activation state: !key mechanism in! cross-talk