['16738859', 'The recovery of free purine and pyrimidine bases and their degradation products  represent alternative pathways in plant cells either to synthesize nucleotides  (salvage pathways) by low energy consumption or to reuse organic nitrogen. Such  recycling of metabolites often requires their uptake into the cell by specialized  transport systems residing in the plasma membrane. In plants, it has been  suggested that several protein families are involved in this process, but only a  few transporters have so far been characterized. In this work, gene expression,  substrate specificities, and transport mechanisms of members of the Ureide  Permease family in Arabidopsis (AtUPS) were analyzed and compared. Promoter-GUS  studies indicated that the members of the family have distinct and partially  overlapping expression patterns with regard to developmental stages or tissue  specific localization. In addition, two alternative splice variants of AtUPS5, a  novel member of the transporter family, were identified and investigated. The  abundance of both alternative mRNAs varied in different organs, while the  relative amounts were comparable. AtUPS5l (longer isoform) shares similar  structural prediction with AtUPS1 and AtUPS2. In contrast, AtUPS5s (shorter  isoform) lacks two transmembrane domains as structural consequence of the  additional splice event. When expressed in yeast, AtUPS5l mediates cellular  import of cyclic purine degradation products and pyrimidines similarly to AtUPS1  and AtUPS2, but differences in transport efficiencies were observed. AtUPS5s,  however, could not be shown to mediate uptake of these compounds into yeast cells  and might therefore be defective or have a different function.', '2006 Nov', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-006-0315-z', 'Desimone']

AtUPS: !mediates! cellular import 
AtUPS5l: !shares similar structure with! AtUPS1 and AtUPS2 
AtUPS5s: !lacks two transmembrane domains! compared to AtUPS5l 
AtUPS5l: !mediates! cellular import of cyclic purine degradation products and pyrimidines 
AtUPS5s: !cannot mediate! uptake of these compounds into yeast cells