['16740662', 'Aluminum (Al) tolerance in Arabidopsis is a genetically complex trait, yet it is  mediated by a single physiological mechanism based on Al-activated root malate  efflux. We investigated a possible molecular determinant for Al tolerance  involving a homolog of the wheat Al-activated malate transporter, ALMT1. This  gene, named AtALMT1 (At1g08430), was the best candidate from the 14-member AtALMT  family to be involved with Al tolerance based on expression patterns and genomic  location. Physiological analysis of a transferred DNA knockout mutant for AtALMT1  as well as electrophysiological examination of the protein expressed in Xenopus  oocytes showed that AtALMT1 is critical for Arabidopsis Al tolerance and encodes  the Al-activated root malate efflux transporter associated with tolerance.  However, gene expression and sequence analysis of AtALMT1 alleles from tolerant  Columbia (Col), sensitive Landsberg erecta (Ler), and other ecotypes that varied  in Al tolerance suggested that variation observed at AtALMT1 is not correlated  with the differences observed in Al tolerance among these ecotypes. Genetic  complementation experiments indicated that the Ler allele of AtALMT1 is equally  effective as the Col allele in conferring Al tolerance and Al-activated malate  release. Finally, fine-scale mapping of a quantitative trait locus (QTL) for Al  tolerance on chromosome 1 indicated that AtALMT1 is located proximal to this QTL.  These results indicate that AtALMT1 is an essential factor for Al tolerance in  Arabidopsis but does not represent the major Al tolerance QTL also found on  chromosome 1.', '2006 Jun 20', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0602868103', 'Kochian']

AtALMT1: !mediates! Al tolerance 
AtALMT1: !encodes! Al-activated root malate efflux transporter 
AtALMT1: !located proximal to! QTL for Al tolerance 
AtALMT1: !not correlated with! differences in Al tolerance among ecotypes 
AtALMT1: !equally effective as! Col allele in conferring Al tolerance