The wheat (Triticum aestivum) and rye (Secale cereale) beta-D-glucosidases hydrolyze hydroxamic acid-glucose conjugates, exist as different types of isozyme, and function as oligomers. In this study, three cDNAs encoding beta-D-glucosidases (TaGlu1a, TaGlu1b, and TaGlu1c) were isolated from young wheat shoots. Although the TaGlu1s share very high sequence homology, the mRNA level of Taglu1c was much lower than the other two genes in 48- and 96-h-old wheat shoots. The expression ratio of each gene was different between two wheat cultivars. Recombinant TaGlu1b expressed in Escherichia coli was electrophoretically distinct fromTaGlu1a and TaGlu1c. Furthermore, coexpression of TaGlu1a and TaGlu1b gave seven bands on a native-PAGE gel, indicating the formation of both homo- and heterohexamers. One distinctive property of the wheat and rye glucosidases is that they function as hexamers but lose activity when dissociated into smaller oligomers or monomers. The crystal structure of hexameric TaGlu1b was determined at a resolution of 1.8 A. The N-terminal region was located at the dimer-dimer interface and plays a crucial role in hexamer formation. Mutational analyses revealed that the aromatic side chain at position 378, which is located at the entrance to the catalytic center, plays an important role in substrate binding. Additionally, serine-464 and leucine-465 of TaGlu1a were shown to be critical in the relative specificity for DIMBOA-glucose (2-O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-4-hydroxy-7-methoxy-1,4-benzoxazin-3-one) over DIBOA-glucose (7-demethoxy-DIMBOA-glucose).

TaGlu1a: !synthesizes! TaGlu1b 
TaGlu1b: !synthesizes! TaGlu1c 
TaGlu1s: !share! high sequence homology 
TaGlu1c: !has lower! mRNA level 
TaGlu1b: !expresses differently! in two wheat cultivars 
TaGlu1b: !forms! homo- and heterohexamers 
TaGlu1b: !functions as! hexamer 
TaGlu1b: !loses activity! when dissociated 
N-terminal region: !localizes to! dimer-dimer interface 
Aromatic side chain: !affects! substrate binding 
Serine-464 and leucine-465: !enhance! relative specificity