Yield reduction caused by late application of glyphosate to glyphosate-resistant cotton (Gossypium hirsutum; GRC) expressing CP4 5-enol-pyruvylshikmate-3-P synthase under the cauliflower mosaic virus-35S promoter has been attributed to male sterility. This study was aimed to elucidate the factors and mechanisms involved in this phenomenon. Western and tissue-print blots demonstrated a reduced expression of the transgene in anthers of GRC compared to ovules of the same plants. Glyphosate application to GRC grown at a high temperature regime after the initiation of flower buds caused a complete loss of pollen viability and inhibition of anther dehiscence, while at a moderate temperature regime only 50% of the pollen grains were disrupted and anther dehiscence was normal. Glyphosate-damaged anthers exhibited a change in the deposition of the secondary cell wall thickenings (SWT) in the endothecium cells, from the normal longitudinal orientation to a transverse orientation, and hindered septum disintegration. These changes occurred only at the high temperature regime. The reorientation of SWT in GRC was accompanied by a similar change in microtubule orientation. A similar reorientation of microtubules was also observed in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings expressing green fluorescent protein tubulin (tubulin alpha 6) following glyphosate treatment. Glyphosate treatment induced the accumulation of high levels of indole-3-acetic acid in GRC anthers. Cotton plants treated with 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid had male sterile flowers, with SWT abnormalities in the endothecium layer similar to those observed in glyphosate-treated plants. Our data demonstrate that glyphosate inhibits anther dehiscence by inducing changes in the microtubule and cell wall organization in the endothecium cells, which are mediated by auxin.

CP4 5-enol-pyruvylshikmate-3-P synthase: !expresses under! cauliflower mosaic virus-35S promoter
glyphosate: !causes! yield reduction
GRC: !expresses! CP4 5-enol-pyruvylshikmate-3-P synthase
GRC: !reduces expression of! transgene in anthers
glyphosate: !inhibits! anther dehiscence
glyphosate: !induces changes in! microtubule and cell wall organization
auxin: !mediates! changes induced by glyphosate
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid: !induces! male sterile flowers