While H2O2 has been implicated in numerous plant environmental responses, normal levels and variabilities are poorly established, and estimates of leaf tissue concentrations span more than three orders of magnitude, even in a single species under similar conditions. Here, leaf tissue H2O2 contents under natural conditions are reported after determining (i) that H2O2 in extracts was stable with time, (ii) that H2O2 added to the extract was recovered quantitatively, and (iii) that the H2O2 calibration curve was unaffected (or quantifiably affected) by the extract. The broad applicability of the protocol and variability in leaf concentrations were demonstrated using tissue collected from several habitats in association with three, more extensive, experiments. The first involved nychthemeral studies of the mangrove, Rhizophora mangle L. Lowest H2O2 levels occurred in the early morning and near sunset, with higher levels both at midday and at night. Second, using five temperate species in Spring, concentrations were compared on a warm, sunny day and a cool, cloudy day. Higher concentrations were found on the warm day for Aesculus glabra Willd., Glechoma hederacea L., Plantago major L., and Viola soraria Willd., while there were no differences in Quercus macrocarpa Michx. Finally, the effects of elevated CO2 and ozone were examined in soybean, Glycine max L. Pioneer 93B15 under Free Air gas Concentration Enrichment (FACE) conditions. Both supplements led to elevated H2O2. Overall, mean leaf, midday, and mid-summer H2O2 concentrations ranged from 0.67 micromol (gFW)(-1) in mangrove to 3.6 micromol (gFW)(-1) in A. glabra Willd. Greatest within-species differences were only 2.5-fold in any of the studies.

H2O2: !varies in! leaf tissue
H2O2: !stable with! time
H2O2: !recovered quantitatively from! extract
H2O2: !calibration curve unaffected by! extract
H2O2: !lowest levels at! early morning/sunset
H2O2: !higher levels at! midday/night
H2O2: !higher concentrations on! warm day
H2O2: !elevated by! CO2/ozone
H2O2: !ranged from! 0.67-3.6 micromol (gFW)(-1)