Grape (Vitis vinifera) heterotrophic suspension-cultured cells were used as a model system to study glucose (Glc) transport and its regulation. Cells transported D-[14C]Glc according to simple Michaelis-Menten kinetics superimposed on first-order kinetics. The saturating component is a high-affinity, broad-specificity H+ -dependent transport system (Km = 0.05 mm). Glc concentration in the medium tightly regulated the transcription of VvHT1 (Vitis vinifera hexose transporter 1), a monosaccharide transporter previously characterized in grape berry, as well as VvHT1 protein amount and monosaccharide transport activity. All the remaining putative monosaccharide transporters identified so far in grape were poorly expressed and responded weakly to Glc. VvHT1 transcription was strongly repressed by Glc and 2-deoxy-D-Glc, but not by 3-O-methyl-D-Glc or Glc plus mannoheptulose, indicating the involvement of a hexokinase-dependent repression. 3-O-Methyl-D-Glc, which cannot be phosphorylated, and Glc plus mannoheptulose induced a decrease of transport activity caused by the reduction of VvHT1 protein in the plasma membrane without affecting VvHT1 transcript levels. This demonstrates hexokinase-independent posttranscriptional regulation. High Glc down-regulated VvHT1 transcription and Glc uptake, whereas low Glc increased those parameters. Present data provide an example showing control of plant sugar transporters by their own substrate both at transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. VvHT1 protein has an important role in the massive import of monosaccharides into mesocarp cells of young grape berries because it was localized in plasma membranes of the early developing fruit. Protein amount decreased abruptly throughout fruit development as sugar content increases, consistent with the regulating role of Glc on VvHT1 expression found in suspension-cultured cells.

VvHT1: !transcribes! Glc 
Glc: !regulates! VvHT1 transcription 
VvHT1: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
Glc: !represses! VvHT1 transcription 
3-O-Methyl-D-Glc: !reduces! VvHT1 protein 
Glc: !down-regulates! VvHT1 expression 
Glc: !increases! Glc uptake