Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC), a key enzyme of primary metabolism of higher plants, is regulated by reversible phosphorylation, which is catalyzed by PEPC kinase (PPCK). Rice has three functional PPCK genes, OsPPCK1, OsPPCK2 and OsPPCK3, all of which have an intron close to the 3' end of the coding region. A novel control mechanism was found for expression of OsPPCK2, namely alternative transcription initiation, and two different transcripts were detected. The four different transcripts of the OsPPCK genes showed different expression patterns. While OsPPCK1 and OsPPCK3 were highly expressed in roots and at low levels in other organs, the two OsPPCK2 transcripts were expressed in all organs. OsPPCK3 was expressed mostly at night, while the long OsPPCK2 transcripts were present in the leaves only in the daytime. Nitrate supplementation of leaves selectively induced expression of both OsPPCK2 transcripts, while phosphate starvation only induced the shorter one. Such diverse expression patterns of OsPPCK genes suggest the importance and variety of strict activity regulation of PEPC in rice. From the correlation between gene expression and the phosphorylation level of PEPC, which was monitored as that of the maize PEPC expressed in transgenic rice plants, it was concluded that the short OsPPCK2 transcripts were expressed in rice leaf mesophyll cells upon nitrogen supplementation and phosphate starvation, whereas OsPPCK3 participated in the nocturnal phosphorylation of PEPC in these cells. Expression of PPCK proteins in rice leaves was detected by immunoblotting using a specific antiserum, and the expression of two different OsPPCK2 proteins derived from alternative transcription initiation was confirmed.

OsPPCK1: !highly expressed in! roots 
OsPPCK2: !expressed in! all organs 
OsPPCK3: !highly expressed in! roots 
OsPPCK3: !expressed mostly at! night 
OsPPCK2: !induced by! nitrate supplementation 
OsPPCK2: !induced by! phosphate starvation 
PEPC: !regulated by! reversible phosphorylation 
PEPC: !catalyzed by! PPCK 
PPCK: !synthesized by! OsPPCK genes 
PPCK: !monitored as! maize PEPC expressed in transgenic rice plants 
PPCK proteins: !detected by! immunoblotting