RNA silencing is a sequence-specific mechanism regulating gene expression and has been used successfully for antiviral defense against RNA viruses. Similar strategies to develop resistance against DNA containing Tomato leaf curl virus (TLCV) and some other geminiviruses have been unsuccessful. To analyze this silencing escape, we transformed tomato plants with a hairpin construct from the TLCV C2 open reading frame (ORF). The transgenic plants showed a strong RNA silencing response, and following TLCV inoculation, their infection was delayed. However, the viral infection was not prevented and TLCV DNA accumulated to the levels found in nontransgenic plants. To determine the fate of a transgene carrying homology to the virus, we used transgenic plants carrying the TLCV C4 gene, which induces a distinct phenotype. Upon TLCV infection, the phenotype was abolished and C4 transcript disappeared. Concurrently, TLCV-specific small interfering RNAs were produced. In situ hybridization showed abundant levels of TLCV DNA in phloem cells of TLCV-infected C4 transgenic plants. However, the C4 transcripts were no longer detectable in nonvascular cells. Analysis of the transgene by methylation sequencing revealed a high level of de novo methylation of asymmetric cytosines in both the C4 ORF and its 35S promoter. A high level of methylation also was found at both symmetric and asymmetric cytosines of the complementary-sense strand of TLCV double-stranded DNA. Given the previous finding that methylated geminiviral DNA is not competent for replication, we provide a model whereby TLCV evades host defense through a population of de novo synthesized unmethylated DNA.

RNA silencing: !regulates! gene expression
TLCV C2 ORF: !transformed into! tomato plants
TLCV C4 gene: !induces! distinct phenotype
TLCV infection: !abolishes! phenotype
TLCV-specific small interfering RNAs: !produced! upon TLCV infection
TLCV DNA: !accumulated in! phloem cells
C4 transcripts: !no longer detectable in! nonvascular cells
Methylation sequencing: !reveals! de novo methylation of asymmetric cytosines
Geminiviral DNA: !not competent for! replication
TLCV: !evades host defense through! population of de novo synthesized unmethylated DNA