['16778018', "The Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome contains 16 genes belonging to the  class IV homeodomain-Leucine zipper gene family. These include GLABRA2,  ANTHOCYANINLESS2, FWA, ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA MERISTEM LAYER1 (ATML1), and  PROTODERMAL FACTOR2 (PDF2). Our previous study revealed that atml1 pdf2 double  mutants have severe defects in the shoot epidermal cell differentiation. Here, we  have characterized additional members of this gene family, which we designated  HOMEODOMAIN GLABROUS1 (HDG1) through HDG12. Analyses of transgenic Arabidopsis  plants carrying the gene-specific promoter fused to the bacterial  beta-glucuronidase reporter gene revealed that some of the promoters have high  activities in the epidermal layer of the shoot apical meristem and developing  shoot organs, while others are temporarily active during reproductive organ  development. Expression profiles of highly conserved paralogous gene pairs within  the family were found to be not necessarily overlapping. Analyses of T-DNA  insertion mutants of these HDG genes revealed that all mutants except hdg11  alleles exhibit no abnormal phenotypes. hdg11 mutants show excess branching of  the trichome. This phenotype is enhanced in hdg11 hdg12 double mutants. Double  mutants were constructed for other paralogous gene pairs and genes within the  same subfamily. However, novel phenotypes were observed only for hdg3 atml1 and  hdg3 pdf2 mutants that both exhibited defects in cotyledon development. These  observations suggest that some of the class IV homeodomain-Leucine zipper members  act redundantly with other members of the family during various aspects of cell  differentiation. DNA-binding sites were determined for two of the family members  using polymerase chain reaction-assisted DNA selection from random  oligonucleotides with their recombinant proteins. The binding sites were found to  be similar to those previously identified for ATML1 and PDF2, which correspond to  the pseudopalindromic sequence 5'-GCATTAAATGC-3' as the preferential binding  site.", '2006 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.106.077388', 'Takahashi']

GLABRA2: !affects! Shoot epidermal cell differentiation
ANTHOCYANINLESS2: !affects! Shoot epidermal cell differentiation
FWA: !affects! Shoot epidermal cell differentiation
ATML1: !affects! Shoot epidermal cell differentiation
PDF2: !affects! Shoot epidermal cell differentiation
HDG1: !localizes to! Epidermal layer of shoot apical meristem
HDG2: !localizes to! Epidermal layer of shoot apical meristem
HDG3: !localizes to! Epidermal layer of shoot apical meristem
HDG4: !localizes to! Epidermal layer of shoot apical meristem
HDG5: !localizes to! Epidermal layer of shoot apical meristem
HDG6: !localizes to! Epidermal layer of shoot apical meristem
HDG7: !localizes to! Epidermal layer of shoot apical meristem
HDG8: !localizes to! Epidermal layer of shoot apical meristem
HDG9: