Desiccation tolerance of protoplasts isolated from germinating pea (Pisum sativum L. cv. 'Alaska') embryonic axes depends, in part, on the osmotic strength and composition of the suspending medium. To determine the reason for this dependence and whether treatment with different solutions results in different types of damage, protoplast recovery and survival were assessed after dehydration to a range of water contents. Protoplasts were derived from germinating axes that had intermediate desiccation tolerance. Protoplasts were isolated and resuspended in buffers containing sucrose/raffinose (85:15, w/w) or sorbitol, which were isotonic or hypertonic to the cells of the embryonic axis, then were flash-dried to a range of water contents. Protoplasts were rehydrated and stained with fluorescein diacetate (FDA) to assess survival and to estimate two types of membrane injury: lysis and the loss of semipermeability. In all treatments, protoplast survival dropped sharply during the initial phase of dehydration due to lysis. Protoplast survival was greater in hypertonic sucrose/raffinose buffer than in isotonic sucrose/raffinose buffer, or in the latter made hypertonic by the addition of sorbitol. When sorbitol was substituted for sucrose/raffinose in either the isolation or desiccation buffer, or both, protoplast survival at intermediate and low hydrations decreased due to a loss of membrane semipermeability. The results indicate that additional sucrose/raffinose is beneficial for the desiccation tolerance of protoplasts, the benefit is not due to a simple osmotic effect, and the benefit is greatest at water contents less than 0.5 g g(-1) DW, where the presence of the sugars appears to protect membrane semipermeability.

protoplasts: !depend on! osmotic strength and composition of suspending medium
protoplasts: !survive better in! hypertonic sucrose/raffinose buffer
sucrose/raffinose: !beneficial for! desiccation tolerance of protoplasts
sorbitol: !substituted for! sucrose/raffinose
sucrose/raffinose: !protects! membrane semipermeability