['16790029', 'Upon a dark/light shift the conditional flu mutant of Arabidopsis starts to  generate singlet oxygen (1O2) that is restricted to the plastid compartment.  Distinct sets of genes are activated that are different from those induced by  hydrogen peroxide/superoxide. One of the genes that is rapidly upregulated is  EDS1 (enhanced disease susceptibility). The EDS1 protein has been shown to be  required for the resistance to biotrophic pathogens and the accumulation of  salicylic acid (SA) that enhances the defenses of a plant by inducing the  synthesis of pathogen-related (PR) proteins. Because of the similarity of its  N-terminal portion to the catalytic site of lipases, EDS1 has also been  implicated with the release of polyunsaturated fatty acids and the subsequent  formation of various oxylipins. The release of singlet oxygen in the flu mutant  triggers a drastic increase in the concentration of free SA and activates the  expression of PR1 and PR5 genes. These changes depend on the activity of EDS1 and  are suppressed in flu/eds1 double mutants. Soon after the beginning of singlet  oxygen production, the synthesis of oxylipins such as jasmonic acid (JA) and  12-oxophytodienoic acid (OPDA) also start and plants stop growing and induce a  cell-death response. The inactivation of EDS1 does not affect oxylipin synthesis,  growth inhibition and the initiation of cell death, but it does allow plants to  recover much faster from singlet oxygen-mediated growth inhibition and it also  suppresses the spread of necrotic lesions in leaves. Hence, singlet oxygen  activates a complex stress-response program with EDS1 playing a key role in  initiating and modulating several steps of it. This program includes not only  responses to oxidative stress, but also responses known to be activated during  plant-pathogen interactions and wounding.', '2006 Aug', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02793.x', 'Apel']

Singlet oxygen: !activates! EDS1 
EDS1: !enhances! resistance to biotrophic pathogens 
EDS1: !synthesizes! oxylipins 
EDS1: !modulates! stress-response program 
Singlet oxygen: !induces! PR1 and PR5 genes