['16805728', 'Plant ROPs (or RACs) are soluble Ras-related small GTPases that are attached to  cell membranes by virtue of the post-translational lipid modifications of  prenylation and S-acylation. ROPs (RACs) are subdivided into two major subgroups  called type-I and type-II. Whereas type-I ROPs terminate with a conserved CaaL  box and undergo prenylation, type-II ROPs undergo S-acylation on two or three  C-terminal cysteines. In the present work we determined the sequence requirement  for association of Arabidopsis type-II ROPs with the plasma membrane. We  identified a conserved sequence motif, designated the GC-CG box, in which the  modified cysteines are flanked by glycines. The GC-CG box cysteines are separated  by five to six mostly non-polar residues. Deletion of this sequence or the  introduction of mutations that change its nature disrupted the association of  ROPs with the membrane. Mutations that changed the GC-CG box glycines to alanines  also interfered with membrane association. Deletion of a polybasic domain  proximal to the GC-CG box disrupted the plasma membrane association of AtROP10. A  green fluorescent protein fusion protein containing the C-terminal 25 residues of  AtROP10, including its polybasic domain and GC-CG box, was primarily associated  with the plasma membrane but a similar fusion protein lacking the polybasic  domain was exclusively localized in the soluble fraction. These data provide  evidence for the minimal sequence required for plasma membrane association of  type-II ROPs in Arabidopsis and other plant species.', '2006 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02749.x', 'Yalovsky']

ROPs: !terminate with! CaaL box 
CaaL box: !flanked by! glycines 
GC-CG box: !separated by! non-polar residues 
GC-CG box: !mutations of! glycines !interfere with! membrane association 
AtROP10: !polybasic domain proximal to! GC-CG box 
AtROP10: !plasma membrane association requires! polybasic domain 
GFP fusion protein: !containing C-terminal 25 residues of! AtROP10 !primarily associated with! plasma membrane