Since the tetraploidization of the Arabidopsis thaliana ancestor 30-35 million years ago (Mya), a wave of chromosomal rearrangements have modified its genome architecture. The dynamics of this process is unknown, as it has so far been impossible to date individual rearrangement events. In this paper, we present evidence demonstrating that the majority of rearrangements occurred before the Arabidopsis-Brassica split 20-24 Mya, and that the segmental architecture of the A. thaliana genome is predominantly conserved in Brassica. This finding is based on the conservation of four rearrangement breakpoints analysed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and RFLP mapping of three A. thaliana chromosomal regions. For this purpose, 95 Arabidopsis bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) spanning a total of 8.25 Mb and 81 genetic loci for 36 marker genes were studied in the Brassica oleracea genome. All the regions under study were triplicated in the B. oleracea genome, confirming the hypothesis of Brassica ancestral genome triplication. However, whilst one of the breakpoints was conserved at one locus, it was not at the two others. Further comparison of their organization may indicate that the evolution of the hexaploid Brassica progenitor proceeded by several events, separated in time. Genetic mapping and reprobing with rDNA allowed assignment of the regions to particular Brassica chromosomes. Based on this study of regional organization and evolution, a new insight into polyploidization/diploidization cycles is proposed.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Process: !modifies! Genome architecture 
Rearrangement: !occurred before! Arabidopsis-Brassica split 
Segmental architecture: !predominantly conserved in! Brassica 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH): !analysed! Four rearrangement breakpoints 
Bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs): !spanned! 8.25 Mb 
Genetic loci: !studied in! Brassica oleracea genome 
Triplication: !confirmed in! B. oleracea genome 
Breakpoint: !conserved at one locus! 
Organization: !compared to! Indicate evolution of hexaploid Brassica progenitor 
Genetic mapping: !allowed assignment of! Regions to particular Brassica chromosomes 
Polyploidization/diploidization cycles: !proposed by! New insight