In Arabidopsis, oxidation of the large (46-kDa) isoform activase to form a disulfide bond in the C-terminal extension (C-extension) significantly increases its ADP sensitivity for both ATP hydrolysis and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco) activation, thereby decreasing both activities at physiological ratios of ADP/ATP. In this study, we demonstrate that the C-extension of the oxidized large activase isoform can be cross-linked with regions containing residues that contribute to the nucleotide-binding pocket, with a higher efficiency in the presence of ADP or the absence of nucleotides than with ATP. Coupled with measurements demonstrating a redox-dependent protease sensitivity of the C-extension and a lower ATP or adenosine 5'-O-(thiotriphosphate) (ATPgammaS) affinity of the oxidized large isoform than either the reduced form or the smaller isoform, the results suggest that the C-extension plays an inhibitory role in ATP hydrolysis, regulated by redox changes. In contrast, the ADP affinities of the small isoform and the reduced or oxidized large isoform were similar, which indicates that the C-extension selectively interferes with the proper binding of ATP, possibly by interfering with the coordination of the gamma-phosphate. Furthermore, replacement of conserved, negatively charged residues (Asp390, Glu394, and Asp401) in the C-extension with alanine significantly reduced the sensitivities of the mutants to ADP inhibition, which suggests the involvement of electrostatic interactions between them and positively charged residues in or near the nucleotide-binding pocket. These studies provide new insights into the mechanism of redox regulation of activase by the C-extension in the large isoform.

oxidized large activase isoform: !cross-links with! regions containing residues 
C-extension: !interferes with! ATP hydrolysis 
redox changes: !regulates! C-extension 
small isoform: !similar ADP affinity to! reduced or oxidized large isoform 
C-extension: !selectively interferes with! proper binding of ATP 
negatively charged residues: !involvement suggested by! alanine mutants