['16845477', 'Arabidopsis thaliana BRAHMA (BRM, also called AtBRM) is a SNF2 family protein  homolog of Brahma, the ATPase of the Drosophila SWI/SNF complex involved in  chromatin remodeling during transcription. Here we show that, in contrast to its  Drosophila counterpart, BRM is not an essential gene. Thus, homozygous BRM loss  of function mutants are viable but exhibit numerous defects including dwarfism,  altered leaf and root development and several reproduction defects. The analysis  of the progeny of self-fertilized heterozygous brm plants and reciprocal crosses  between heterozygous and wild type plants indicated that disruption of BRM  reduced both male and female gametophyte transmission. This was consistent with  the presence of aborted ovules in the self-fertilized heterozygous flowers that  contained arrested embryos predominantly at the two terminal cells stage.  Furthermore, brm homozygous mutants were completely sterile. Flowers of brm  loss-of-function mutants have several developmental abnormalities, including  homeotic transformations in the second and third floral whorls. In accordance  with these results, brm mutants present reduced levels of APETALA2, APETALA3,  PISTILLATA and NAC-LIKE, ACTIVATED BY AP3/PI. We have previously shown that BRM  strongly interacts with AtSWI3C. Now we extend our interaction studies  demonstrating that BRM interacts weakly with AtSWI3B but not with AtSWI3A or  AtSWI3D. In agreement with these results, the phenotype described in this study  for brm plants is very similar to that previously described for the AtSWI3C  mutant plants, suggesting that both proteins participate in the same genetic  pathway or form a molecular complex.', '2006 Sep', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-006-9021-2', 'Reyes']

BRM: !affects! leaf and root development 
BRM: !interacts with! AtSWI3C 
BRM: !interacts with! AtSWI3B 
BRM: !represses! APETALA2, APETALA3, PISTILLATA and NAC-LIKE, ACTIVATED BY AP3/PI 
AtSWI3C: !enhances! BRM 
AtSWI3B: !enhances! BRM