['1684022', "Glutamine synthetase (GS) plays an important role in the assimilation of nitrogen  by higher plants. We present here a molecular analysis of the GS polypeptides,  mRNAs, and genes of Arabidopsis thaliana. Western blot analysis of leaf and root  protein extracts revealed at least two distinct GS polypeptides; 43 kDa and 39  kDa GS polypeptides were present in leaves, while only a 39 kDa GS was detected  in roots. The 43 kDa GS polypeptide is light-inducible. In etiolated seedlings  only the 39 kDa GS was detected. However, upon greening the 43 kDa GS increased  to levels comparable to those observed in light-grown plants. Four distinct GS  cDNA clones, lambda Atgsl1, lambda Atgsr1, lambda Atgsr2 and lambda Atkb6 were  isolated and characterized. Their complete nucleotide and deduced amino acid  sequences are presented. The coding sequences of the four clones are 70-88%  similar while their 5' and 3' untranslated regions exhibit less than 50%  similarity. Northern blots of leaf, root and germinated seed RNA revealed that  the four cDNAs hybridize to mRNAs which are differentially expressed in the  organs of Arabidopsis thaliana. lambda Atgsl1 is leaf-specific and hybridizes to  a 1.6 kb mRNA. Both lambda Atgsr1 and lambda Atgskb6 hybridize to 1.4 kb mRNAs  which are expressed in both roots and germinated seeds. lambda Atgsr2 hybridizes  to a 1.4 kb mRNA, which is primarily expressed in roots with low levels of  expression in seeds and leaves. lambda Atgsl1, which represents the leaf-specific  mRNA, is induced by light. lambda Atgsl1 mRNA levels increase during the greening  of etiolated seedlings while lambda Atgsr1 levels remain constant. Southern blot  analysis indicated that the Arabidopsis genome contains at least four and  possibly five distinct GS genes.", '1991 Nov', 'Mol Gen Genet', '10.1007/BF00290662', 'Goodman']

Glutamine synthetase: !synthesizes! nitrogen 
lambda Atgsl1: !localizes to! leaves 
lambda Atgsr1: !localizes to! roots and germinated seeds 
lambda Atgsr2: !localizes to! roots 
lambda Atkb6: !localizes to! roots and germinated seeds 
lambda Atgsl1: !enhances! light-induction 
Arabidopsis genome: !contains! at least four GS genes