Although oxylipins can be synthesized from free fatty acids, recent evidence suggests that oxylipins are components of plastid-localized polar complex lipids in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Using a combination of electrospray ionization (ESI) collisionally induced dissociation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MS) to identify acyl chains, ESI triple-quadrupole (Q) MS in the precursor mode to identify the nominal masses of complex polar lipids containing each acyl chain, and ESI Q-time-of-flight MS to confirm the identifications of the complex polar lipid species, 17 species of oxylipin-containing phosphatidylglycerols, monogalactosyldiacylglycerols (MGDG), and digalactosyldiacylglycerols (DGDG) were identified. The oxylipins of these polar complex lipid species include oxophytodienoic acid (OPDA), dinor-OPDA (dnOPDA), 18-carbon ketol acids, and 16-carbon ketol acids. Using ESI triple-Q MS in the precursor mode, the accumulation of five OPDA- and/or dnOPDA-containing MGDG and two OPDA-containing DGDG species were monitored as a function of time in mechanically wounded leaves. In unwounded leaves, the levels of these oxylipin-containing complex lipid species were low, between 0.001 and 0.023 nmol/mg dry weight. However, within the first 15 min after wounding, the levels of OPDA-dnOPDA MGDG, OPDA-OPDA MGDG, and OPDA-OPDA DGDG, each containing two oxylipin chains, increased 200- to 1,000-fold. In contrast, levels of OPDA-hexadecatrienoic acid MGDG, linolenic acid (18:3)-dnOPDA MGDG, OPDA-18:3 MGDG, and OPDA-18:3 DGDG, each containing a single oxylipin chain, rose 2- to 9-fold. The rapid accumulation of high levels of galactolipid species containing OPDA-OPDA and OPDA-dnOPDA in wounded leaves is consistent with these lipids being the primary products of plastidic oxylipin biosynthesis.

Oxylipins: !synthesized from! Free Fatty Acids 
ESI triple-Q MS: !identifies! Acyl Chains 
Polar Complex Lipids: !contain! Oxylipins 
Mechanically Wounded Leaves: !increase levels of! OPDA-dnOPDA MGDG 
Mechanically Wounded Leaves: !increase levels of! OPDA-OPDA MGDG 
Mechanically Wounded Leaves: !increase levels of! OPDA-OPDA DGDG 
Mechanically Wounded Leaves: !increase levels of! OPDA-hexadecatrienoic acid MGDG 
Mechanically Wounded Leaves: !increase levels of! Linolenic Acid (18:3)-dnOPDA MGDG 
Mechanically Wounded Leaves: !increase levels of! OPDA-18:3 MGDG 
Mechanically Wounded Leaves: !increase levels of! OPDA-18:3 DGDG