['16854975', 'The four-member SPA protein family of Arabidopsis acts in concert with the E3  ubiquitin ligase COP1 to suppress photomorphogenesis in dark-grown seedlings.  Here, we demonstrate that SPA proteins are, moreover, essential for photoperiodic  flowering. Mutations in SPA1 cause phyA-independent early flowering under short  day (SD) but not long day (LD) conditions, and this phenotype is enhanced by  additional loss of SPA3 and SPA4 function. These spa1 spa3 spa4 triple mutants  flower at the same time in LD and SD, indicating that the SPA gene family is  essential for the inhibition of flowering under non-inductive SD. Among the four  SPA genes, SPA1 is necessary and sufficient for normal photoperiodic flowering.  Early flowering of SD-grown spa mutant correlates with strongly increased FT  transcript levels, whereas CO transcript levels are not altered. Epistasis  analysis demonstrates that both early flowering and FT induction in spa1 mutants  is fully dependent on CO. Consistent with this finding, SPA proteins interact  physically with CO in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that SPA proteins regulate CO  protein function. Domain mapping shows that the SPA1-CO interaction requires the  CCT-domain of CO, but is independent of the B-box type Zn fingers of CO. We  further show that spa1 spa3 spa4 mutants exhibit strongly increased CO protein  levels, which are not caused by a change in CO gene expression. Taken together,  our results suggest, that SPA proteins regulate photoperiodic flowering by  controlling the stability of the floral inducer CO.', '2006 Aug', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.02481', 'Hoecker']

SPA proteins: !act in concert with! COP1 
SPA proteins: !essential for! photoperiodic flowering 
SPA1: !necessary and sufficient for! normal photoperiodic flowering 
SPA1: !correlates with! increased FT transcript levels 
SPA proteins: !interact with! CO 
SPA proteins: !regulate! CO protein function 
SPA proteins: !control the stability of! floral inducer CO