Ascorbic acid (Asc) is a major antioxidant in plants that detoxifies reactive oxygen species (ROS) and maintains photosynthetic function. Expression of dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR), responsible for regenerating Asc from an oxidized state, regulates the cellular Asc redox state, which in turn affects cell responsiveness and tolerance to environmental ROS. Because of its role in Asc recycling, we examined whether DHAR is important for plant growth. Suppression of DHAR expression resulted in a preferential loss of chlorophyll a, a lower steady state of Rubisco as measured by the amount of the large subunit of Rubisco (RbcL), and a lower rate of CO(2) assimilation. As a consequence, a slower rate of leaf expansion and reduced foliar dry weight were observed. In addition, an accelerated rate of loss of chlorophyll, RbcL, light-harvesting complex II, and photosynthetic functioning was observed in mature leaves, resulting in premature leaf aging. Reduced growth rate as measured by plant height and leaf number was consistent with the DHAR-mediated reduction of photosynthetic function. Increasing DHAR expression maintained higher levels of chlorophyll, RbcL, light-harvesting complex II, and photosynthetic functioning, resulting in delayed leaf aging. The effect of DHAR expression on leaf aging inversely correlated with the level of lipid peroxidation, indicating that DHAR functions to protect against ROS-mediated damage. These observations support the conclusion that through its Asc recycling function, DHAR affects the level of foliar ROS and photosynthetic activity during leaf development and as a consequence, influences the rate of plant growth and leaf aging.

DHAR: !affects! Cell responsiveness
DHAR: !regulates! Asc redox state
DHAR: !influences! Photosynthetic function
DHAR: !protects against! ROS-mediated damage
DHAR: !maintains! Chlorophyll levels
DHAR: !regulates! RbcL levels
DHAR: !maintains! Light-harvesting complex II
DHAR: !influences! Plant growth
DHAR: !influences! Leaf aging