Plants enlarge mostly because the walls of certain cells enlarge, with accompanying input of wall constituents and other factors from the cytoplasm. However, the enlargement can occur without input, suggesting an uncertain relationship between cytoplasmic input and plant growth. Therefore, the role of the input was investigated by quantitatively comparing growth in isolated walls (no input) with that in living cells (input occurring). Cell walls were isolated from growing internodes of Chara corallina and filled with pressurized oil to control turgor pressure while elongation was monitored. Turgor pressure in living cells was similarly controlled and monitored by adding/removing cell solution. Temperature was varied in some experiments. At all pressures and temperatures, isolated walls displayed turgor-driven growth indistinguishable in every respect from that in living cells, except the rate decelerated in the isolated walls while the living cells grew rapidly. The growth in the isolated walls was highly responsive to temperature, in contrast to the elastic extension that has been shown to be insensitive to similar temperatures. Consequently, strong intermolecular bonds were responsible for growth and weak bonds for elastic extension. Boiling the walls gave the same results, indicating that enzyme activities were not controlling these bonds. However, pectin added to isolated walls reversed their growth deceleration and returned the rate to that in the living cells. The pectin was similar to that normally produced by the cytoplasm and deposited in the wall, suggesting that continued cytoplasmic input of pectin may play a role in sustaining turgor-driven growth in Chara.

Cell walls: !enlarge! Turgor Pressure 
Living Cells: !sustain! Turgor-driven Growth 
Isolated Walls: !display! Turgor-driven Growth 
Isolated Walls: !decelerate! Rate 
Elastic Extension: !insensitive to! Temperature 
Strong Intermolecular Bonds: !responsible for! Growth 
Weak Bonds: !responsible for! Elastic Extension 
Enzyme Activities: !not controlling! Bonds 
Pectin: !reverses! Growth Deceleration 
Cytoplasmic Input: !plays a role in! Sustaining Turgor-driven Growth