Somatic hybridization can be an interesting alternative for the selection of heterozygous and vigorous potato plants through combination of dihaploid genomes. The resulting hybrids can harbour interesting characters and thus can be used in agriculture if they are in agreement with agronomic criteria. In this report, we used an intraspecific somatic hybridization technique for the production of tetraploid potato lines. Two parental combinations were used in protoplast electrofusion procedure: Aminca-Cardinal and Cardinal-Nicola. The selection of somatic hybrids was based on in vitro plant vigour. Therefore, among the 75 regenerated plants obtained from Aminca-Cardinal fusion, 3 putative hybrids were retained and 2 plant lines were selected among the 54 regenerated from the Cardinal-Nicola fusion. Heterosis was observed in the larger hybrid tuber size compared to the parents'. Our results also showed a precocity in the in vitro tuberization for the hybrids. Moreover, all of the regenerated putative hybrids were tetraploid (2n=4x=48 chromosomes). Isocitrate dehydrogenase and malate dehydrogenase isoenzyme analyses confirmed the hybrid nature of these lines. A molecular characterization performed by PCR amplification of simple sequence repeats and inter-simple sequence repeats confirmed that all these lines were somatic hybrids. The effect of potato virus Y infection on these hybrid lines was tested by mechanical inoculation of plants cultivated in a greenhouse. The majority displayed a reduction of infection rate associated with a delayed appearance of symptoms compared to the parents. Moreover, complete resistance was noted for one hybrid line (CN2). All hybrids also showed improved tolerance to Pythium aphanidermatum infection during tuber storage or after plant inoculation.

Somatic hybridization: !combines! dihaploid genomes
Protoplast electrofusion: !produces! tetraploid potato lines
In vitro plant vigour: !selects! somatic hybrids
Heterosis: !observed in! larger hybrid tuber size
Isocitrate dehydrogenase/malate dehydrogenase isoenzyme analyses: !confirm! hybrid nature
PCR amplification: !confirms! somatic hybrids
Potato virus Y infection: !reduces! infection rate
Pythium aphanidermatum infection: !improves! tolerance