Herbivore attack elicits costly defenses that are known to decrease plant fitness by using resources that are normally slated for growth and reproduction. Additionally, plants have evolved mechanisms for tolerating attack, which are not understood on a molecular level. Using 11C-photosynthate labeling as well as sugar and enzyme measurements, we found rapid changes in sink-source relations in the annual Nicotiana attenuata after simulated herbivore attacks, which increased the allocation of sugars to roots. This herbivore-induced response is regulated by the beta-subunit of an SnRK1 (SNF1-related kinase) protein kinase, GAL83, transcripts of which are rapidly down-regulated in source leaves after herbivore attack and, when silenced, increase assimilate transport to roots. This C diversion response is activated by herbivore-specific elicitors and is independent of jasmonate signaling, which regulates most of the plant's defense responses. Herbivore attack during early stages of development increases root reserves, which, in turn, delays senescence and prolongs flowering. That attacked GAL83-silenced plants use their enhanced root reserves to prolong reproduction demonstrates that SnRK1 alters resource allocation so that plants better tolerate herbivory. This tolerance mechanism complements the likely defensive value of diverting resources to a less vulnerable location within the plant.

Herbivore attack: !elicits! costly defenses 
costly defenses: !decrease! plant fitness 
plant: !evolved mechanisms for! tolerating attack 
11C-photosynthate labeling: !found rapid changes in! sink-source relations 
sink-source relations: !increased allocation of! sugars to roots 
beta-subunit of SnRK1 protein kinase GAL83: !regulates! herbivore-induced response 
GAL83 transcripts: !down-regulated in source leaves after! herbivore attack 
silencing GAL83: !increases! assimilate transport to roots 
herbivore-specific elicitors: !activate! C diversion response 
C diversion response: !independent of! jasmonate signaling 
herbivore attack during early stages of development: !increases! root reserves 
root reserves: !delay! senescence and prolong flowering 
SnRK1: !alters resource allocation so that plants! better tolerate herbivory