['16920870', 'Plants are able to integrate exogenous 1-deoxy-D-xylulose (DX) into the  2C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway, implicated in the biosynthesis of  plastidial isoprenoids. Thus, the carbohydrate needs to be phosphorylated into  1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate and translocated into plastids, or vice versa. An  enzyme capable of phosphorylating DX was partially purified from a cell-free  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) protein extract. It was identified by mass  spectrometry as a cytosolic protein bearing D-xylulose kinase (XK) signatures,  already suggesting that DX is phosphorylated within the cytosol prior to  translocation into the plastids. The corresponding cDNA was isolated and  enzymatic properties of a recombinant protein were determined. In Arabidopsis,  xylulose kinases are encoded by a small gene family, in which only two genes are  putatively annotated. The additional gene is coding for a protein targeted to  plastids, as was proved by colocalization experiments using green fluorescent  protein fusion constructs. Functional complementation assays in an Escherichia  coli strain deleted in xk revealed that the cytosolic enzyme could exclusively  phosphorylate xylulose in vivo, not the enzyme that is targeted to plastids. xk  activities could not be detected in chloroplast protein extracts or in proteins  isolated from its ancestral relative Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. The gene  encoding the plastidic protein annotated as "xylulose kinase" might in fact yield  an enzyme having different phosphorylation specificities. The biochemical  characterization and complementation experiments with DX of specific Arabidopsis  knockout mutants seedlings treated with oxo-clomazone, an inhibitor of  1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase, further confirmed that the cytosolic  protein is responsible for the phosphorylation of DX in planta.', '2006 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.106.086652', 'Bach']

XK: !encoded by! gene family 
XK: !localizes to! cytosol 
XK: !phosphorylates! DX 
XK: !complements! E. coli strain 
XK: !inhibited by! oxo-clomazone 
gene: !synthesizes! XK 
gene: !localizes to! plastids