We quantify the risks of climate-induced changes in key ecosystem processes during the 21st century by forcing a dynamic global vegetation model with multiple scenarios from 16 climate models and mapping the proportions of model runs showing forest/nonforest shifts or exceedance of natural variability in wildfire frequency and freshwater supply. Our analysis does not assign probabilities to scenarios or weights to models. Instead, we consider distribution of outcomes within three sets of model runs grouped by the amount of global warming they simulate: <2 degrees C (including simulations in which atmospheric composition is held constant, i.e., in which the only climate change is due to greenhouse gases already emitted), 2-3 degrees C, and >3 degrees C. High risk of forest loss is shown for Eurasia, eastern China, Canada, Central America, and Amazonia, with forest extensions into the Arctic and semiarid savannas; more frequent wildfire in Amazonia, the far north, and many semiarid regions; more runoff north of 50 degrees N and in tropical Africa and northwestern South America; and less runoff in West Africa, Central America, southern Europe, and the eastern U.S. Substantially larger areas are affected for global warming >3 degrees C than for <2 degrees C; some features appear only at higher warming levels. A land carbon sink of approximately 1 Pg of C per yr is simulated for the late 20th century, but for >3 degrees C this sink converts to a carbon source during the 21st century (implying a positive climate feedback) in 44% of cases. The risks continue increasing over the following 200 years, even with atmospheric composition held constant.

Global warming: !affects! Forest/nonforest shifts 
Global warming: !affects! Wildfire frequency 
Global warming: !affects! Freshwater supply 
Global warming: !affects! Land carbon sink 
Forest loss: !high risk for! Eurasia 
Forest loss: !high risk for! Eastern China 
Forest loss: !high risk for! Canada 
Forest loss: !high risk for! Central America 
Forest loss: !high risk for! Amazonia 
Wildfire: !more frequent in! Amazonia 
Wildfire: !more frequent in! Far north 
Wildfire: !more frequent in! Semiarid regions 
Runoff: !more in! North of 50 degrees N 
Runoff: !more in! Tropical Africa 
Runoff: !more in! Northwestern South America 
Runoff: !less in! West Africa 
Runoff: !less in! Central America 
Runoff: !less in! Southern Europe 
Runoff: !less in! Eastern U.S. 
Carbon sink: !converts to source for! >3 degrees C