['16928193', 'Cyps (cyclophilins) are ubiquitous proteins of the immunophilin superfamily with  proposed functions in protein folding, protein degradation, stress response and  signal transduction. Conserved cysteine residues further suggest a role in redox  regulation. In order to get insight into the conformational change mechanism and  functional properties of the chloroplast-located CYP20-3, site-directed  mutagenized cysteine-->serine variants were generated and analysed for enzymatic  and conformational properties under reducing and oxidizing conditions. Compared  with the wild-type form, elimination of three out of the four cysteine residues  decreased the catalytic efficiency of PPI (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase)  activity of the reduced CYP20-3, indicating a regulatory role of  dithiol-disulfide transitions in protein function. Oxidation was accompanied by  conformational changes with a predominant role in the structural rearrangement of  the disulfide bridge formed between Cys(54) and Cys(171). The rather negative  E(m) (midpoint redox potential) of -319 mV places CYP20-3 into the redox  hierarchy of the chloroplast, suggesting the activation of CYP20-3 in the light  under conditions of limited acceptor availability for photosynthesis as realized  under environmental stress. Chloroplast Prx (peroxiredoxins) were identified as  interacting partners of CYP20-3 in a DNA-protection assay. A catalytic role in  the reduction of 2-Cys PrxA and 2-Cys PrxB was assigned to Cys(129) and Cys(171).  In addition, it was shown that the isomerization and disulfide-reduction  activities are two independent functions of CYP20-3 that both are regulated by  the redox state of its active centre.', '2007 Jan 1', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BJ20061092', 'Kandlbinder']

CYPs: !proposed functions in! protein folding, protein degradation, stress response and signal transduction
CYPs: !role in! redox regulation
CYPs: !elimination of cysteine residues decreases! catalytic efficiency of PPI activity
CYPs: !oxidation accompanied by! conformational changes
CYPs: !E(m) of -319 mV places into! redox hierarchy of chloroplast
CYPs: !interacting partners in DNA-protection assay! PrxA and PrxB
CYPs: !isomerization and disulfide-reduction activities! regulated by redox state of active centre