['16925600', 'The expression profiles of Botrytis-inoculated Arabidopsis plants were studied to  determine the nature of the defense transcriptome and to identify genes involved  in host responses to the pathogen. Normally resistant Arabidopsis wild-type  plants were compared with coi1, ein2, and nahG plants that are defective in  various defense responses and/or show increased susceptibility to Botrytis. In  wild-type plants, the expression of 621 genes representing approximately 0.48% of  the Arabidopsis transcriptome was induced greater than or equal to twofold after  infection. Of these 621 Botrytis-induced genes (BIGs), 462 were induced at or  before 36 h post-inoculation, and may be involved in resistance to the pathogen.  The expression of 181 BIGs was dependent on a functional COI1 gene required for  jasmonate signaling, whereas the expression of 63 and 80 BIGs were dependent on  ethylene (ET) signaling or salicylic acid accumulation, respectively, based on  results from ein2 and nahG plants. BIGs encode diverse regulatory and structural  proteins implicated in pathogen defense and abiotic and oxidative-stress  responses. Thirty BIGs encode putative DNA-binding proteins that belong to ET  response, zinc-finger, MYB, WRKY, and HD-ZIP family transcription-factor  proteins. Fourteen BIGs were studied in detail to determine their role in  resistance to Botrytis. T-DNA insertion alleles of ZFAR1 (At2G40140), the gene  encoding a putative zinc-finger protein with ankyrin-repeat domains, showed  increased local susceptibility to Botrytis and sensitivity to germination in the  presence of abscisic acid (ABA), supporting the role of ABA in mediating  responses to Botrytis infection. In addition, two independent T-DNA insertion  alleles in the WRKY70 gene showed increased susceptibility to Botrytis. The  transcriptional activation of genes involved in plant hormone signaling and  synthesis, removal of reactive oxygen species, and defense and abiotic-stress  responses, coupled with the susceptibility of the wrky70 and zfar1 mutants,  highlights the complex genetic network underlying defense responses to Botrytis  in Arabidopsis.', '2006 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02849.x', 'Mengiste']

Gene: !affects! Defense transcriptome
Gene: !localizes to! Arabidopsis wild-type plants
Gene: !interacts with! COI1 gene
Gene: !enhances! Jasmonate signaling
Gene: !represses! Ethylene signaling
Gene: !synthesizes! Putative DNA-binding proteins
Gene: !enhances! Resistance to Botrytis
Gene: !represses! Susceptibility to Botrytis
Gene: !synthesizes! Plant hormone signaling
Gene: !synthesizes! Removal of reactive oxygen species