When grown in nutrient solutions of extremely low [P] (<or=1.0 microm), the sedge Schoenus unispiculatus Benth. (Cyperaceae) develops dauciform roots, which are short and carrot shaped, and produce dense numbers of long root hairs. It has been suggested that dauciform roots of monocotyledonous sedges function to acquire P from nutrient-poor, P-fixing soils in a manner similar to that of cluster (proteoid) roots developed by some dicotyledonous species, but without evidence to substantiate this claim. To elucidate the ecophysiological role of dauciform roots, we assessed carboxylate exudation, internal carboxylate and P concentrations and O(2) uptake rates during dauciform root development. We showed that O(2) consumption was fastest [9 nmol O(2) g(-1) fresh mass (FM) s(-1)] and root [P] greatest (0.4 mg P g(-1) FM) when dauciform roots were young and rapidly developing. Citrate was the most abundant carboxylate in root tissues at all developmental stages, and was most concentrated (22.2 micromol citrate g(-1) FM) in young dauciform roots, decreasing by more than half in mature dauciform roots. Peak citrate-exudation rates (1.7 nmol citrate g(-1) FM s(-1)) occurred from mature dauciform roots, and were approximately an order of magnitude faster than those from roots of species without root clusters, and similar to those of mature proteoid (cluster) roots of Proteaceae. Both developing and mature dauciform roots had the capacity to acidify (but not alkalinize) the rhizosphere. Anatomical studies showed that epidermal cells in dauciform roots were greatly elongated in the transverse plane; epidermal cells of parent roots were unmodified. Although structurally distinct, the physiology of dauciform roots in sedges appears to be analogous to that of proteoid roots of Proteaceae and Fabaceae, and hence, dauciform roots would facilitate access to sorbed P and micronutrients from soils of low fertility.

Gene: !affects! Carboxylate exudation 
Gene: !affects! O2 uptake rate 
Gene: !affects! Internal carboxylate and P concentrations 
Gene: !enhances! Access to sorbed P and micronutrients 
Gene: !modifies! Epidermal cells