['16965536', 'The signal of the plant hormone cytokinin is perceived by membrane-located sensor  histidine kinases and transduced by other members of the plant two-component  system. In Arabidopsis thaliana, 28 two-component system proteins  (phosphotransmitters and response regulators) act downstream of three receptors,  transmitting the signal from the membrane to the nucleus and modulating the  cellular response. Although the principal signaling mechanism has been  elucidated, redundancy in the system has made it difficult to understand which of  the many components interact to control the downstream biological processes.  Here, we present a large-scale interaction study comprising most members of the  Arabidopsis cytokinin signaling pathway. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we  detected 42 new interactions, of which more than 90% were confirmed by in vitro  coaffinity purification. There are distinct patterns of interaction between  protein families, but only a few interactions between proteins of the same  family. An interaction map of this signaling pathway shows the Arabidopsis  histidine phosphotransfer proteins as hubs, which interact with members from all  other protein families, mostly in a redundant fashion. Domain-mapping experiments  revealed the interaction domains of the proteins of this pathway. Analyses of  Arabidopsis histidine phosphotransfer protein 5 mutant proteins showed that the  presence of the canonical phospho-accepting histidine residue is not required for  the interactions. Interaction of A-type response regulators with Arabidopsis  histidine phosphotransfer proteins but not with B-type response regulators  suggests that their known activity in feedback regulation may be realized by  interfering at the level of Arabidopsis histidine phosphotransfer  protein-mediated signaling. This study contributes to our understanding of the  protein interactions of the cytokinin-signaling system and provides a framework  for further functional studies in planta.', '2006 Oct', 'FEBS J', '10.1111/j.1742-4658.2006.05467.x', 'Heyl']

Histidine kinases: !perceive! signal of cytokinin 
Two-component system proteins: !transduce! signal from membrane to nucleus 
Yeast two-hybrid system: !detects! 42 new interactions 
In vitro coaffinity purification: !confirms! 90% of interactions 
Arabidopsis histidine phosphotransfer proteins: !act as hubs! for interactions 
Domain-mapping experiments: !reveal! interaction domains 
A-type response regulators: !interact with! Arabidopsis histidine phosphotransfer proteins 
B-type response regulators: !do not interact with! Arabidopsis histidine phosphotransfer proteins