['16972866', 'Plants, as sessile organisms, employ multiple mechanisms to adapt to the seasonal  and daily temperature fluctuations associated with their habitats. Here, we  provide genetic and physiological evidence that the FtsH11 protease of  Arabidopsis contributes to the overall tolerance of the plant to elevated  temperatures. To identify the various mechanisms of thermotolerance in plants, we  isolated a series of Arabidopsis thaliana thermo-sensitive mutants (atts) that  fail to acquire thermotolerance after pre-conditioning at 38 degrees C. Two  allelic mutants, atts244 and atts405, were found to be both highly susceptible to  moderately elevated temperatures and defective in acquired thermotolerance. The  growth and development of the mutant plants at all stages examined were arrested  after exposure to temperatures above 30 degrees C, which are permissive  conditions for wild-type plants. The affected gene in atts244 was identified  through map-based cloning and encodes a chloroplast targeted FtsH protease,  FtsH11. The Arabidopsis genome contains 12 predicted FtsH protease genes, with  all previously characterized FtsH genes playing roles in the alleviation of light  stress through the degradation of unassembled thylakoid membrane proteins and  photodamaged photosystem II D1 protein. Photosynthetic capability, as measured by  chlorophyll content (chl a/b ratios) and PSII quantum yield, is greatly reduced  in the leaves of FtsH11 mutants when exposed to the moderately high temperature  of 30 degrees C. Under high light conditions, however, FtsH11 mutants and  wild-type plants showed no significant difference in photosynthesis capacity. Our  results support a direct role for the A. thaliana FtsH11-encoded protease in  thermotolerance, a function previously reported for bacterial and yeast FtsH  proteases but not for those from plants.', '2006 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02855.x', 'Xin']

FtsH11: !contributes to! thermotolerance 
FtsH11: !degrades! unassembled thylakoid membrane proteins 
FtsH11: !degrades! photodamaged photosystem II D1 protein 
FtsH11: !reduces! chlorophyll content 
FtsH11: !reduces! PSII quantum yield