We have previously demonstrated that vacuolar sorting receptor (VSR) proteins are concentrated on prevacuolar compartments (PVCs) in plant cells. PVCs in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) BY-2 cells are multivesicular bodies (MVBs) as defined by VSR proteins and the BP-80 reporter, where the transmembrane domain (TMD) and cytoplasmic tail (CT) sequences of BP-80 are sufficient and specific for correct targeting of the reporter to PVCs. The genome of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) contains seven VSR proteins, but little is known about their individual subcellular localization and function. Here, we study the subcellular localization of the seven Arabidopsis VSR proteins (AtVSR1-7) based on the previously proven hypothesis that the TMD and CT sequences correctly target individual VSR to its final destination in transgenic tobacco BY-2 cells. Toward this goal, we have generated seven chimeric constructs containing signal peptide (sp) linked to green fluorescent protein (GFP) and TMD/CT sequences (sp-GFP-TMD/CT) of the seven individual AtVSR. Transgenic tobacco BY-2 cell lines expressing these seven sp-GFP-TMD-CT fusions all exhibited typical punctate signals colocalizing with VSR proteins by confocal immunofluorescence. In addition, wortmannin caused the GFP-marked prevacuolar organelles to form small vacuoles, and VSR antibodies labeled these enlarged MVBs in transgenic BY-2 cells. Wortmannin also caused VSR-marked PVCs to vacuolate in other cell types, including Arabidopsis, rice (Oryza sativa), pea (Pisum sativum), and mung bean (Vigna radiata). Therefore, the seven AtVSRs are localized to MVBs in tobacco BY-2 cells, and wortmannin-induced vacuolation of PVCs is a general response in plants.

VSR proteins: !concentrate on! prevacuolar compartments 
TMD/CT sequences: !target! individual VSR 
sp-GFP-TMD/CT fusions: !exhibit! punctate signals 
GFP-marked prevacuolar organelles: !form! small vacuoles 
VSR antibodies: !label! enlarged MVBs 
wortmannin: !causes! vacuolation of PVCs