['16995899', 'Analysis of albino or pale-green (apg) mutants is important for identifying  nuclear genes responsible for chloroplast development and pigment synthesis. We  have identified 38 apg mutants by screening 11 000 Arabidopsis Ds-tagged lines.  One mutant, apg6, contains a Ds insertion in a gene encoding APG6 (ClpB3), a  homologue of the heat-shock protein Hsp101 (ClpB1). We isolated somatic  revertants and identified two Ds-tagged and one T-DNA-tagged mutant alleles of  apg6. All three alleles gave the same pale-green phenotype. These results suggest  that APG6 is important for chloroplast development. The APG6 protein contains a  transit peptide and is localized in chloroplasts. The plastids of apg6 pale-green  cells were smaller than those of the wild type, and contained undeveloped  thylakoid membranes. APG6 mRNA accumulated in response to heat shock in various  organs, but not in response to other abiotic stresses. Under normal conditions,  APG6 is constitutively expressed in the root tips, the organ boundary region, the  reproductive tissues of mature plants where plastids exist as proplastids, and  slightly in the stems and leaves. In addition, constitutive overexpression of  APG6 in transgenic plants inhibited chloroplast development and resulted in a  mild pale-green phenotype. The amounts of chloroplast proteins related to  photosynthesis were markedly decreased in apg6 mutants. These results suggest  that APG6 functions as a molecular chaperone involved in plastid differentiation  mediating internal thylakoid membrane formation and conferring thermotolerance to  chloroplasts during heat stress. The APG6 protein is not only involved in  heat-stress response in chloroplasts, but is also essential for chloroplast  development.', '2006 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02873.x', 'Shinozaki']

APG6: !encodes! Hsp101
APG6: !localizes to! chloroplasts
APG6: !accumulates in response to! heat shock
APG6: !constitutively expressed in! root tips, organ boundary region, reproductive tissues
APG6: !overexpression inhibits! chloroplast development
APG6: !functions as! molecular chaperone
APG6: !involved in! heat-stress response, chloroplast development