Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. has been described as a freezing-tolerant species based on freezing-resistance assays. Nonetheless, this type of experiment does not discriminate between freezing-tolerance and freezing-avoidance mechanisms. The purpose of this paper was to determine which of these two freezing-resistance mechanisms is responsible for freezing resistance in A. thaliana. This was achieved by comparing the thermal properties (ice-nucleation temperature and the freezing temperature) of leaves and the lethal temperature to 10, 50 and 90% of the plants (LT10, LT50, and LT90, respectively). Two wild-type genotypes were used (Columbia and Ler) and their mutants (esk-1 and frs-1, respectively), which differ in their freezing resistance. This study's results indicated that the mutant esk-1, described as a freezing-tolerant species showed freezing tolerance only after a cold-acclimation period. The mutant frs-1, described as freezing sensitive, presented freezing avoidance. Both wild genotypes presented LT50 similar to or higher than the ice-nucleation temperature. Thus, the main freezing-resistance mechanism for A. thaliana is avoidance of freezing by supercooling. No injury of the photosynthetic apparatus was shown by measuring the maximal photochemical efficiency (Fv/Fm) and pigments (chlorophyll and carotenoid) during cold acclimation in all genotypes. During cold acclimation, Columbia and esk-1 increased total soluble carbohydrates in leaves. esk-1 was the only genotype that presented freezing tolerance after cold acclimation. This feature could be related to an increase in sugar accumulation in the apoplast.

Arabidopsis thaliana: !presents! Freezing Avoidance
Columbia/Ler: !present! LT50 similar to or higher than ice-nucleation temperature
esk-1: !increases! Total soluble carbohydrates in leaves
esk-1: !presents! Freezing tolerance after cold acclimation
Fv/Fm: !measures! Maximal photochemical efficiency
Pigments: !measures! Chlorophyll and carotenoid
Apoplast: !related to! Increase in sugar accumulation