Most plant oxylipins, a large class of diverse oxygenated polyunsaturated fatty acids and their derivatives, are produced through the lipoxygenase (LOX) pathway. Recent progress in dicots has highlighted the biological roles of oxylipins in plant defence responses to pathogens and pests. By contrast, the physiological function of LOXs and their metabolites in monocots is poorly understood. Two maize LOXs, ZmLOX10 and ZmLOX11 that share >90% amino acid sequence identity but are localized on different chromosomes, were cloned and characterized. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that ZmLOX10 and ZmLOX11 cluster together with well-characterized plastidic type 2 linoleate 13-LOXs from diverse plant species. Regio-specificity analysis of recombinant ZmLOX10 protein overexpressed in Escherichia coli proved it to be a linoleate 13-LOX with a pH optimum at approximately pH 8.0. Both predicted proteins contain putative transit peptides for chloroplast import. ZmLOX10 was preferentially expressed in leaves and was induced in response to wounding, cold stress, defence-related hormones jasmonic acid (JA), salicylic acid (SA), and abscisic acid (ABA), and inoculation with an avirulent strain of Cochliobolus carbonum. These data suggested a role for this gene in maize adaptation to abiotic stresses and defence responses against pathogens and pests. ZmLOX11 was preferentially expressed in silks and was induced in leaves only by ABA, indicating its possible involvement in responses to osmotic stress. In leaves, mRNA accumulation of ZmLOX10 is strictly regulated by a circadian rhythm, with maximal expression coinciding temporally with the highest photosynthetic activity. This study reveals the evolutionary divergence of physiological roles for relatively recently duplicated genes. Possible physiological functions of these 13-LOXs are suggested.

ZmLOX10: !localizes to! chloroplast 
ZmLOX10: !enhances! defence responses against pathogens and pests 
ZmLOX10: !responds to! wounding, cold stress, JA, SA, ABA 
ZmLOX10: !regulated by! circadian rhythm 
ZmLOX11: !localizes to! chloroplast 
ZmLOX11: !enhances! responses to osmotic stress 
ZmLOX11: !responds to! ABA