The Wm locus of soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.] controls flower color. Dominant Wm and recessive wm allele of the locus produce purple and magenta flower, respectively. A putative full-length cDNA of flavonol synthase (FLS), gmfls1 was isolated by 5' RACE and end-to-end PCR from a cultivar Harosoy with purple flower (WmWm). Sequence analysis revealed that gmfls1 consisted of 1,208 nucleotides encoding 334 amino acids. It had 59-72% homology with FLS proteins of other plant species. Conserved dioxygenase domains A and B were found in the deduced polypeptide. Sequence comparison between Harosoy and Harosoy-wm (magenta flower mutant of Harosoy; wmwm) revealed that they differed by a single G deletion in the coding region of Harosoy-wm. The deletion changed the subsequent reading frame resulting in a truncated polypeptide consisting of 37 amino acids that lacked the dioxygenase domains A and B. Extracts of E. coli cells expressing gmfls1 of Harosoy catalyzed the formation of quercetin from dihydroquercetin, whereas cell extracts expressing gmfls1 of Harosoy-wm had no FLS activity. Genomic Southern analysis suggested the existence of three to four copies of the FLS gene in the soybean genome. CAPS analysis was performed to detect the single-base deletion. Harosoy and Clark (WmWm) exhibited longer fragments, while Harosoy-wm had shorter fragments due to the single-base deletion. The CAPS marker co-segregated with genotypes at Wm locus in a F(2) population segregating for the locus. Linkage mapping using SSR markers revealed that the Wm and gmfls1 were mapped at similar position in the molecular linkage group F. The above results strongly suggest that gmfls1 represents the Wm gene and that the single-base deletion may be responsible for magenta flower color.

Wm: !controls! flower color
gmfls1: !isolated from! Harosoy
gmfls1: !differs by! single G deletion
Harosoy-wm: !has! truncated polypeptide
E. coli cells: !expressing! gmfls1 of Harosoy
E. coli cells: !expressing! gmfls1 of Harosoy-wm
Southern analysis: !suggests! 3-4 copies of FLS gene
CAPS analysis: !detects! single-base deletion
F(2) population: !segregates for! Wm locus
Linkage mapping: !maps! Wm and gmfls1 at similar position