['17028154', 'The sucrose nonfermenting-1 protein kinase (SNF1)/AMP-activated protein kinase  subfamily plays a central role in metabolic responses to nutritional and  environmental stresses. In yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and mammals, the  beta- and gamma-noncatalytic subunits are implicated in substrate specificity and  subcellular localization, respectively, and regulation of the kinase activity.  The atypical betagamma-subunit has been previously described in maize (Zea mays),  presenting at its N-terminal end a sequence related to the KIS (kinase  interacting sequence) domain specific to the beta-subunits (Lumbreras et al.,  2001). The existence of two components, SNF1-related protein kinase (SnRK1)  complexes containing the betagamma-subunit and one SnRK1 kinase, had been  proposed. In this work, we show that, despite its unusual features, the  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) homolog AKINbetagamma clearly interacts with  AKINbeta-subunits in vitro and in vivo, suggesting its involvement in  heterotrimeric complexes located in both cytoplasm and nucleus. Unexpectedly, a  transcriptional analysis of AKINbetagamma gene expression highlighted the  implication of alternative splicing mechanisms in the regulation of AKINbetagamma  expression. A two-hybrid screen performed with AKINbetagamma as bait, together  with in planta bimolecular fluorescence complementation experiments, suggests the  existence of interactions in the cytosol between AKINbetagamma and two  leucine-rich repeats related to pathogen resistance proteins. Interestingly, this  interaction occurs through the truncated KIS domain that corresponds exactly to a  GBD (glycogen-binding domain) recently described in mammals and yeast. A  phylogenetic study suggests that AKINbetagamma-related proteins are restricted to  the plant kingdom. Altogether, these data suggest the existence of plant-specific  SnRK1 trimeric complexes putatively involved in a plant-specific function such as  plant-pathogen interactions.', '2006 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.106.087718', 'Thomas']

SNF1/AMP-activated protein kinase: !plays a role in! metabolic responses
beta- and gamma-noncatalytic subunits: !implicated in! substrate specificity and subcellular localization
AKINbetagamma: !interacts with! AKINbeta-subunits
AKINbetagamma: !interacts with! two leucine-rich repeats
AKINbetagamma: !interacts through! truncated KIS domain