Many insect and fungal pathogens posing agronomically important threats specifically target the roots in strawberry. The use of a root-specific promoter to confer expression of resistance genes in a targeted manner has the potential appreciably to benefit the genetic improvement of commercial strawberry varieties. A novel gene, FaRB7, was isolated from strawberry (Fragariaxananassa Duch.) and found to contain motifs characteristic of tonoplast intrinsic proteins (TIPs). Phylogenetic analysis revealed that FaRB7 represents an RB7-type TIP. In strawberry, this gene is expressed predominantly in roots, with very low expression in petioles. A 2.843 kb region representing the FaRB7 gene upstream regulatory sequence was isolated and found to share a number of sequence motifs with the promoter of the Nicotiana tabacum TobRB7 root-specific RB7-type TIP. When cloned upstream of the gusA reporter gene and introduced into strawberry plants, the FaRB7 promoter was shown to direct strong, near root-specific expression with expression patterns very similar to that of the endogenous gene. Furthermore, the FaRB7 promoter was found to confer constitutive expression, comparable to that produced by the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S RNA promoter, in tobacco. Thus, the FaRB7 promoter may be used to achieve near-root-specific transgene expression in strawberry and also represents an alternative to the CaMV 35S promoter for producing constitutive foreign gene expression in heterologous hosts. The FaRB7 full-length genomic sequence and 5' upstream regulatory region have been submitted to the EMBL/GenBank database under accession number DQ178022.

FaRB7: !isolated from! strawberry 
FaRB7: !contains! motifs characteristic of TIPs 
FaRB7: !expressed predominantly in! roots 
FaRB7 promoter: !shares sequence motifs with! TobRB7 root-specific RB7-type TIP 
FaRB7 promoter: !directs strong, near root-specific expression! 
FaRB7 promoter: !confer constitutive expression! 
FaRB7 promoter: !alternative to! CaMV 35S promoter