['17039368', 'Mammalian sulfotransferases (EC 2.8.2) are involved in many important facets of  steroid hormone activity and metabolism. In this study, Arabidopsis AtST4a and  AtST1 were identified and characterized as brassinosteroid sulfotransferases that  appear to be involved in different aspects of hormone regulation. The two  proteins share 44% identity in amino acid sequence, and belong to different plant  sulfotransferase families. AtST4a was specific for biologically active end  products of the brassinosteroid pathway. The enzyme sulfated brassinosteroids  with diverse side-chain structures, including 24-epibrassinosteroids and the  naturally occurring (22R, 23R)-28-homobrassinosteroids. AtST4a belongs to a small  subfamily of sulfotransferases having two other members, AtST4b and -c. Among the  three recombinant enzymes, only AtST4a was catalytically active with  brassinosteroids. Transcript expression of AtST4 subfamily members was largely  specific to the root. AtST4b- and -c transcript levels were induced by treatment  with trans-zeatin, while AtST4a was repressed under the same conditions,  supporting a divergent function of AtST4a. Co-regulation of AtST4b and -c  correlated with their location in tandem on chromosome 1. AtST1 was  stereospecific for 24-epibrassinosteroids, with a substrate preference for the  metabolic precursor 24-epicathasterone, and exhibited catalytic activity with  hydroxysteroids and estrogens. To gain more insight into this dual activity with  plant and mammalian steroids, enzymatic activities of human steroid  sulfotransferases toward brassinosteroids were characterized. The  dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase SULT2A1 displayed catalytic activity with  a selected set of 24-epibrassinolide precursors, including 24-epicathasterone,  with specific activities comparable to that measured for the endogenous substrate  dehydroepiandrosterone. The comparable activity profiles of AtST1 and SULT2A1  suggest a similar architecture of the acceptor-binding site between the two  enzymes, and may potentially reflect a common ability to conjugate certain  xenobiotics.', '2007 Apr', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-006-0413-y', 'Varin']

AtST4a: !specific for! biologically active end products of brassinosteroid pathway 
AtST4b/c: !co-regulated with! AtST4a 
AtST1: !stereospecific for! 24-epibrassinosteroids 
SULT2A1: !comparable activity profile to! AtST1