The building up of the cell wall is tightly dependent on the functionality of the secretory pathway. Syntaxins as well as other SNARE proteins play important roles during vesicle secretion and fusion. We have compared the secretion of newly synthesised cell-wall polysaccharides to that of secretory marker proteins such as secreted green-fluorescent protein (sec-GFP) and secreted rat preputial beta-glucuronidase (secRGUS) in leaf protoplasts and roots of wild-type and transgenic Nicotiana tabacum plants, overexpressing a syntaxin homologue NtSyr1 (Sp1) and its soluble variant Sp2 that interferes specifically with Sp1 function, affecting post-Golgi transport. In protoplasts transiently transformed with secGFP and Sp1, no variation was observed in the pattern of fluorescence with respect to control; on the contrary, GFP fluorescence accumulate within the cells in protoplasts co-transformed with secGFP and Sp2. Sp2 reduced the percentage of marker protein secretion to 53% as quantified with secRGUS. In protoplasts obtained from leaves of wild-type and transformed tobacco plants expressing Sp1, Sp2 and Sp1 plus Sp2, no remarkable differences in the percentage of newly synthesised polysaccharides incorporated into the regenerating cell walls were observed. The same results were confirmed in roots of whole transformed seedlings. Tests with cytochalasin D (CD) showed a marked decrease in the amount of newly synthesised polysaccharides into the wall and a simultaneous sharp increase in membrane-associated polysaccharides. SecRGUS secretion was also inhibited by CD. The data indicate that marker proteins and matrix polysaccharides, as well as cellulose synthase complexes, are secreted through the involvement of different secretory machineries.

Syntaxins: !affect! Vesicle secretion 
SNARE proteins: !affect! Vesicle secretion 
Sp1: !enhances! Secretion of marker proteins 
Sp2: !interferes with! Sp1 function 
Sp2: !represses! Marker protein secretion 
Sp1/Sp2: !have no effect on! Polysaccharide secretion 
Cytochalasin D: !inhibits! Polysaccharide secretion 
Cytochalasin D: !inhibits! Marker protein secretion