['17059404', "The Arabidopsis radial swelling mutant rsw10 showed ballooning of root  trichoblasts, a lower than wild-type level of cellulose and altered levels of  some monosaccharides in non-cellulosic polysaccharides. Map-based cloning showed  that the mutated gene (At1g71100) encodes a ribose 5-phosphate isomerase (RPI)  and that the rsw10 mutation replaces a conserved glutamic acid residue with  lysine. Although RPI is intimately involved with many biochemical pathways, media  supplementation experiments suggest that the visible phenotype results from a  defect in the production of pyrimidine-based sugar-nucleotide compounds, most  likely uridine 5'-diphosphate-glucose, the presumed substrate of cellulose  synthase. Two of three RPI sequences in the nuclear genome are cytoplasmic, while  the third has a putative chloroplast transit sequence. The sequence encoding both  cytoplasmic enzymes could complement the mutation when expressed behind the CaMV  35S promoter, while fusion of the RSW10 promoter region to the GUS reporter gene  established that the gene is expressed in many aerial tissues as well as the  roots. The prominence of the rsw10 phenotype in roots probably reflects RSW10  being the only cytosolic RPI in this tissue and the gene encoding the plastid RPI  being relatively weakly expressed. We could not, however, detect a decrease in  total RPI activity in root extracts. The rsw10 phenotype is prominent near the  root tip where cells undergo division, endoreduplication and cell expansion and  so are susceptible to a restriction in de novo pyrimidine production. The two  cytosolic RPIs probably arose in an ancient duplication event, their present  expression patterns representing subfunctionalization of the expression of the  original ancestral gene.", '2006 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02902.x', 'Williamson']

At1g71100: !encodes! ribose 5-phosphate isomerase 
RSW10 mutation: !replaces! conserved glutamic acid residue 
RPI: !intimately involved with! many biochemical pathways 
RSW10: !expressed in! aerial tissues and roots 
RSW10: !prominent near! root tip 
two cytosolic RPIs: !arose from! ancient duplication event