Stratospheric ozone depletion leads to enhanced UV-B radiation. Therefore, the capacity of reproductive cells to cope with different spectral irradiance was investigated in the laboratory. Zoospores of the upper sublittoral kelp Saccorhiza dermatodea were exposed to varying fluence of spectral irradiance consisting of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR, 400-700 nm; =P), PAR+UV-A radiation (UV-A, 320-400 nm; =PA), and PAR+UV-A+UV-B radiation (UV-B, 280-320 nm; =PAB). Structural changes, localization of phlorotannin-containing physodes, accumulation of UV-absorbing phlorotannins, and physiological responses of zoospores were measured after exposure treatments as well as after 2-6 d recovery in dim white light (8 mumol photon m(-2) s(-1)). Physodes increased in size under PAB treatment. Extrusion of phlorotannins into the medium and accumulation of physodes was induced not only under UVR treatment but also under PAR. UV-B radiation caused photodestruction indicated by a loss of pigmentation. Photosynthetic efficiency of spores was photoinhibited after 8 h exposure to 22 and 30 mumol photon m(-2) s(-1) of PAR, while supplement of UVR had a significant additional effect on photoinhibition. A relatively low recovery of photosystem II function was observed after 2 d recovery in spores exposed to 1.7 x 10(4) J m(-2) of UV-B, with a germination rate of only 49% of P treatment after 6 d recovery. The amount of UV-B-induced DNA damage measured as cyclobutane-pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) increased with the biologically effective UV-B dose (BED(DNA)). Significant removal of CPDs indicating repair of DNA damage was observed after 2 d in low white light. The protective function of phlorotannins has restricted efficiency for a single cell. Within a plume of zoospores, however, each cell can buffer each other and protect the lower layer of spores from excessive radiation. Exudation of phlorotannins into the water can also reduce the impact of UV-B radiation on UV-sensitive spores. The results of this study showed that the impact of UVR on reproductive cells can be mitigated by protective and repair mechanisms.

Stratospheric ozone depletion: !leads to! Enhanced UV-B radiation
Zoospores: !exposed to! Varying fluence of spectral irradiance
Physodes: !increase in size! Under PAB treatment
Phlorotannins: !extruded into medium! Under UVR treatment
Photosynthetic efficiency: !photoinhibited! After 8 h exposure to PAR+UVR
UV-B radiation: !causes photodestruction! Indicated by loss of pigmentation
DNA damage: !measured as! Cyclobutane-pyrimidine dimers (CPDs)
Phlorotannins: !provide protection! From excessive radiation
Repair mechanisms: !mitigate impact! Of UVR on reproductive cells