Endoplasmin is a molecular chaperone of the heat-shock protein 90 class located in the endoplasmic reticulum and its activity is poorly characterized in plants. We assessed the ability of endoplasmin to alleviate stress via its transient overexpression in tobacco protoplasts treated with tunicamycin, an inhibitor of glycosylation and inducer of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Endoplasmin supported the secretion of a model secretory protein but was less effective than BiP, the endoplasmic reticulum member of the heat-shock protein 70 family. Consistently, immunoprecipitation experiments with in vivo radioactively labelled proteins using an antiserum prepared against Arabidopsis endoplasmin showed that a much smaller number of newly synthesized polypeptides associated with endoplasmin than with BiP. Synthesis of endoplasmin was enhanced by UPR inducers in tobacco seedlings but not protoplasts. As BiP synthesis was induced in both systems, we conclude that the UPR acts differently, at least in part, on the expression of the two chaperones. Endoplasmin was not detectable in extracts of leaves and stems of the Arabidopsis endoplasmin T-DNA insertion mutant shepherd. However, the chaperone is present, albeit at low levels, in shepherd mutant callus, mature roots and tunicamycin-treated seedlings, demonstrating that the mutation is leaky. Reduced endoplasmin in the shepherd mutant has no effect on BiP protein levels in callus or mature roots, leaves and stems, but is compensated by increased BiP in seedlings. This increase occurs in proliferating rather than expanding leaf cells, indicating an important role for endoplasmin in proliferating plant tissues.

Endoplasmin: !alleviates stress! tobacco protoplasts
Endoplasmin: !less effective than! BiP
Endoplasmin: !associated with! newly synthesized polypeptides
UPR: !acts differently on! expression of endoplasmin and BiP
Endoplasmin: !present in! shepherd mutant callus, mature roots and tunicamycin-treated seedlings
Endoplasmin: !compensated by! increased BiP in seedlings
Endoplasmin: !important role in! proliferating plant tissues