['17062755', 'Cytokinins, which are central regulators of cell division and differentiation in  plants, are adenine derivatives carrying an isopentenyl side chain that may be  hydroxylated. Plants have two classes of isopentenyltransferases (IPTs) acting on  the adenine moiety: ATP/ADP isopentenyltransferases (in Arabidopsis thaliana,  AtIPT1, 3, 4-8) and tRNA IPTs (in Arabidopsis, AtIPT2 and 9). ATP/ADP IPTs are  likely to be responsible for the bulk of cytokinin synthesis, whereas it is  thought that cis-zeatin (cZ)-type cytokinins are produced possibly by degradation  of cis-hydroxy isopentenyl tRNAs, which are formed by tRNA IPTs. However, these  routes are largely hypothetical because of lack of in vivo evidence, because the  critical experiment necessary to verify these routes, namely the production and  analysis of mutants lacking AtIPTs, has not yet been described. We isolated null  mutants for all members of the ATP/ADP IPT and tRNA IPT gene families in  Arabidopsis. Notably, our work demonstrates that the atipt1 3 5 7 quadruple  mutant possesses severely decreased levels of isopentenyladenine and trans-zeatin  (tZ), and their corresponding ribosides, ribotides, and glucosides, and is  retarded in its growth. In contrast, these mutants possessed increased levels of  cZ-type cytokinins. The atipt2 9 double mutant, on the other hand, lacked  isopentenyl- and cis-hydroxy isopentenyl-tRNA, and cZ-type cytokinins. These  results indicate that whereas ATP/ADP IPTs are responsible for the bulk of  isopentenyladenine- and tZ-type cytokinin synthesis, tRNA IPTs are required for  cZ-type cytokinin production. This work clarifies the long-standing questions of  the biosynthetic routes for isopentenyladenine-, tZ-, and cZ-type cytokinin  production.', '2006 Oct 31', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0603522103', 'Kakimoto']

AtIPT1/3/4-8: !synthesizes! isopentenyladenine/tZ-type cytokinins 
AtIPT2/9: !synthesizes! cis-hydroxy isopentenyl-tRNA/cZ-type cytokinins 
atipt1 3 5 7 quadruple mutant: !lacks! isopentenyladenine/tZ-type cytokinins 
atipt2 9 double mutant: !lacks! cis-hydroxy isopentenyl-tRNA/cZ-type cytokinins