Elicitor-induced sanguinarine accumulation in opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) cell cultures provides a responsive model system to profile modulations in gene transcripts and metabolites related to alkaloid biosynthesis. An annotated expressed sequence tag (EST) database was assembled from 10,224 random clones isolated from an elicitor-treated opium poppy cell culture cDNA library. The most abundant ESTs encoded defense proteins, and enzymes involved in alkaloid metabolism and S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyl transfer. ESTs corresponding to 40 enzymes involved in the conversion of sucrose to sanguinarine were identified. A corresponding DNA microarray was probed with RNA from cell cultures collected at various time-points after elicitor treatment, and compared with RNA from control cells. Several diverse transcript populations were coordinately induced, with alkaloid biosynthetic enzyme and defense protein transcripts displaying the most rapid and substantial increases. In addition to all known sanguinarine biosynthetic gene transcripts, mRNAs encoding several upstream primary metabolic enzymes were coordinately induced. Fourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance-mass spectrometry was used to characterize the metabolite profiles of control and elicitor-treated cell cultures. Principle component analysis revealed a significant and dynamic separation in the metabolome, represented by 992 independent detected analytes, in response to elicitor treatment. Identified metabolites included sanguinarine, dihydrosanguinarine, and the methoxylated derivatives dihydrochelirubine and chelirubine, and the alkaloid pathway intermediates N-methylcoclaurine, N-methylstylopine, and protopine. Some of the detected analytes showed temporal changes in abundance consistent with modulations in the profiles of alkaloid biosynthetic gene transcripts.

Elicitor: !induces! sanguinarine accumulation
ESTs: !encode! defense proteins
ESTs: !encode! enzymes involved in alkaloid metabolism
DNA microarray: !probed with! RNA from cell cultures
Transcript populations: !coordinately induced by! elicitor treatment
Alkaloid biosynthetic enzyme transcripts: !display! most rapid and substantial increases
FT-ICR-MS: !used to characterize! metabolite profiles
Metabolites: !include! sanguinarine, dihydrosanguinarine, etc.
Metabolites: !show temporal changes in abundance consistent with! modulations in profiles of alkaloid biosynthetic gene transcripts