['17079264', 'The floral inhibitor FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) is a crucial regulator of flowering  time in Arabidopsis, and is positively regulated by the FRIGIDA (FRI) gene in  late-flowering winter-annual accessions. In rapid-cycling accessions, FLC  expression is suppressed by the autonomous floral-promotion pathway (AP); thus AP  mutants contain high levels of FLC and are late flowering. Previous work has  shown that the upregulation of FLC in FRI- or AP-mutant backgrounds is correlated  to an increase in histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) trimethylation at the FLC locus.  This increase in trimethylation requires a PAF1-like complex and EARLY FLOWERING  IN SHORT DAYS (EFS), a putative histone H3 methyltransferase. We have identified  a putative zinc-finger-containing transcription factor, SUF4, that is required  for the upregulation of FLC by FRI. suf4 mutations strongly suppress the  late-flowering phenotype of FRI, but only weakly suppress AP mutants. As with  mutants in efs or the PAF1-like complex, suf4 mutants show reduced H3K4  trimethylation at FLC. An interesting distinction between the phenotypes of suf4  mutants and mutants in efs or the PAF1-like complex is observed in the expression  of genes that are adjacent to FLC or FLC-like genes. In efs and PAF1-like-complex  mutants, the expression of FLC, FLC-like genes and adjacent genes is suppressed.  In suf4 mutants, however, only FLC expression is suppressed. These data are  consistent with a model in which SUF4 may act to specifically recruit EFS and the  PAF1-like complex to the FLC locus.', '2006 Dec', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.02684', 'Michaels']

FLC: !positively regulated by! FRI 
AP: !suppresses! FLC 
H3K4 trimethylation: !increased by! FRI/AP mutants 
PAF1-like complex: !required for! H3K4 trimethylation 
EFS: !putative histone H3 methyltransferase and! required for! H3K4 trimethylation 
SUF4: !required for! upregulation of FLC by FRI 
suf4 mutations: !strongly suppress! late-flowering phenotype of FRI 
EFS/PAF1-like complex: !suppress! expression of FLC, FLC-like genes and adjacent genes 
SUF4: !recruits! EFS/PAF1-like complex to FLC locus