When leaves of Bryophyllum marnierianum are detached from the plant, plantlets develop from primordia located at their margins. Leaves excised with a piece of stem attached do not produce plantlets. Severing the major leaf veins overcomes the inhibitory effect of the attached stem, indicating that the control agent is transmitted through the vascular system. A possible mechanism is that an inhibitory substance, possibly a known plant hormone, transported from the stem to the leaf, suppresses plantlet development. A number of hormones were tested for their ability to inhibit plantlet primordium development in whole isolated leaves. Auxins had no effect, indicating that apical dominance is not involved. The cytokinins zeatin, kinetin, and benzylaminopurine (BAP) strongly inhibited plantlet development, suggesting that they may be the or a factor involved in maintenance of plantlet primordium dormancy when the leaf is attached to the plant. This hypothesis was strongly supported by the finding that treatment of leaves attached to stems with a cytokinin antagonist (purine riboside) released the primordia from inhibition. In contrast to whole leaves, plantlet primordium development on leaf explants incubated on Murashige Skoog medium containing 3% sucrose was strongly stimulated by cytokinins. A possible explanation of these observations is that in whole leaves the cytokinin signal is transduced into an inhibitory signal whereas in the isolated primordium cytokinin has a direct stimulatory effect. The inhibitory cytokinin pathway must be dominant as long as the leaf is attached to the plant. A model is proposed which could explain these findings. This study points to a novel role of cytokinins in the maintenance of foliar plantlet primordium dormancy.

stem: !transmits! inhibitory substance
cytokinins: !inhibit! plantlet primordium development
auxins: !have no effect on! plantlet primordium development
cytokinin antagonist: !releases! primordia from inhibition
cytokinins: !stimulate! plantlet primordium development on leaf explants