Nuclear dynamics in root hairs, which depends upon the actin cytoskeleton, appears to be an important factor in root-hair tip growth. Previous evidence suggests that there is an absolute requirement for the nucleus to be a fixed distance from the growing root-hair tip for tip growth to proceed. To test this hypothesis, nuclear dynamics were examined in root-hair cells bearing multiple root hairs. The majority of root-hair cells of transgenic plants overexpressing the ROP2 GTPase (ROP2 OX) bear multiple root hairs. Simultaneous and sustained fast tip growth occurred in multiple root hairs of ROP2 OX, with the continual presence of tip-localized cytoplasm in these growing hairs. Nuclear dynamics were imaged in ROP2 OX by co-expressing a transgene encoding a nuclear localization signal (NLS)-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion protein. The nucleus was in continual proximity to one of the growing root-hair tips, whilst the other tip elongated at a similar rate but in the absence of the nucleus from the shank of that root hair. To test whether this phenomenon was an artefact of ROP2 overexpression, nuclear dynamics were examined in wild-type and NLS-GFP transgenic plants. Multiple root hairs on the same cell underwent simultaneous and sustained fast tip growth, with the nucleus lying deep within the shank of only one of these hairs. The nucleus was also moved into the root-hair tip during the severe root-hair tip branching which is characteristic of ROP2 OX transgenic plants. These results suggest that fast tip growth can proceed in some multiple root hairs at extreme distances from the nucleus.

ROP2 OX: !overexpresses! GTPase 
NLS-GFP: !encodes! fusion protein 
Nuclear dynamics: !examined in! root-hair cells 
Nucleus: !localizes to! root-hair tip 
Root hairs: !undergo! simultaneous and sustained fast tip growth 
Wild-type plants: !examined in! NLS-GFP transgenic plants 
Root-hair tip branching: !characteristic of! ROP2 OX transgenic plants 
Nucleus: !moved into! root-hair tip