In a compatible interaction biotrophic fungi often lower the yield of their hosts by reducing photosynthesis and altering the fluxes of carbon within the infected leaf. In contrast, comparatively little is known about the metabolic consequences of activating resistance responses. In this study we investigated the hypothesis that the activation of both race-specific (Mla12) and broad-spectrum (mlo) resistance pathways in barley leaves infected with Blumeria graminis represents a cost to the plant in terms of carbon production and utilization. We have shown, using quantitative imaging of chlorophyll fluorescence, that during a susceptible interaction, photosynthesis was progressively reduced both in cells directly below fungal colonies and in adjacent cells when compared with uninoculated leaves. The lower rate of photosynthesis was associated with an increase in invertase activity, an accumulation of hexoses and a down-regulation of photosynthetic gene expression. During both Mla12- and mlo-mediated resistance, photosynthesis was also reduced, most severely inhibited in cells directly associated with attempted penetration of the fungus but also in surrounding cells. These cells displayed intense autofluorescence under ultraviolet illumination indicative of the accumulation of phenolic compounds and/or callose deposition. The depression in photosynthesis was not due only to cell death but also to an alteration in source-sink relations and carbon utilization. Apoplastic (cell wall-bound) invertase activity increased more rapidly and to a much greater extent than in infected susceptible leaves and was accompanied by an accumulation of hexoses that was localized to areas of the leaf actively exhibiting resistance responses. The accumulation of hexoses was accompanied by a down-regulation in the expression of Rubisco (rbcS) and chlorophyll a/b binding protein (cab) genes (although to a lesser extent than in a compatible interaction) and with an up-regulation in the expression of the pathogenesis-related protein 1 (PR-1). These results are consistent with a role for invertase in the generation of hexoses, which may supply energy for defence reactions and/or act as signals inducing defence gene expression.

Gene: !affects! Photosynthesis 
Gene: !enhances! Invertase activity 
Gene: !accumulates! Hexoses 
Gene: !down-regulates! Photosynthetic gene expression 
Gene: !accumulates! Phenolic compounds/callose deposition 
Gene: !alters! Source-sink relations 
Gene: !up-regulates! PR-1 gene expression