We have previously analysed expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from non-acclimated (NA) and cold-acclimated (CA) Rhododendron leaves, and identified highly abundant complementary DNAs (cDNAs) possibly involved in cold acclimation. A potentially significant, but relatively unexplored, application of these EST data sets is the study of moderately abundant cDNAs, such as those picked only 1-3 times from each Rhododendron EST library containing approximately 430 ESTs. Using statistical tests and Northern blots, we established that the probability of differential expression of moderately abundant cDNAs based on the EST data is, indeed, a reasonably accurate predictor of their 'true' upregulation or downregulation as 11 out of 13 cDNAs (85%) studied fit this criterion. The analyses also revealed four aspects of cold acclimation in Rhododendron leaf tissues. Firstly, the concomitant upregulation of long-chain acyl-coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) synthetase, CTP:cholinephosphate cytidylyltransferase and delta-12 fatty acid desaturase in CA leaf tissues suggests that phospholipid biosynthesis and desaturation are important components of cold hardening in Rhododendron. Secondly, upregulation of plastidic nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphatemalic enzyme (NADP-ME) in CA tissues suggests that malate is an important source of acetyl-CoA used for fatty acid biosynthesis during cold acclimation. Thirdly, down-regulation of plasma membrane intrinsic protein (PIP)2-1 aquaporin and upregulation of gated outward rectifying K+ channel (GORK) in CA tissues may be associated with the protection of overwintering leaves from freeze-induced cellular dehydration. Fourthly, upregulation of coumarate 3-hydroxylase may be associated with cell wall thickening in CA tissues. Physiological implications of these results, which reveal potentially novel regulations of cold acclimation in overwintering woody evergreens, are discussed. This work highlights the importance of also investigating low/moderately abundant ESTs (in addition to highly abundant ones) in genomic studies, in that it offers an effective strategy for identifying stress-related genes, especially when large-scale cDNA sequencing/microarray studies are not possible.

Acyl-CoA synthetase: !upregulated in! cold-acclimated Rhododendron leaves
CTP:cholinephosphate cytidylyltransferase: !upregulated in! cold-acclimated Rhododendron leaves
Delta-12 fatty acid desaturase: !upregulated in! cold-acclimated Rhododendron leaves
Plastidic NADP-ME: !upregulated in! cold-acclimated Rhododendron leaves
PIP2-1 aquaporin: !downregulated in! cold-acclimated Rhododendron leaves
GORK: !upregulated in! cold-acclimated Rhododendron leaves
Coumarate 3-hydroxylase: !upregulated in! cold-acclimated Rhododendron leaves