Plants are much more dynamic than we usually expect them to be. This dynamic behaviour is of paramount importance for their performance under natural conditions, when resources are distributed heterogeneously in space and time. However, plants are not only the cue ball of their physical and chemical environment. Endogenous rhythms and networks controlling photosynthesis and growth buffer plant processes from external fluctuations. This review highlights recent evidence of the importance of dynamic temporal and spatial organization of photosynthesis and of growth in leaves and roots. These central processes for plant performance differ strongly in their dependence on environmental impact and endogenous properties, respectively. Growth involves a wealth of processes ranging from the supply of resources from external and internal sources to the growth processes themselves. In contrast, photosynthesis can only take place when light and CO2 are present and thus clearly requires 'input from the environment'. Nevertheless, growth and photosynthesis are connected to each other via mechanisms that are still not fully understood. Recent advances in imaging technology have provided new insights into the dynamics of plant-environment interactions. Such processes do not only play a crucial role in understanding stress response of plants under extreme environmental conditions. Dynamics of plants under modest growth conditions rise from endogenous mechanisms as well as exogenous impact too. It is thus an important task for future research to identify how dynamic external conditions interact with plant-internal signalling networks to optimize plant behaviour in real time and to understand how plants have adapted to characteristic spatial and temporal properties of the resources from their environment, on which they depend on.

Photosynthesis: !requires! Environment 
Growth: !involves! Supply of resources 
Photosynthesis: !connected to! Growth 
Imaging technology: !provides insights into! Plant-environment interactions 
Dynamic external conditions: !interact with! Plant-internal signalling networks