The adaptation of metabolism is thought to play a role in the acquisition of desiccation tolerance (DT). However, the importance of such a role and whether specific regulatory pathways exist remain to be assessed. Using in vitro 31P and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and biochemical assays, we analysed metabolite profiles of perchloric extracts from germinating radicles of cucumber to identify changes in carbon and phosphate metabolism associated with DT. Emerged radicles measuring 2 mm long can be rendered tolerant to desiccation by incubation in a polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution with a water potential of 1.5 MPa. However, in 4-mm-long emerged radicles, this treatment was ineffective. This manipulable system enabled the discrimination of changes in metabolites associated with DT from those associated with the response to osmotic stress. Independent of radicle length, the PEG treatment resulted in an increase in sucrose (Suc) content, whereas glucose (Glc), fructose (Fru) and the hexose phosphate pool, as well as phosphoenolpyruvate decreased three- to fourfold. In addition, three derivatives arising early during phospholipid catabolism (glycerylphosphorylcholine, glycerylphosphorylethanolamine and glycerylphosphorylinositol) appeared in the PEG-treated radicles. Interestingly, phospholipid degradation was much more pronounced in osmotically challenged radicles that remain sensitive to drying. This was proved by the appearance of catabolites, such as phosphocholine and phosphoethanolamine, solely in 4 mm PEG-treated radicles. Furthermore, glycerol-3-phosphate and its derivative 3-phosphoglycerate increased significantly. Our data suggest that the metabolic response leading to the re-establishment of DT is not entirely identical to that of an osmotic response. It is inferred that membrane remodelling and/or increased phospholipid catabolism is an adaptive response common to osmotic adjustment and DT but is controlled differently in tolerant and sensitive radicles.

PEG: !increases! Suc
PEG: !decreases! Glc, Fru, hexose phosphate pool, phosphoenolpyruvate
PEG: !induces! glycerylphosphorylcholine, glycerylphosphorylethanolamine, glycerylphosphorylinositol
osmotic stress: !induces! phosphocholine, phosphoethanolamine
DT: !induces! glycerol-3-phosphate, 3-phosphoglycerate