Ecosystem-scale estimation of photosynthesis and respiration using micrometeorological techniques remains an important, yet difficult, challenge. In this study, we combined micrometeorological and stable isotope methods to partition net ecosystem CO2 exchange (FN) into photosynthesis (F(A)) and respiration (F(R)) in a corn-soybean rotation ecosystem during the summer 2003 corn phase. Mixing ratios of (12)CO2 and (13)CO2 were measured continuously using tunable diode laser (TDL) absorption spectroscopy. The dynamics of the isotope ratio of ecosystem respiration (R), net ecosystem CO2 exchange (deltaN) and photosynthetic discrimination at the canopy scale (delta canopy) were examined. During the period of full canopy closure, F(N) was partitioned into photosynthesis and respiration using both the isotopic approach and the conventional night-time-derived regression methodology. Results showed that deltaR had significant seasonal variation (-32 to -11% per hundred) corresponding closely with canopy phenology. Daytime deltaN typically varied from -12 to -4% per hundred, while delta canopy remained relatively constant in the vicinity of 3% per hundred. Compared with the regression approach, the isotopic flux partitioning showed more short-term variations and was considerably more symmetric about F(N). In this experiment, the isotopic partitioning resulted in larger uncertainties, most of which were caused by the uncertainties in deltaN. and the daytime estimate of deltaR. By sufficiently reducing these uncertainties, the tunable diode laser (TDL)-micrometeorological technique should yield a better understanding of the processes controlling photosynthesis, respiration and ecosystem-scale discrimination.

F(N): !partitioned into! photosynthesis, respiration 
deltaR: !varied with! canopy phenology 
deltaN: !varied from! -12 to -4% per hundred 
delta canopy: !remained constant at! 3% per hundred 
regression approach: !showed less! short-term variations 
TDL-micrometeorological technique: !should yield better understanding of! processes controlling photosynthesis, respiration