ARR22 (At3g04280) is a novel Type A response regulator whose function in Arabidopsis is unknown. RT-PCR analysis has shown that expression of the gene takes place in flowers and developing pods with the tissues accumulating different proportions of splice variants. Spatial analysis of expression, using ARR22::GUS plants as a marker, has revealed that the reporter protein accumulates specifically at the junction between the funiculus and the chalazal tissue. Expression can be up-regulated at this location by wounding the developing seed. A detailed analysis has failed to detect ARR22 expression at any other sites and, to support this assertion, the only evidence for tissue ablation in ARR22::Barnase plants is during seed development, with the consequence that embryo growth is attenuated. Ectopic expression of ARR22, driven by either the CaMV 35S or the pea plastocyanin (PPC) promoters, resulted in the generation of plants exhibiting extremely stunted root and shoot growth. No viable progeny could be isolated from the PPC::ARR22 transgenic lines. An RT-PCR analysis of a recently annotated gene (ARR24-At5g26594), that exhibits 66% amino acid similarity to ARR22, has shown that expression is also predominantly in floral and silique tissues. Examination of ARR24::GUS plants has revealed that the activity of the promoter is primarily restricted to pollen grains indicating that this gene is unlikely to display an overlapping function with ARR22. Analyses of individual KO lines of either ARR22 or ARR24 have failed to identify a mutant phenotype under the growth conditions employed and the double knockout ARR22/ARR24 line is also indistinguishable from wild-type plants. These results are discussed in the light of the proposed role of response regulators in plant growth and development.

ARR22: !localizes to! junction between funiculus and chalazal tissue
ARR22: !up-regulated by! wounding of developing seed
ARR22: !enhances! embryo growth
ARR22: !represses! root and shoot growth
ARR24: !synthesizes! in floral and silique tissues
ARR24: !localizes to! pollen grains
ARR24: !no effect on! plant growth and development