['17092320', 'A functional cloning approach using the oxidant-sensitive yeast mutant,  Deltayap1, was employed to identify plant genes involved in tolerance of  oxidative stress. In this screen, we identified an Arabidopsis late  embryogenesis-abundant (LEA)-like protein, AtLEA5, which increased the tolerance  of Deltayap1 cells to the oxidants H(2)O(2), diamide, menadione and tert-butyl  hydroperoxide. Unlike canonical LEAs, AtLEA5 is constitutively expressed in roots  and reproductive organs but not in seeds. In leaves of short-day grown plants,  AtLEA5 transcripts exhibited a diurnal pattern of regulation, where transcripts  were repressed in the light and abundant in the dark. Expression of AtLEA5 in  leaves was induced by oxidants, ABA and dehydration. Use of abi1-1  (ABA-insensitive) and aba1-1 (ABA-deficient) Arabidopsis mutants indicated that  drought induction of AtLEA5 required ABA synthesis but was independent of the  ABI1 gene product. Abscisic acid and H(2)O(2) induction of AtLEA5 was also  independent of the OXI1 protein kinase. Constitutive overexpression of AtLEA5  resulted in increased root growth and shoot biomass, both in optimal conditions  and under H(2)O(2) stress. However, in comparison with wild type, photosynthesis  in overexpressing plants was more susceptible to drought. These features suggest  that AtLEA5 has a unique function among LEA proteins in that it plays a specific  role in protection against oxidative stress involving decreased photosynthesis.  This protein functions as part of a complex network of defences that contribute  to robustness of plants under stress by minimizing the negative effects of  oxidation.', '2006 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02911.x', 'Theodoulou']

AtLEA5: !increases tolerance of! Deltayap1 cells 
AtLEA5: !constitutively expressed in! roots and reproductive organs 
AtLEA5: !diurnally regulated in! leaves 
AtLEA5: !induced by! oxidants, ABA and dehydration 
AtLEA5: !independent of! ABI1 and OXI1 
AtLEA5: !results in! increased root growth and shoot biomass 
AtLEA5: !decreases photosynthesis under! drought 
AtLEA5: !plays a role in! protection against oxidative stress