['17098851', 'Seventeen loci encode proteins of the preprotein and amino acid transporter  family in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Some of these genes have arisen  from recent duplications and are not in annotated duplicated regions of the  Arabidopsis genome. In comparison to a number of other eukaryotic organisms, this  family of proteins has greatly expanded in plants, with 24 loci in rice (Oryza  sativa). Most of the Arabidopsis and rice genes are orthologous, indicating  expansion of this family before monocot and dicot divergence. In vitro protein  uptake assays, in vivo green fluorescent protein tagging, and immunological  analyses of selected proteins determined either mitochondrial or plastidic  localization for 10 and six proteins, respectively. The protein encoded by  At5g24650 is targeted to both mitochondria and chloroplasts and, to our  knowledge, is the first membrane protein reported to be targeted to mitochondria  and chloroplasts. Three genes encoded translocase of the inner mitochondrial  membrane (TIM)17-like proteins, three TIM23-like proteins, and three outer  envelope protein16-like proteins in Arabidopsis. The identity of Arabidopsis  TIM22-like proteins is most likely a protein encoded by At3g10110/At1g18320,  based on phylogenetic analysis, subcellular localization, and complementation of  a yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) mutant and coexpression analysis. The lack of  a preprotein and amino acid transporter domain in some proteins, localization in  mitochondria, plastids, or both, variation in gene structure, and the differences  in expression profiles indicate that the function of this family has diverged in  plants beyond roles in protein translocation.', '2007 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.106.090688', 'Whelan']

Gene: !encodes! Protein 
Gene: !arose from! Duplication 
Gene: !expanded in! Plants 
Gene: !orthologous to! Rice 
Gene: !localizes to! Mitochondria 
Gene: !localizes to! Chloroplasts 
Gene: !complements! Yeast Mutant 
Gene: !lacks! Preprotein Domain 
Gene: !differs in! Expression Profiles 
Gene: !diverged in! Function