Plastids are cellular organelles which originated when a photosynthetic prokaryote was engulfed by the eukaryotic ancestor of green and red algae and land plants. Plastids have diversified in plants from their original function as chloroplasts to fulfil a variety of other roles in metabolite biosynthesis and in storage, or purely to facilitate their own transmission, according to the cell type that harbours them. Therefore cellular development and plastid biogenesis pathways must be closely intertwined. Cell biological, biochemical, and genetic approaches have generated a large body of knowledge on a variety of plastid biogenesis processes. A brief overview of the components and functions of the plastid genetic machinery, the plastid division apparatus, and protein import to and targeting inside the organelle is presented here. However, key areas in which our knowledge is still surprisingly limited remain, and these are also discussed. Chloroplast-defective mutants suggest that a substantial number of important plastid biogenesis proteins are still unknown. Very little is known about how different plastid types differentiate, or about what mechanisms co-ordinate cell growth with plastid growth and division, in order to achieve what is, in photosynthetic cells, a largely constant cellular plastid complement. Further, it seems likely that major, separate plastid and chloroplast 'master switches' exist, as indicated by the co-ordinated gene expression of plastid or chloroplast-specific proteins. Recent insights into each of these developing areas are reviewed. Ultimately, this information should allow us to gain a systems-level understanding of the plastid-related elements of the networks of plant cellular development.

Plastids: !originated from! photosynthetic prokaryote 
Cellular development: !intertwined with! plastid biogenesis pathways 
Chloroplast-defective mutants: !suggest! important plastid biogenesis proteins 
Cell growth: !coordinates with! plastid growth and division 
Plastid/chloroplast 'master switches': !indicated by! co-ordinated gene expression 
Systems-level understanding: !allows! networks of plant cellular development