Images taken at different spectral bands are increasingly used for characterizing plants and their health status. In contrast to conventional point measurements, imaging detects the distribution and quantity of signals and thus improves the interpretation of fluorescence and reflectance signatures. In multispectral fluorescence and reflectance set-ups, images are separately acquired for the fluorescence in the blue, green, red, and far red, as well as for the reflectance in the green and in the near infrared regions. In addition, 'reference' colour images are taken with an RGB (red, green, blue) camera. Examples of imaging for the detection of photosynthetic activity, UV screening caused by UV-absorbing substances, fruit quality, leaf tissue structure, and disease symptoms are introduced. Subsequently, the different instrumentations used for multispectral fluorescence and reflectance imaging of leaves and fruits are discussed. Various types of irradiation and excitation light sources, detectors, and components for image acquisition and image processing are outlined. The acquired images (or image sequences) can be analysed either directly for each spectral range (wherein they were captured) or after calculating ratios of the different spectral bands. This analysis can be carried out for different regions of interest selected manually or (semi)-automatically. Fluorescence and reflectance imaging in different spectral bands represents a promising tool for non-destructive plant monitoring and a 'road' to a broad range of identification tasks.

Images: !used for! Characterizing plants 
Fluorescence: !detects! Distribution and quantity of signals 
Multispectral fluorescence: !acquires images for! Blue, green, red, far red, green, near infrared regions 
Reference colour images: !taken with! RGB camera 
Instrumentations: !used for! Multispectral fluorescence and reflectance imaging 
Light sources: !irradiate and excite! Detectors and components 
Image sequences: !analysed for! Different spectral ranges 
Manual/semi-automatic selection: !carried out for! Different regions of interest 
Fluorescence/reflectance imaging: !promising tool for! Non-destructive plant monitoring