Heat shock in barley aleurone layers induces heat shock protein synthesis and suppresses secretory protein synthesis by selectively destabilizing their mRNAs. In addition, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes upon which secretory protein mRNAs are translated become vesiculated during heat shock, leading to the hypothesis that ER dissociation and targeted mRNA destabilization are linked mechanistically. Supporting this, ER can be heat adapted, and heat-adapted ER has higher levels of fatty acid saturation in membrane phospholipids which do not vesiculate upon heat shock. Secretory protein mRNAs are also more stable in heat-adapted cells. To understand better heat shock-induced changes in ER membranes, we examined ER membrane proteins and enzymes involved in phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis and phospholipid turnover in heat-shocked aleurone cells. Heat shock significantly increased the activity of phospholipases A2 and D, and shortly thereafter significant but gradual increases in choline kinase and phosphocholine glyceride transferase activities and a sharp increase in phosphorylcholine citidyl transferase activity were observed. Only minor changes were observed in SDS-PAGE analyses of proteins from sonicated ER membranes fractionated on continuous sucrose gradients. Overall, heat shock reduced total lipid in ER membranes relative to protein, and in intact, ultracentrifuged aleurone cells examined by light and electron microscopy the ER band appeared to increase in density. The changes in phospholipid metabolism coupled with the suppression of secretory protein synthesis indicate that in addition to inducing a classic heat shock response, high temperature also induces a classic unfolded protein response in the ER of this secretory cell.

Heat shock: !induces! Heat shock protein synthesis
Heat shock: !destabilizes! Secretory protein mRNAs
ER: !heat adapted! Higher levels of fatty acid saturation
Secretory protein mRNAs: !more stable! In heat-adapted cells
Heat shock: !increases! Phospholipase A2 and D activities
Heat shock: !increases! Choline kinase and phosphocholine glyceride transferase activities
Heat shock: !increases! Phosphorylcholine citidyl transferase activity
Heat shock: !reduces! Total lipid in ER membranes
ER: !increases in density! In intact, ultracentrifuged aleurone cells