Novel open reading frames coding for cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP) belonging to the superfamily of bacterial, fungal, and plant heme peroxidases were analyzed in the available fungal genomes. Multiple sequence alignment of 71 selected peroxidase genes revealed the presence of three conserved regions essential for their function: one on the distal and two on the proximal side of the prosthetic heme group. Conserved sequence motifs on the proximal heme side are peculiar for CcPs and are responsible for their reactivity. Phylogenetic analysis performed with the distance method as well as with the maximum likelihood method revealed the existence of three distinct subfamilies of fungal CcP and their relationship to other members of the peroxidase superfamily. These divergent CcP evolutionary lines apparently evolved from a single primordial heme peroxidase gene in parallel with the evolution of ascorbate peroxidase genes. Analyzed CcPs differ significantly in their N-terminal sequences. Only subfamily I did not exhibit a presence of any signal sequence. Subfamily II members possess a well defined signal sequence allowing processing and release into mitochondrion and also in subfamily III a signal sequence was detected. Several here analyzed peroxidase genes mainly from Candida albicans and from Rhizopus oryzae can be considered interesting for the investigation of the structure-function relationship of novel CcPs revealing differences to the well documented properties of cytochrome c peroxidase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

CcP: !belongs to! peroxidase superfamily 
CcP: !evolved from! primordial heme peroxidase gene 
CcP: !reveals differences to! S. cerevisiae CcP 
CcP: !has three conserved regions! essential for function 
CcP: !has conserved sequence motifs! responsible for reactivity 
CcP: !exhibits distinct subfamilies! revealed by phylogenetic analysis 
CcP: !possesses signal sequence! allowing processing and release 
CcP: !differs significantly in N-terminal sequences! between subfamilies