The defining features of any cropping system are (i) the crop rotation and (ii) the kind or intensity of tillage. The trend worldwide starting in the late 20th century has been (i) to specialize competitively in the production of two, three, a single, or closely related crops such as different market classes of wheat and barley, and (ii) to use direct seeding, also known as no-till, to cut costs and save soil, time, and fuel. The availability of glyphosate- and insect-resistant varieties of soybeans, corn, cotton, and canola has helped greatly to address weed and insect pest pressures favored by direct seeding these crops. However, little has been done through genetics and breeding to address diseases caused by residue- and soil-inhabiting pathogens that remain major obstacles to wider adoption of these potentially more productive and sustainable systems. Instead, the gains have been due largely to innovations in management, including enhancement of root defense by antibiotic-producing rhizosphere-inhabiting bacteria inhibitory to root pathogens. Historically, new varieties have facilitated wider adoption of new management, and changes in management have facilitated wider adoption of new varieties. Although actual yields may be lower in direct-seed compared with conventional cropping systems, largely due to diseases, the yield potential is higher because of more available water and increases in soil organic matter. Achieving the full production potential of these more-sustainable cropping systems must now await the development of varieties adapted to or resistant to the hazards shown to account for the yield depressions associated with direct seeding.

Crop rotation: !affects! Kind/intensity of tillage 
Glyphosate-resistant varieties: !facilitate! Weed/insect pest pressures 
Genetics/breeding: !little done to address! Diseases caused by residue-/soil-inhabiting pathogens 
New varieties: !facilitate! Wider adoption of new management 
Changes in management: !facilitate! Wider adoption of new varieties 
Direct-seed systems: !lower yields due to! Diseases 
Yield potential: !higher due to! More available water/increases in soil organic matter 
Full production potential: !awaits! Varieties adapted/resistant to hazards