['17135235', 'Protoporphyrin IX is the last common intermediate between the heme and  chlorophyll biosynthesis pathways. The addition of magnesium directs this  molecule toward chlorophyll biosynthesis. The first step downstream from the  branchpoint is catalyzed by the magnesium chelatase and is a highly regulated  process. The corresponding product, magnesium protoporphyrin IX, has been  proposed to play an important role as a signaling molecule implicated in  plastid-to-nucleus communication. To get more information on the chlorophyll  biosynthesis pathway and on magnesium protoporphyrin IX derivative functions, we  have identified an magnesium protoporphyrin IX methyltransferase (CHLM) knock-out  mutant in Arabidopsis in which the mutation induces a blockage downstream from  magnesium protoporphyrin IX and an accumulation of this chlorophyll biosynthesis  intermediate. Our results demonstrate that the CHLM gene is essential for the  formation of chlorophyll and subsequently for the formation of photosystems I and  II and cytochrome b6f complexes. Analysis of gene expression in the chlm mutant  provides an independent indication that magnesium protoporphyrin IX is a negative  effector of nuclear photosynthetic gene expression, as previously reported.  Moreover, it suggests the possible implication of magnesium protoporphyrin IX  methyl ester, the product of CHLM, in chloroplast-to-nucleus signaling. Finally,  post-transcriptional up-regulation of the level of the CHLH subunit of the  magnesium chelatase has been detected in the chlm mutant and most likely  corresponds to specific accumulation of this protein inside plastids. This result  suggests that the CHLH subunit might play an important regulatory role when the  chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway is disrupted at this particular step.', '2007 Jan 26', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M610286200', 'Block']

Protoporphyrin IX: !directs towards! chlorophyll biosynthesis 
Magnesium chelatase: !catalyzes! first step downstream 
Magnesium protoporphyrin IX: !implicated in! plastid-to-nucleus communication 
CHLM gene: !essential for! formation of chlorophyll 
Magnesium protoporphyrin IX: !negative effector of! nuclear photosynthetic gene expression 
Magnesium protoporphyrin IX methyl ester: !implication in! chloroplast-to-nucleus signaling 
CHLH subunit: !accumulates inside! plastids 
CHLH subunit: !plays regulatory role! when chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway disrupted