In the phosphorelay-mediated cytokinin signal transduction of Arabidopsis thaliana, certain members of the type-B authentic response regulator (ARR) family are implicated in the regulatory networks that are primarily propagated by the cytokinin-receptors [authentic histidine kinases (AHKs)]. Clarification of the involvement of each type-B ARR transcription factor in cytokinin-responsive phenomena is still at a very early stage. Here we analyzed the redundant function of two type-B ARR genes, ARR10 and ARR12, by constructing an arr10/arr12 double mutant. The resulting mutant plants showed stronger phenotypes with special reference to the cytokinin action in roots (e.g. inhibition of root elongation, green callus formation from root explants) than those for each single mutant, suggesting that ARR10 and ARR12 redundantly play an important role in the cytokinin signaling in roots. This idea was further supported by results from root-specific microarray analyses with the double mutant plant. We also showed that ARR10 and ARR12 are involved in the AHK-dependent signaling pathway that negatively regulates protoxylem specification in root vascular tissues. When the double mutant is combined with an arr1 allele, the resultant arr1/arr10/arr12 triple mutant showed phenotypes displaying a very poor growth, quite similar to those of the wooden leg (wol) mutant that virtually lacks cytokinin receptor activities in plants. In this triple arr mutant, the specification of root vascular tissues is also affected as severely as in wol. Taken together, we propose that ARR10 and ARR12, together with ARR1, redundantly play pivotal roles in the AHK-dependent phosphorelay signaling in response to cytokinin in roots.

ARR10: !redundantly plays! important role in cytokinin signaling
ARR12: !redundantly plays! important role in cytokinin signaling
ARR10/ARR12: !inhibit! root elongation
ARR10/ARR12: !form! green callus from root explants
ARR10/ARR12: !involved in! AHK-dependent signaling pathway
ARR1/ARR10/ARR12: !affects! protoxylem specification
ARR1/ARR10/ARR12: !similar to! wooden leg mutant