Pathogen infection leads to defence induction as well as to changes in carbohydrate metabolism of plants. Salicylic acid and oxylipins are involved in the induction of defence, but it is not known if these signalling molecules also mediate changes in carbohydrate metabolism. In this study, the effect of application of salicylic acid and the oxylipins 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid (OPDA) and jasmonic acid on photosynthesis was investigated by kinetic chlorophyll fluorescence imaging and compared with the effects of infection by virulent and avirulent strains of Pseudomonas syringae. Both pathogen strains and OPDA caused a similar change in fluorescence parameters of leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana. The response to OPDA appeared faster compared with that to the pathogens and persisted only for a short time. Infiltration with jasmonic acid or salicylic acid did not lead to a localized and distinct fluorescence response of the plant. To capture the faint early symptoms of the plant response, a novel algorithm was applied identifying the unique fluorescence signature-the set of images that, when combined, yield the highest contrast between control and infected leaf segments. Unlike conventional fluorescence parameters, this non-biased approach indeed detected the infection as early as 6 h after inoculation with bacteria. It was posssible to identify distinct fluorescence signatures characterizing the early and late phases of the infection. Fluorescence signatures of both infection phases were found in leaves infiltrated with OPDA.

Pathogen: !induces! Defence
Salicylic acid: !induces! Defence
Oxylipins: !induces! Defence
Pathogen: !causes! Change in carbohydrate metabolism
OPDA: !causes! Change in carbohydrate metabolism
Jasmonic acid: !causes! Change in carbohydrate metabolism
Salicylic acid: !causes! Change in carbohydrate metabolism
Pathogen: !leads to! Fluorescence response
OPDA: !leads to! Fluorescence response
Jasmonic acid: !leads to! Fluorescence response
Algorithm: !identifies! Unique fluorescence signature
Infection: !detected by! Algorithm