['17158605', 'The tonoplast monosaccharide transporter (TMT) family comprises three isoforms in  Arabidopsis thaliana, and TMT-green fluorescent protein fusion proteins are  targeted to the vacuolar membrane. TMT promoter-beta-glucuronidase plants  revealed that the TONOPLAST MONOSACCHARIDE TRANSPORTER1 (TMT1) and TMT2 genes  exhibit a tissue- and cell type-specific expression pattern, whereas TMT3 is only  weakly expressed. TMT1 and TMT2 expression is induced by drought, salt, and cold  treatments and by sugar. During cold adaptation, tmt knockout lines accumulated  less glucose and fructose compared with wild-type plants, whereas no differences  were observed for sucrose. Cold adaptation of wild-type plants substantially  promoted glucose uptake into isolated leaf mesophyll vacuoles. Glucose uptake  into isolated vacuoles was inhibited by NH(4)(+), fructose, and phlorizin,  indicating that transport is energy-dependent and that both glucose and fructose  were taken up by the same carrier. Glucose import into vacuoles from two  cold-induced tmt1 knockout lines or from triple knockout plants was substantially  lower than into corresponding wild-type vacuoles. Monosaccharide feeding into  leaf discs revealed the strongest response to sugar in tmt1 knockout lines  compared with wild-type plants, suggesting that TMT1 is required for cytosolic  glucose homeostasis. Our results indicate that TMT1 is involved in vacuolar  monosaccharide transport and plays a major role during stress responses.', '2006 Dec', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.106.047290', 'Neuhaus']

TMT1: !induces! expression 
TMT1: !promotes! glucose uptake 
TMT1: !required for! cytosolic glucose homeostasis 
TMT2: !exhibits! tissue- and cell type-specific expression pattern 
TMT2: !induced by! drought, salt, cold treatments and sugar 
TMT3: !weakly expressed! 
knockout lines: !accumulate less! glucose and fructose 
knockout lines: !strongest response to! sugar 
wild-type plants: !promote! glucose uptake into isolated leaf mesophyll vacuoles 
isolated vacuoles: !inhibited by! NH(4)(+), fructose, phlorizin