Plant embryo development is regulated by a network of transcription factors that include LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), LEC1-LIKE (L1L), and B3 domain factors, LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2), FUSCA3 (FUS3), and ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 3 (ABI3) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Interactions of these genes result in temporal progression of overlapping B3 gene expression culminating in maturation and desiccation of the seed. Three VP1/ABI3-LIKE (VAL) genes encode B3 proteins that include plant homeodomain-like and CW domains associated with chromatin factors. Whereas val monogenic mutants have phenotypes similar to wild type, val1 val2 double-mutant seedlings form no leaves and develop embryo-like proliferations in root and apical meristem regions. In a val1 background, val2 and val3 condition a dominant variegated leaf phenotype revealing a VAL function in vegetative development. Reminiscent of the pickle (pkl) mutant, inhibition of gibberellin biosynthesis during germination induces embryonic phenotypes in val1 seedlings. Consistent with the embryonic seedling phenotype, LEC1, L1L, ABI3, and FUS3 are up-regulated in val1 val2 seedlings in association with a global shift in gene expression to a profile resembling late-torpedo-stage embryogenesis. Hence, VAL factors function as global repressors of the LEC1/B3 gene system. The consensus binding site of the ABI3/FUS3/LEC2 B3 DNA-binding domain (Sph/RY) is strongly enriched in the promoters and first introns of VAL-repressed genes, including the early acting LEC1 and L1L genes. We suggest that VAL targets Sph/RY-containing genes in the network for chromatin-mediated repression in conjunction with the PKL-related CHD3 chromatin-remodeling factors.

LEC1: !regulates! Plant embryo development
L1L: !regulates! Plant embryo development
FUS3: !regulates! Plant embryo development
ABI3: !regulates! Plant embryo development
VAL: !represses! LEC1/B3 gene system
Sph/RY: !enriched in! VAL-repressed genes
PKL: !related to! CHD3 chromatin-remodeling factors