We report on the early response of Arabidopsis thaliana to the obligate biotrophic pathogen Plasmodiophora brassicae at the hormone and proteome level. Using a CYCB1;1::GUS construct, the re-initiation of infection-related cell division is shown from 4 days after inoculation on. Sensitivity to cytokinins and auxins as well as the endogenous hormone levels are evaluated. Both an enhanced cytokinin gene response and an accumulation of isopentenyl adenine and adenosine precede this re-initiation of cell division, whereas an enhanced auxin gene response is observed from 6 days after inoculation on. The alhl mutant, impaired in the cross talk between ethylene and auxins, is resistant to P. brassicae. A differential protein analysis of infected versus noninfected roots and hypocotyls was performed using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and quantitative image analysis, coupled to matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight-time of flight mass spectrometry-based protein identification. Of the visualized proteins, 12% show altered abundance compared with the noninfected plants, including proteins involved in metabolism, cell defense, cell differentiation, and detoxification. Combining the hormone and proteome data, we postulate that, at the very first stages of Plasmodiophora infection, plasmodial-produced cytokinins trigger a local re-initiation of cell division in the root cortex. Consequently, a de novo meristematic area is established that acts as a sink for host-derived indole-3-acetic acid, carbohydrates, nitrogen, and energy to maintain the pathogen and to trigger gall development.

CYCB1;1::GUS: !affects! infection-related cell division
Sensitivity to cytokinins and auxins: !affects! re-initiation of cell division
alhl mutant: !impaired in! cross talk between ethylene and auxins
Proteins: !involved in! metabolism, cell defense, cell differentiation, detoxification
Cytokinins: !trigger! local re-initiation of cell division
Meristematic area: !acts as a sink for! host-derived indole-3-acetic acid, carbohydrates, nitrogen, energy