['17151019', 'To better understand the mechanisms governing cellular traffic, storage of  various metabolites, and their ultimate degradation, Arabidopsis thaliana vacuole  proteomes were established. To this aim, a procedure was developed to prepare  highly purified vacuoles from protoplasts isolated from Arabidopsis cell cultures  using Ficoll density gradients. Based on the specific activity of the vacuolar  marker alpha-mannosidase, the enrichment factor of the vacuoles was estimated at  approximately 42-fold with an average yield of 2.1%. Absence of significant  contamination by other cellular compartments was validated by Western blot using  antibodies raised against specific markers of chloroplasts, mitochondria, plasma  membrane, and endoplasmic reticulum. Based on these results, vacuole preparations  showed the necessary degree of purity for proteomics study. Therefore, a  proteomics approach was developed to identify the protein components present in  both the membrane and soluble fractions of the Arabidopsis cell vacuoles. This  approach includes the following: (i) a mild oxidation step leading to the  transformation of cysteine residues into cysteic acid and methionine to  methionine sulfoxide, (ii) an in-solution proteolytic digestion of very  hydrophobic proteins, and (iii) a prefractionation of proteins by short migration  by SDS-PAGE followed by analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass  spectrometry. This procedure allowed the identification of more than 650  proteins, two-thirds of which copurify with the membrane hydrophobic fraction and  one-third of which copurifies with the soluble fraction. Among the 416 proteins  identified from the membrane fraction, 195 were considered integral membrane  proteins based on the presence of one or more predicted transmembrane domains,  and 110 transporters and related proteins were identified (91 putative  transporters and 19 proteins related to the V-ATPase pump). With regard to  function, about 20% of the proteins identified were known previously to be  associated with vacuolar activities. The proteins identified are involved in ion  and metabolite transport (26%), stress response (9%), signal transduction (7%),  and metabolism (6%) or have been described to be involved in typical vacuolar  activities, such as protein and sugar hydrolysis. The subcellular localization of  several putative vacuolar proteins was confirmed by transient expression of green  fluorescent protein fusion constructs.', '2007 Mar', 'Mol Cell Proteomics', '10.1074/mcp.M600250-MCP200', 'Bourguignon']

Gene: !affects! Cellular traffic
Gene: !affects! Metabolite storage
Gene: !affects! Metabolite degradation
Gene: !localizes to! Vacuole
Gene: !synthesizes! Alpha-mannosidase
Gene: !enhances! Vacuolar marker activity
Gene: !represses! Contamination by other cellular compartments
Gene: !interacts with! Chloroplasts
Gene: !interacts with! Mitochondria
Gene: !interacts with! Plasma membrane
Gene: !interacts with! Endoplasmic reticulum
Gene: !synthesizes! Cysteic acid
Gene: !synthesizes! Methionine sulfoxide
Gene: !enhances! Proteomics study
Gene: !synthesizes! Transmembrane domains
Gene: !synthesizes! Transporters
Gene: !synthesizes! V-ATPase pump
Gene: !affects! Ion transport
Gene: !affects! Metabolite transport
Gene: !affects! Stress response
Gene: !affects! Signal transduction
