['17169919', "Methionine gamma-lyase (MGL) catalyzes the degradation of L-methionine to  alpha-ketobutyrate, methanethiol and ammonia. The Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) genome includes a single gene (At1g64660) encoding a protein (AtMGL)  with approximately 35% identity to bacterial and protozoan MGLs. When  overexpressed in Escherichia coli, AtMGL allowed growth on L-methionine as sole  nitrogen source and conferred a high rate of methanethiol emission. The purified  recombinant protein exhibited a spectrum typical of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate  enzymes, and had high activity toward l-methionine, L-ethionine, L-homocysteine  and seleno-L-methionine, but not L-cysteine. Quantitation of mRNA showed that the  AtMGL gene is expressed in aerial organs and roots, and that its expression in  leaves was increased 2.5-fold by growth on low sulfate medium. Emission of  methanethiol from Arabidopsis plants supplied with 10 mM L-methionine was  undetectable (<0.5 nmol min(-1) g(-1) FW), suggesting that AtMGL is not an  important source of volatile methanethiol. Knocking out the AtMGL gene  significantly increased leaf methionine content (9.2-fold) and leaf and root  S-methylmethionine content (4.7- and 7-fold, respectively) under conditions of  sulfate starvation, indicating that AtMGL carries a significant flux in vivo. In  Arabidopsis plantlets fed L-[(35)S]methionine on a low sulfate medium, label was  incorporated into protein-bound cysteine as well as methionine, but incorporation  into cysteine was significantly (30%) less in the knockout mutant. These data  indicate that plants possess an alternative to the reverse trans-sulfuration  pathway (methionine-->homocysteine-->cystathionine-->cysteine) in which  methanethiol is an intermediate.", '2007 Feb', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcl055', 'Hanson']

AtMGL: !catalyzes! degradation of L-methionine 
AtMGL: !overexpressed in! Escherichia coli 
AtMGL: !expressed in! aerial organs and roots 
AtMGL: !increased expression in! leaves 
AtMGL: !knocked out! increased leaf methionine content 
AtMGL: !knocked out! increased leaf S-methylmethionine content 
AtMGL: !fed with! L-[(35)S]methionine 
AtMGL: !incorporates into! protein-bound cysteine 
AtMGL: !knocked out! decreased incorporation into cysteine