High mobility group B (HMGB) proteins found in the nuclei of higher eukaryotes play roles in various cellular processes such as replication, transcription and nucleosome assembly. The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains eight genes encoding HMGB proteins, the functions of which remain largely unknown in the transcriptional regulation of plant stress responses. To understand better the functions of HMGB proteins in the responses of plants to environmental stimuli, we examined the effect of various abiotic stresses on germination and growth of transgenic Arabidopsis plants that overexpress a single isoform of HMGB. The expression of HMGB2, HMGB3 and HMGB4 was up-regulated by cold stress, whereas the expression of HMGB2 and HMGB3 was markedly down-regulated by drought or salt stress. Under salt or drought stress, the transgenic Arabidopsis plants that overexpress HMGB2 displayed retarded germination and subsequent growth compared with wild-type plants. Overexpression of HMGB4 had no impact on seed germination and seedling growth of the plants under the stress conditions tested. In contrast to no significant stress-related phenotypes of HMGB5-overexpressing plants, loss-of-function mutants of HMGB5 displayed retarded germination and subsequent growth compared with wild-type plants under stress conditions. Although transcript levels of various stress-responsive genes were not modulated by the expression of HMGB2, expression of several germination-responsive genes was modulated by HMGB2 under salt stress. Taken together, these results provide a novel basis for understanding the biological functions of HMGB protein family members that differently affect germination and seedling growth of Arabidopsis plants under various stress conditions.

HMGB2: !up-regulated by! cold stress
HMGB2: !down-regulated by! drought or salt stress
HMGB2: !retards! germination and growth of transgenic Arabidopsis plants
HMGB4: !no impact on! seed germination and seedling growth
HMGB5: !retards! germination and growth of loss-of-function mutants
HMGB2: !modulates! expression of germination-responsive genes under salt stress