['17172287', 'The biosynthesis of jasmonic acid (JA) in plant peroxisomes requires the action  of acyl-coenzyme A oxidase (ACX). Among the five expressed members (ACX1-5) of  the ACX gene family in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), only ACX1 is known to  serve a role in JA production. Here, we used transgenic promoter-reporter lines  to show that ACX1 is highly expressed in mature and germinating pollen, stem  epidermal cells, and other tissues in which jasmonate-signaled processes occur.  Wound-induced JA accumulation was reduced in a mutant that is defective in ACX1  and was abolished in a mutant that is impaired in both ACX1 and its closely  related paralog, ACX5. The severe JA deficiency in acx1/5 double mutants was  accompanied by decreased resistance to the leaf-eating insect Trichoplusia ni.  The double mutant also showed reduced pollen viability and fecundity. Treatment  of acx1/5 plants with JA restored both protection against T. ni larvae and normal  seed set. Unexpectedly, acx1/5 plants accumulated JA in response to infection by  the necrotrophic fungal pathogen Alternaria brassicicola. In contrast to mutants  that are impaired in jasmonate perception or early steps of the JA biosynthetic  pathway, acx1/5 plants maintained resistance to A. brassicicola infection. These  results indicate that ACX1/5-mediated JA synthesis is essential for resistance to  chewing insects and male reproductive function and further suggest that other ACX  isozymes contribute to JA production in response to A. brassicicola challenge.  Thus, different types of biotic stress may induce JA synthesis via distinct  enzymatic routes.', '2007 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.106.092916', 'Howe']

ACX1: !affects! JA production 
ACX1: !localizes to! mature and germinating pollen, stem epidermal cells 
ACX1/5: !represses! wound-induced JA accumulation 
ACX1/5: !reduces! resistance to Trichoplusia ni 
ACX1/5: !decreases! pollen viability and fecundity 
ACX1/5: !accumulates! JA in response to Alternaria brassicicola infection