['17189287', 'The late-flowering phenotype of dominant fwa mutants is caused by hypomethylation  in the FWA locus leading to ectopic expression of a homeodomain leucine zipper  (HD-ZIP) protein. However, little is known about whether FWA has any role in  regulation of flowering and how ectopically expressed FWA delays flowering.  Through analysis of FWA expression in wild-type seedlings, it was shown that FWA  is not expressed during the vegetative phase. This suggests that FWA has no role  in flowering. The previous reports that fwa suppressed the precocious-flowering  phenotype of plants overexpressing FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) suggest that the  flowering pathway(s) either at and/or downstream of FT is blocked by FWA.  Comparison of gene expression profiles in three genetic backgrounds ectopically  expressing FWA and their respective wild types failed to detect common changes,  ruling out the possibility that FWA acts through transcriptional misregulation.  Yeast two-hybrid analysis and in vitro pull-down assay showed that FWA protein  can specifically interact with FT protein. The importance of protein interaction  with FT in delaying flowering was supported by studies involving N-terminal and  C-terminal truncations of FWA. The C-terminal truncation with abolished  interaction did not delay flowering when overexpressed, while the N-terminal  truncation, which retains interaction, did. Specific interaction of FWA with FT  enabled us to use FWA protein as a specific inhibitor of FT protein function.  Through tissue-specific ectopic expression of FWA, further support for the shoot  apex being the site of action of FT protein was provided.', '2007 Feb', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcl061', 'Araki']

FWA: !causes! late-flowering phenotype 
FWA: !expresses in! wild-type seedlings 
FWA: !suppresses! precocious-flowering phenotype 
FWA: !interacts with! FT protein 
FT protein: !blocks! flowering pathway 
FWA protein: !inhibits! FT protein function 
FT protein: !acts at! shoot apex