The vacuolar H(+)-ATPase (V-ATPase) is a key enzyme that controls the electrochemical proton potential across endomembranes. Although evidence suggests that V-ATPase is important for photo-morphogenesis, little is known about short-term regulation of V-ATPase upon initiation of the photo-morphogenetic programme by exposure of dark-grown plants to light. In this study, etiolated coleoptiles were given a short blue light treatment and V-ATPase characteristics were determined. The effectiveness of the light treatment was assessed by means of fusicoccin binding to the plasma membrane; this increased 5-fold. The short light treatment also induced a 2-fold to 3-fold increase in the hydrolytic activity of V-ATPase. Members of the 14-3-3 protein family are involved in both blue light perception and the subsequent activation of the P-type ATPase. We provide evidence that 14-3-3 proteins specifically interact with the catalytic A-subunit of the V-ATPase. First, the isolated V1-part of the V-ATPase co-purifies with 14-3-3 on a gel filtration column. Secondly, in an overlay experiment, 14-3-3 interacts with a 68 kDa band that was identified as the V1 A-subunit by mass spectrometry. Thirdly, in 14-3-3 affinity chromatography, both A- and B-subunits of the catalytic moiety of the V-ATPase were identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization tandem time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI TOF/TOF MS) as 14-3-3-interacting proteins. It was shown that the A-subunit can be phosphorylated in vitro by a tonoplast-bound kinase, whose properties are affected by blue light. Taken together, the data show that besides the P- and F-type H(+)-ATPases, the V-type H(+)-ATPase also interacts with 14-3-3 proteins.

V-ATPase: !controls! electrochemical proton potential
Blue light: !induces! V-ATPase activity
14-3-3 proteins: !involved in! blue light perception
14-3-3 proteins: !interacts with! V1 A-subunit
V1 A-subunit: !phosphorylated by! tonoplast-bound kinase
Tonoplast-bound kinase: !affected by! blue light