Monosymmetry evolved several times independently during flower evolution. In snapdragon (Antirrhinum majus), a key gene for monosymmetry is CYCLOIDEA (CYC), which belongs to the class II TCP gene family encoding transcriptional activators. We address the questions of the evolutionary history of this gene family and of possible recruitment of genes homologous to CYC in floral development and symmetry in the Papaveraceae. Two to three members of the class II TCP family were found in each species analyzed, two of which were CYC-like genes, on the basis of the presence of both the TCP and R conserved domains. The duplication that gave rise to these two paralogous lineages (named PAPACYL1 and PAPACYL2) probably predates the divergence of the two main clades within the Papaveraceae. Phylogenetic relationships among angiosperm class II TCP genes indicated that (1) PAPACYL genes were closest to Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) AtTCP18, and a duplication at the base of the core eudicot would have given rise to two supplementary CYC-like lineages; and (2) at least three class II TCP genes were present in the ancestor of monocots and eudicots. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and in situ hybridization approaches in three species with different floral symmetry indicated that both PAPACYL paralogs were expressed during floral development. A pattern common to all three species was observed at organ junctions in inflorescences and flowers. Expression in the outer petals was specifically observed in the two species with nonactinomorphic flowers. Hypotheses concerning the ancestral pattern of expression and function of CYC-like genes and their possible role in floral development of Papaveraceae species leading to bisymmetric buds are discussed.

CYC: !belongs to! class II TCP gene family 
PAPACYL1/2: !duplicated from! CYC 
AtTCP18: !related to! PAPACYL genes 
PAPACYL genes: !expressed during! floral development 
PAPACYL genes: !specifically expressed in! outer petals