Ammonium is a central intermediate in the nitrogen metabolism of plants. We have previously shown that methyl jasmonate (MJ) not only increases the content of H(2)O(2), but also causes NH(4)(+) accumulation in rice leaves. More recently, H(2)O(2) is thought to constitute a general signal molecule participating in the recognition of and the response to stress factors. In this study, we examined the role of H(2)O(2) as a link between MJ and subsequent NH(4)(+) accumulation in detached rice leaves. MJ treatment resulted in an accumulation of NH(4)(+) in detached rice leaves, which was preceded by a decrease in the activity of glutamine synthetase (GS) and an increase in the specific activities of protease and phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL). GS, PAL, and protease appear to be the enzymes responsible for the accumulation of NH(4)(+) in MJ-treated detached rice leaves. Dimethylthiourea (DMTU), a chemical trap for H(2)O(2), was observed to be effective in inhibiting MJ-induced NH(4)(+) accumulation in detached rice leaves. Scavengers of free radicals (sodium benzoate, SB, and glutathione, GSH), nitric oxide donor (N-tert-butyl-alpha-phenylnitrone, PBN), the inhibitors of NADPH oxidase (diphenyleneiodonium chloride, DPI, and imidazole, IMD), and inhibitors of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (wortmannin, WM, and LY 294002, LY), which have previously been shown to prevent MJ-induced H(2)O(2) production in detached rice leaves, inhibited MJ-induced NH(4)(+) accumulation. Similarly, changes in enzymes responsible for NH(4)(+) accumulation induced by MJ were observed to be inhibited by DMTU, SB, GSH, PBN DPI, IMD, WM, or LY. Seedlings of rice cultivar Taichung Native 1 (TN1) are jasmonic acid (JA)-sensitive and those of cultivar Tainung 67 (TNG67) are JA-insensitive. On treatment with JA, H(2)O(2) accumulated in the leaves of TN1 seedlings but not in the leaves of TNG67. Ethylene action inhibitor, silver thiosulfate, was observed to inhibit MJ- and abscisic acid-induced accumulation of NH(4)(+) and changes in enzymes responsible for NH(4)(+) accumulation in detached rice leaves, suggesting that the action of MJ and ABA is ethylene dependent.

Methyl jasmonate: !increases! H(2)O(2)
Glutamine synthetase: !decreases! activity
Protease: !increases! specific activity
Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase: !increases! specific activity
H(2)O(2): !links! MJ and NH(4)(+) accumulation
Dimethylthiourea: !inhibits! MJ-induced NH(4)(+) accumulation
Scavengers of free radicals: !inhibit! MJ-induced NH(4)(+) accumulation
Inhibitors of NADPH oxidase: !inhibit! MJ-induced NH(4)(+) accumulation
Inhibitors of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase: !inhibit! MJ-induced NH(4)(+) accumulation
Jasmonic acid: !accumulates! H(2)O(2) in TN1 seedlings
Silver thiosulfate: !inhibits! MJ- and ABA-induced NH(4)(+) accumulation