Sugarcane (Saccharum spp.) is a highly efficient biomass and sugar producing crop. Leaf reactions have been considered as potential rate-limiting step for sucrose accumulation in sugarcane stalks. To characterize the sugarcane leaf transcriptome, field-grown mature leaves from cultivar "SP80-3280" were analyzed using Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE). From 480 sequenced clones, 9,482 valid tags were extracted, with 5,227 unique sequences, from which 3,659 (70%) matched at least a sugarcane assembled sequence (SAS) with putative function; while 872 tags (16.7%) matched SAS with unknown function; 523 (10%) matched SAS without a putative annotation; and only 173 (3.3%) did not match any sugarcane ESTs. Based on gene ontology (GO), photosystem (PS) I reaction center was identified as the most frequent gene product location, followed by the remaining sites of PS I, PS II and thylakoid complexes. For metabolic processes, photosynthesis light harvesting complexes; carbon fixation; and chlorophyll biosynthesis were the most enriched GO-terms. Considering the alternative photosynthetic C(4) cycles, tag frequencies related to phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and aspartate aminotransferase compared to those for NADP(+)-malic enzyme (NADP-ME) and NADP-malate dehydrogenase, suggested that PEPCK-type decarboxylation appeared to predominate over NADP-ME in mature leaves, although both may occur, opposite to currently assumed in sugarcane. From the unique tag set, 894 tags (17.1%) were assigned as potentially derived from antisense transcripts, while 73 tags (1.4%) were assigned to more than one SAS, suggesting the occurrence of alternative processing. The occurrence of antisense was validated by quantitative reverse transcription amplification. Sugarcane leaf transcriptome provided new insights for functional studies associated with sucrose synthesis and accumulation.

Photosystem I: !localizes to! Reaction Center 
Photosynthesis Light Harvesting Complexes: !enhances! Carbon Fixation 
PEPCK: !predominates over! NADP-ME 
Antisense Transcripts: !occurs in! Sugarcane Leaf