['17217465', 'The extrinsic photosystem II (PSII) protein of 33 kDa (PsbO), which stabilizes  the water-oxidizing complex, is represented in Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis)  by two isoforms. Two T-DNA insertion mutant lines deficient in either the PsbO1  or the PsbO2 protein were retarded in growth in comparison with the wild type,  while differing from each other phenotypically. Both PsbO proteins were able to  support the oxygen evolution activity of PSII, although PsbO2 was less efficient  than PsbO1 under photoinhibitory conditions. Prolonged high light stress led to  reduced growth and fitness of the mutant lacking PsbO2 as compared with the wild  type and the mutant lacking PsbO1. During a short period of treatment of detached  leaves or isolated thylakoids at high light levels, inactivation of PSII electron  transport in the PsbO2-deficient mutant was slowed down, and the subsequent  degradation of the D1 protein was totally inhibited. The steady-state levels of  in vivo phosphorylation of the PSII reaction centre proteins D1 and D2 were  specifically reduced in the mutant containing only PsbO2, in comparison with the  mutant containing only PsbO1 or with wild-type plants. Phosphorylation of PSII  proteins in vitro proceeded similarly in thylakoid membranes from both mutants  and wild-type plants. However, dephosphorylation of the D1 protein occurred much  faster in the thylakoids containing only PsbO2. We conclude that the function of  PsbO1 in Arabidopsis is mostly in support of PSII activity, whereas the  interaction of PsbO2 with PSII regulates the turnover of the D1 protein,  increasing its accessibility to the phosphatases and proteases involved in its  degradation.', '2007 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02976.x', 'Spetea']

PsbO1: !stabilizes! water-oxidizing complex 
PsbO2: !regulates! D1 protein turnover 
PsbO1: !supports! PSII activity 
PsbO2: !slows down! PSII inactivation 
PsbO2: !inhibits! D1 degradation 
PsbO2: !reduces! PSII phosphorylation 
PsbO2: !increases! D1 accessibility to phosphatases/proteases