['17217463', 'Plant defences require a multitude of tightly regulated resistance responses. In  Arabidopsis, the unique gain-of-function mutant suppressor of npr1-1 constitutive  1 (snc1) carries a point mutation in a Resistance (R)-gene, resulting in  constitutive activation of defence responses without interaction with pathogens.  This has allowed us to identify various downstream signalling components  essential in multiple defence pathways. One mutant that suppresses snc1-mediated  constitutive resistance is modifier of snc1 5 (mos5), which carries a 15-bp  deletion in UBA1, one of two ubiquitin-activating enzyme genes in Arabidopsis. A  mutation in UBA2 does not suppress snc1, suggesting that these two genes are not  equally required in Arabidopsis disease resistance. On the other hand, a mos5  uba2 double mutant is lethal, implying partial redundancy of the two homologues.  Apart from affecting snc1-mediated resistance, mos5 also exhibits enhanced  disease susceptibility to a virulent pathogen and is impaired in response to  infection with avirulent bacteria carrying the protease elicitor AvrRpt2. The  mos5 mutation in the C-terminus of UBA1 might affect binding affinity of the  downstream ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, thus perturbing ubiquitination of  target proteins. Furthermore, SGT1b and RAR1, which are necessary for resistance  conferred by the SNC1-related R-genes RPP4 and RPP5, are dispensable in  snc1-mediated resistance. Our data reveal the definite requirement for the  ubiquitination pathway in the activation and downstream signalling of several  R-proteins.', '2007 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02978.x', 'Li']

snc1: !constitutively activates! defence responses
mos5: !suppresses! snc1-mediated resistance
UBA1: !interacts with! UBA2
mos5: !enhances! disease susceptibility
UBA1: !affects binding affinity of! downstream ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes
SGT1b: !dispensable in! snc1-mediated resistance
RAR1: !dispensable in! snc1-mediated resistance
ubiquitination pathway: !required for! activation and downstream signalling of R-proteins