['17237354', 'Directional transport of the phytohormone auxin is established primarily at the  point of cellular efflux and is required for the establishment and maintenance of  plant polarity. Studies in whole plants and heterologous systems indicate that  PIN-FORMED (PIN) and P-glycoprotein (PGP) transport proteins mediate the cellular  efflux of natural and synthetic auxins. However, aromatic anion transport  resulting from PGP and PIN expression in nonplant systems was also found to lack  the high level of substrate specificity seen in planta. Furthermore, previous  reports that PGP19 stabilizes PIN1 on the plasma membrane suggested that PIN-PGP  interactions might regulate polar auxin efflux. Here, we show that PGP1 and PGP19  colocalized with PIN1 in the shoot apex in Arabidopsis thaliana and with PIN1 and  PIN2 in root tissues. Specific PGP-PIN interactions were seen in yeast two-hybrid  and coimmunoprecipitation assays. PIN-PGP interactions appeared to enhance  transport activity and, to a greater extent, substrate/inhibitor specificities  when coexpressed in heterologous systems. By contrast, no interactions between  PGPs and the AUXIN1 influx carrier were observed. Phenotypes of pin and pgp  mutants suggest discrete functional roles in auxin transport, but pin pgp mutants  exhibited phenotypes that are both additive and synergistic. These results  suggest that PINs and PGPs characterize coordinated, independent auxin transport  mechanisms but also function interactively in a tissue-specific manner.', '2007 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.106.040782', 'Murphy']

PIN: !mediates! auxin transport 
PGP: !mediates! auxin transport 
PIN: !interacts with! PGP 
PGP: !enhances! transport activity 
PIN: !localizes to! shoot apex 
PGP: !localizes to! shoot apex 
PIN: !localizes to! root tissues 
PGP: !localizes to! root tissues 
PIN: !synthesizes! polar auxin efflux 
PGP: !synthesizes! polar auxin efflux 
PIN: !represses! AUXIN1 influx carrier 
PGP: !represses! AUXIN1 influx carrier