Signals can be perceived and amplified at the cell membrane by receptors coupled to the production of a variety of second messengers, including myoinositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate [Ins(1,4,5)P(3)]. The myoinositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatases (5PTases; EC 3.1.3.56) comprise a large protein family that hydrolyzes 5-phosphates from a variety of myoinositol phosphate (InsP) and phosphoinositide phosphate (PtdInsP) substrates. Arabidopsis thaliana has 15 genes encoding 5PTases. Biochemical analyses of a subgroup of 5PTase enzymes suggest that these enzymes have both overlapping and unique substrate preferences. Ectopic expression of these genes in transgenic plants can reduce Ins(1,4,5)P(3) levels and alter abscisic acid (ABA) signaling. To further explore the function of 5PTases in signaling, we have identified and characterized T-DNA insertional mutants for 5PTase1 and 5PTase2 and produced a double mutant. When grown in the dark, the seeds from these mutants germinate faster than wild-type seeds and the mutant seedlings have longer hypocotyls than wild-type seedlings. Seeds from these mutant lines also demonstrate an increase in sensitivity to ABA. These changes in early seedling growth are accompanied by mass increases in Ins(1,4,5)P(3), but not by changes in endogenous ABA content. By labeling the endogenous myoinositol pool in 5ptase1 and 5ptase2 mutants, we detected increases in Ins(1,4,5)P(3) and a decrease in PtdIns, PtdIns(4)P, and phosphatidylinositol (4,5) bisphosphate. Taken together, these data indicate that the At5PTase1 and At5PTase2 genes have nonredundant roles in hydrolyzing inositol second-messenger substrates and that regulation of Ins(1,4,5)P(3) levels is important during germination and early seedling development.

Signals: !perceived and amplified! by receptors 
Receptors: !coupled to! production of second messengers 
5PTases: !hydrolyze! 5-phosphates from substrates 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !has! 15 genes encoding 5PTases 
Ectopic expression: !reduces! Ins(1,4,5)P(3) levels 
T-DNA insertional mutants: !identified and characterized! for 5PTase1 and 5PTase2 
Mutant seedlings: !have longer hypocotyls than! wild-type seedlings 
Mutant lines: !demonstrate increased sensitivity to! ABA 
Endogenous myoinositol pool: !labeled in! 5ptase1 and 5ptase2 mutants 
At5PTase1 and At5PTase2 genes: !have nonredundant roles in hydrolyzing! inositol second-messenger substrates