The Agrobacterium T-DNA oncogene 6b induces tumors and modifies the growth of transgenic plants by an unknown mechanism. We have investigated changes in roots of tobacco seedlings that express a dexamethasone-inducible T-6b (dex-T-6b) gene. On induction medium with sucrose, intact or isolated dex-T-6b roots accumulated sucrose, glucose, and fructose and changed their growth, contrary to noninduced roots. Root fragments bridging agar blocks with or without sucrose accumulated sugars at the site of sucrose uptake, resulting in local growth. Induced root fragments showed enhanced uptake of 14C-labeled sucrose, glucose, and fructose. When seedlings were placed on sucrose-free induction medium, sugar levels strongly decreased in roots and increased in cotyledons. Collectively, these results demonstrate that 6b stimulates sugar uptake and retention with drastic effects on growth. Apart from sugars, phenolic compounds also have been found to accumulate in 6b tissues and have been proposed earlier to play a role in 6b-induced growth. Induced dex-T-6b roots accumulated high levels of 5-caffeoylquinic acid (or chlorogenic acid [CGA]), but only under conditions where endogenous sugars increased. Inhibition of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase with the competitive inhibitor 2-aminoindan-2-phosphonic acid (AIP) abolished CGA accumulation without modifying sugar accumulation or affecting the 6b phenotype. We conclude that the absorption, retention, and abnormal accumulation of sugars are essential factors in 6b-induced growth changes, whereas phenylpropanoids only marginally contribute to the 6b seedling phenotype.

T-6b: !induces! Tumors 
T-6b: !modifies! Growth 
Sucrose: !accumulated by! T-6b Roots 
Glucose: !accumulated by! T-6b Roots 
Fructose: !accumulated by! T-6b Roots 
14C-Labeled Sucrose: !enhanced uptake of! T-6b Roots 
5-Caffeoylquinic Acid: !accumulated by! T-6b Roots 
AIP: !inhibits! CGA Accumulation 
Sugars: !essential for! 6b-Induced Growth Changes 
Phenylpropanoids: !marginally contribute to! 6b Seedling Phenotype