['17259290', 'Full-length cDNA corresponding to Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) gene  At2g31690, which has been annotated in GenBank as a putative triacylglycerol  (TAG) lipase, was obtained by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction  using RNA from senescing rosette leaves of Arabidopsis as a template. The cognate  protein was found to contain the lipase active site sequence, and corresponding  recombinant protein proved capable of deesterifying TAG. In vitro chloroplast  import assays indicated that the lipase is targeted to chloroplasts. This was  confirmed by confocal microscopy of rosette leaf tissue treated with fluorescein  isocyanate-labeled, lipase-specific antibody, which revealed that lipase protein  colocalizes with plastoglobular neutral lipids. Western-blot analysis indicated  that the lipase is expressed in roots, inflorescence stems, flowers, siliques,  and leaves and that it is strongly up-regulated in senescing rosette leaf tissue.  Transgenic plants with suppressed lipase protein levels were obtained by  expressing At2g31690 cDNA in antisense orientation under the regulation of a  constitutive promoter. Transgenic plants bolted and flowered at the same time as  wild-type plants, but were severely stunted and exhibited delayed rosette  senescence. Moreover, the stunted growth phenotype correlated with irregular  chloroplast morphology. The chloroplasts of transgenic plants were structurally  deformed, had reduced abundance of thylakoids that were abnormally stacked, and  contained more plastoglobular neutral lipids than chloroplasts of wild-type  plants. These observations collectively indicate that this TAG lipase plays a  role in maintaining the structural integrity of chloroplasts, possibly by  mobilizing the fatty acids of plastoglobular TAG.', '2007 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.106.090811', 'Thompson']

At2g31690: !encodes! TAG lipase 
TAG lipase: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
TAG lipase: !up-regulated in! senescing rosette leaf tissue 
At2g31690: !suppressed in! transgenic plants 
transgenic plants: !exhibit! stunted growth 
transgenic plants: !have! irregular chloroplast morphology 
TAG lipase: !plays a role in! maintaining structural integrity of chloroplasts