['17259265', 'Phospholipase D (PLD) and its product, phosphatidic acid (PA), play key roles in  cellular processes, including stress and hormonal responses, vesicle trafficking,  and cytoskeletal rearrangements. We isolated and functionally characterized  Arabidopsis thaliana PLDzeta2, which is expressed in various tissues and enhanced  by auxin. A PLDzeta2-defective mutant, pldzeta2, and transgenic plants deficient  in PLDzeta2 were less sensitive to auxin, had reduced root gravitropism, and  suppressed auxin-dependent hypocotyl elongation at 29 degrees C, whereas  transgenic seedlings overexpressing PLDzeta2 showed opposite phenotypes,  suggesting that PLDzeta2 positively mediates auxin responses. Studies on the  expression of auxin-responsive genes and observation of the beta-glucuronidase  (GUS) expression in crosses between pldzeta2 and lines containing DR5-GUS  indicated that PLDzeta2, or PA, stimulated auxin responses. Observations of the  membrane-selective dye FM4-64 showed suppressed vesicle trafficking under  PLDzeta2 deficiency or by treatment with 1-butanol, a PLD-specific inhibitor. By  contrast, vesicle trafficking was enhanced by PA or PLDzeta2 overexpression.  Analyses of crosses between pldzeta2 and lines containing PIN-FORMED2  (PIN2)-enhanced green fluorescent protein showed that PLDzeta2 deficiency had no  effect on the localization of PIN2 but blocked the inhibition of brefeldin A on  PIN2 cycling. These results suggest that PLDzeta2 and PA are required for the  normal cycling of PIN2-containing vesicles as well as for function in auxin  transport and distribution, and hence auxin responses.', '2007 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.106.041426', 'Xue']

PLDzeta2: !enhances! auxin responses 
PLDzeta2: !stimulates! auxin-responsive genes 
PLDzeta2: !mediates! root gravitropism 
PLDzeta2: !suppresses! hypocotyl elongation 
PLDzeta2: !blocks! inhibition of PIN2 cycling 
PA: !stimulates! auxin responses 
PA: !enhances! vesicle trafficking 
1-butanol: !inhibits! PLD 
brefeldin A: !inhibits! PIN2 cycling