['17253984', 'Jasmonates, potent lipid mediators of defense gene expression in plants, are  rapidly synthesized in response to wounding. These lipid mediators also stimulate  their own production via a positive feedback circuit, which depends on both JA  synthesis and JA signaling. To date, molecular components regulating the  activation of jasmonate biogenesis and its feedback loop have been poorly  characterized. We employed a genetic screen capable of detecting the misregulated  activity of 13-lipoxygenase, which operates at the entry point of the jasmonate  biosynthesis pathway. Leaf extracts from the Arabidopsis fou2 (fatty acid  oxygenation upregulated 2) mutant displayed an increased capacity to catalyze the  synthesis of lipoxygenase (LOX) metabolites. Quantitative oxylipin analysis  identified less than twofold increased jasmonate levels in healthy fou2 leaves  compared to wild-type; however, wounded fou2 leaves strongly increased jasmonate  biogenesis compared to wounded wild-type. Furthermore, the plants displayed  enhanced resistance to the fungus Botrytis cinerea. Higher than wild-type LOX  activity and enhanced resistance in the fou2 mutant depend fully on a functional  jasmonate response pathway. The fou2 mutant carries a missense mutation in the  putative voltage sensor of the Two Pore Channel 1 gene (TPC1), which encodes a  Ca(2+)-permeant non-selective cation channel. Patch-clamp analysis of fou2  vacuolar membranes showed faster time-dependent conductivity and activation of  the mutated channel at lower membrane potentials than wild-type. The results  indicate that cation fluxes exert strong control over the positive feedback loop  whereby JA stimulates its own synthesis.', '2007 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.03002.x', 'Farmer']

Jasmonates: !synthesize! in response to wounding
13-lipoxygenase: !operates at! entry point of jasmonate biosynthesis pathway
fou2 mutant: !displays! increased capacity to catalyze LOX metabolites
fou2 mutant: !identifies! less than twofold increased jasmonate levels
fou2 mutant: !enhances! resistance to Botrytis cinerea
LOX activity: !depends on! functional jasmonate response pathway
fou2 mutant: !carries! missense mutation in TPC1 gene
TPC1 gene: !encodes! Ca(2+)-permeant non-selective cation channel
fou2 vacuolar membranes: !show! faster time-dependent conductivity
cation fluxes: !exert control over! positive feedback loop