Phospholipase D (PLD) has been implicated in a variety of stresses including osmotic stress and wounding. PLDalpha1-derived phosphatidic acid interacts with ABI1 phosphatase 2C and promotes abscisic acid signalling. It has also been shown to regulate proline biosynthesis negatively. Plants with abrogated PLDalpha show insensitivity to abscisic acid (ABA) and impaired stomatal conductance. The goal in the present study was to identify early PLDalpha-mediated events in response to progressive drought stress in Arabidopsis. Water was withheld from 7-week-old Arabidopsis thaliana (Col-0) and antisense-PLDalpha1 (anti-PLDalpha) in a controlled environment chamber. Diurnal leaf water potential (LWP) and photosynthesis measurements were recorded five and three times a day, respectively. Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and microarray analyses were conducted using RNA from shoots collected at the fourth LWP time point on the ninth day after stress imposition. Anti-PLDalpha experienced severe water stress (-1.28 MPa) at the same time period that Col-0 experienced less water stress (-0.31 MPa). Diurnal LWP measurements showed that anti-PLDalpha had a lower LWP than Col-0 in both control and drought-stress conditions. Photosynthesis was also more affected in anti-PLDalpha than in Col-0. Anti-PLDalpha plants recovered fully following rehydration after 10 d of stress. qRT-PCR revealed up to 18-fold lower values for PLDalpha transcripts in stressed anti-PLDalpha plants when compared with stressed Col-0. Microarray expression profiles revealed distinct gene expression patterns in Col-0 and anti-PLDalpha. No differences in gene expression were detected between the two genotypes in the absence of drought stress. ROP8, PLDdelta, and lipid transfer proteins were among the differentially expressed genes between the two genotypes.

PLDalpha1: !interacts with! ABI1 phosphatase 2C 
PLDalpha1: !regulates! proline biosynthesis 
PLDalpha1: !affects! abscisic acid signalling 
PLDalpha1: !represses! stomatal conductance 
anti-PLDalpha: !experiences! severe water stress 
anti-PLDalpha: !has lower! leaf water potential 
anti-PLDalpha: !has more affected! photosynthesis 
qRT-PCR: !reveals! up to 18-fold lower values for PLDalpha transcripts 
microarray expression profiles: !reveal! distinct gene expression patterns 
Col-0 and anti-PLDalpha: !differ in! ROP8, PLDdelta, and lipid transfer proteins