Nonhost resistance as a durable and broad-spectrum defence strategy is of great potential for agricultural applications. We have previously isolated a cDNA showing homology with genes encoding bZIP transcription factors from tomato leaf mould pathogen Cladosporium fulvum. Upon expression, the cDNA results in necrosis in C. fulvum host tomato and nonhost tobacco plants and is thus named CfHNNI1 (for C . f ulvum host and nonhost plant necrosis inducer 1). In the present study we report the induction of necrosis in a variety of nonhost plant species belonging to three families by the transient in planta expression of CfHNNI1 using virus-based vectors. Additionally, transient expression of CfHNNI1 also induced expression of the HR marker gene LeHSR203 and greatly reduced the accumulation of recombinant Potato virus X. Stable CfHNNI1 transgenic tobacco plants were generated in which the expression of CfHNNI1 is under the control of the pathogen-inducible hsr203J promoter. When infected with the oomycetes pathogen Phytophthora parasitica var. nicotianae, these transgenic plants manifested enhanced expression of CfHNNI1 and subsequent accumulation of CfHNNI1 protein, resulting in high expression of the HSR203J and PR genes, and strong resistance to the pathogen. The CfHNNI1 transgenic plants also exhibited induced resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci and Tobacco mosaic virus. Furthermore, CfHNNI1 was highly expressed and the protein was translocated into plant cells during the incompatible interactions between C. fulvum and host and nonhost plants. Our results demonstrate that CfHNNI1 is a potential general elicitor of hypersensitive response and nonhost resistance.

CfHNNI1: !induces! Necrosis 
CfHNNI1: !induces! HR marker gene LeHSR203 
CfHNNI1: !reduces! Accumulation of recombinant Potato virus X 
CfHNNI1: !enhances! Expression of HSR203J and PR genes 
CfHNNI1: !confers! Resistance to Phytophthora parasitica var. nicotianae 
CfHNNI1: !confers! Resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci 
CfHNNI1: !confers! Resistance to Tobacco mosaic virus 
CfHNNI1: !localizes to! Plant cells