['17270015', 'Plasmodesmal conductivity is regulated in part by callose turnover, which is  hypothesized to be determined by beta-1,3-glucan synthase versus glucanase  activities. A proteomic analysis of an Arabidopsis thaliana plasmodesmata  (Pd)-rich fraction identified a beta-1,3-glucanase as present in this fraction.  The protein encoded by the putative plasmodesmal associated protein (ppap) gene,  termed AtBG_ppap, had previously been found to be a post-translationally modified  glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) lipid-anchored protein. When fused to green  fluorescent protein (GFP) and expressed in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) or  Nicotiana benthamiana epidermal cells, this protein displays fluorescence  patterns in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane system, along the cell  periphery and in a punctate pattern that co-localizes with aniline blue-stained  callose present around the Pd. Plasma membrane localization was verified by  co-localization of AtBG_ppap:GFP together with a plasma membrane marker  N-[3-triethylammoniumpropyl]-4-[p-diethylaminophenylhexatrienyl] pyridinium  dibromide (FM4-64) in plasmolysed cells. In Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion mutants  that do not transcribe AtBG_ppap, functional studies showed that GFP cell-to-cell  movement between epidermal cells is reduced, and the conductivity coefficient of  Pd is lower. Measurements of callose levels around Pd after wounding revealed  that callose accumulation in the mutant plants was higher. Taken together, we  suggest that AtBG_ppap is a Pd-associated membrane protein involved in  plasmodesmal callose degradation, and functions in the gating of Pd.', '2007 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02986.x', 'Epel']

beta-1,3-glucanase: !present in! Pd-rich fraction 
AtBG_ppap: !localizes to! ER membrane system 
AtBG_ppap: !co-localizes with! callose 
AtBG_ppap: !co-localizes with! plasma membrane marker 
AtBG_ppap: !reduces! GFP cell-to-cell movement 
AtBG_ppap: !lowers! conductivity coefficient of Pd 
AtBG_ppap: !increases! callose accumulation 
AtBG_ppap: !involved in! plasmodesmal callose degradation 
AtBG_ppap: !functions in! gating of Pd