Photoprotection mechanisms of rice plants were studied when its seedlings were subjected to the combined stress of water and high light. The imposition of water stress, induced by PEG 6000 which was applied to roots, resulted in substantial inhibition of stomatal conductance and net photosynthesis under all irradiance treatments. Under high light stress, the rapid decline of photosynthesis with the development of water stress was accompanied by decreases in the maximum velocity of RuBP carboxylation by Rubisco (V(cmax)), the capacity for ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate regeneration (J(max)), Rubisco and stromal FBPase activities, and the quantum efficiency of photosystem II, in the absence of any stomatal limitation of CO(2) supply. Water stress significantly reduced the energy flux via linear electron transport (J(PSII)), but increased light-dependent and DeltapH- and xanthophyll-mediated thermal dissipation (J(NPQ)). It is concluded that the drought-induced inhibition of photosynthesis under different irradiances in the rice was due to both diffusive and metabolic limitations. Metabolic limitation of photosynthesis may be related to the adverse effects of some metabolic processes and the oxidative damage to the chloroplast. Meanwhile, an enhanced thermal dissipation is an important process to minimize the adverse effects of drought and high irradiance when CO(2) assimilation is suppressed.

PEG 6000: !induces! Water Stress 
Water Stress: !inhibits! Stomatal Conductance 
Water Stress: !inhibits! Net Photosynthesis 
High Light Stress: !accelerates! Water Stress Inhibition 
V(cmax): !decreases! Under High Light Stress 
J(max): !decreases! Under High Light Stress 
Rubisco: !decreases! Under High Light Stress 
Stromal FBPase: !decreases! Under High Light Stress 
Quantum Efficiency of Photosystem II: !decreases! Under High Light Stress 
J(PSII): !decreases! Under Water Stress 
J(NPQ): !increases! Under Water Stress 
Metabolic Processes: !adversely affects! Photosynthesis 
Oxidative Damage: !adversely affects! Chloroplast 
Thermal Dissipation: !enhances! To Minimize Adverse Effects