['17314094', 'Glycosylation plays a major role in the remarkable chemical diversity of  flavonoids in plants including Arabidopsis thaliana. The wide diversity encoded  by the large family-1 glycosyltransferase (UGT) gene family makes it difficult to  determine the biochemical function of each gene solely from its primary sequence.  Here we used transcriptome coexpression analysis combined with a reverse genetics  approach to identify a gene that is prominent in determining the flavonoid  composition of Arabidopsis. Using transcriptome coexpression analysis accessible  on the ATTED-II public data base, the expression pattern of a UGT gene, UGT89C1,  was found to be highly correlated with known flavonoid biosynthetic genes. No C-7  rhamnosylated flavonols were detected in either of two T-DNA ugt89c1 mutants.  This specific metabolite deficiency in the mutants was complemented by stable  transformation with the genomic fragment containing intact UGT89C1. Glutathione  S-transferasefused recombinant UGT89C1 protein converted kaempferol 3-O-glucoside  to kaempferol 3-O-glucoside-7-O-rhamnoside and recognized 3-O-glycosylated  flavonols and UDP-rhamnose as substrates, but not flavonol aglycones,  3-O-glycosylated anthocyanins or other UDP-sugars. These results show that  UGT89C1 is a flavonol 7-O-rhamnosyltransferase. The abundance of UGT89C1  transcripts in floral buds was consistent with the flavonoid accumulation of C-7  rhamnosylated flavonols in Arabidopsis organs. Our present study demonstrates  that the integration of transcriptome coexpression analysis with a reverse  genetic approach is a versatile tool for understanding a multigene family of a  metabolic pathway in Arabidopsis.', '2007 May 18', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M611498200', 'Saito']

UGT89C1: !affects! Flavonoid composition 
UGT89C1: !synthesizes! Kaempferol 3-O-glucoside-7-O-rhamnoside 
UGT89C1: !recognizes! 3-O-glycosylated flavonols and UDP-rhamnose 
Transcriptome coexpression analysis: !identifies! UGT89C1 
Reverse genetics approach: !complements! Metabolite deficiency in mutants