['17319845', 'Alanine aminotransferase (AlaAT) catalyses the reversible transfer of an amino  group from glutamate to pyruvate to form 2-oxoglutarate and alanine. The  regulation of AlaAT in several plant species has been studied in response to  low-oxygen stress, light and nitrogen application. In this study, induction of  Arabidopsis AlaAT1 and AlaAT2 during hypoxia was observed at the transcriptional  level, and an increase in enzyme activity was detected in hypoxically treated  roots. In addition, the tissue-specific expression of AlaAT1 and AlaAT2 was  analysed using promoter:GUS fusions. The GUS staining patterns indicated that  both AlaAT genes are expressed predominantly in vascular tissues. We manipulated  AlaAT expression to determine the relative importance of this enzyme in  low-oxygen stress tolerance and nitrogen metabolism. This was done by analysing  T-DNA mutants and over-expressing barley AlaAT in Arabidopsis. The AlaAT1  knockout mutant (alaat1-1) showed a dramatic reduction in AlaAT activity,  suggesting that AlaAT1 is the major AlaAT isozyme in Arabidopsis. Over-expression  of barley AlaAT significantly increased the AlaAT activity in the transgenic  plants. These plants were analysed for metabolic changes over a period of hypoxic  stress and during their subsequent recovery. The results showed that alaat1-1  plants accumulate more alanine than wild-type plants during the early phase of  hypoxia, and the decline in accumulated alanine was delayed in the alaat1-1 line  during the post-hypoxia recovery period. When alanine was supplied as the  nitrogen source, alaat1-1 plants utilized alanine less efficiently than wild-type  plants did. These results indicate that the primary role of AlaAT1 is to break  down alanine when it is in excess. Therefore, AlaAT appears to be crucial for the  rapid conversion of alanine to pyruvate during recovery from low-oxygen stress.', '2007 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.03023.x', 'Good']

Alanine aminotransferase (AlaAT): !catalyses! reversible transfer of amino group 
AlaAT: !induces! Arabidopsis AlaAT1 and AlaAT2 
AlaAT1 and AlaAT2: !express predominantly in! vascular tissues 
AlaAT expression: !manipulated to determine importance! low-oxygen stress tolerance and nitrogen metabolism 
AlaAT1 knockout mutant (alaat1-1): !dramatically reduces! AlaAT activity 
Barley AlaAT: !over-expressed! transgenic plants 
alaat1-1 plants: !accumulate more alanine! wild-type plants 
alaat1-1 plants: !utilize alanine less efficiently! wild-type plants 
AlaAT1: !primary role! break down alanine when in excess