Soil microorganisms are critical players in plant-soil interactions at the rhizosphere. We have identified a Bacillus megaterium strain that promoted growth and development of bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) and Arabidopsis thaliana plants. We used Arabidopsis thaliana as a model to characterize the effects of inoculation with B. megaterium on plant-growth promotion and postembryonic root development. B. megaterium inoculation caused an inhibition in primary-root growth followed by an increase in lateral-root number, lateral-root growth, and root-hair length. Detailed cellular analyses revealed that primary root-growth inhibition was caused both by a reduction in cell elongation and by reduction of cell proliferation in the root meristem. To study the contribution of auxin and ethylene signaling pathways in the alterations in root-system architecture elicited by B. megaterium, a suite of plant hormone mutants of Arabidopsis, including aux1-7, axr4-1, eir1, etr1, ein2, and rhd6, defective in either auxin or ethylene signaling, were evaluated for their responses to inoculation with this bacteria. When inoculated, all mutant lines tested showed increased biomass production. Moreover, aux1-7 and eir1, which sustain limited root-hair and lateral-root formation when grown in uninoculated medium, were found to increase the number of lateral roots and to develop long root hairs when inoculated with B. megaterium. The ethylene-signaling mutants etr1 and ein2 showed an induction in lateral-root formation and root-hair growth in response to bacterial inoculation. Taken together, our results suggest that plant-growth promotion and root-architectural alterations by B. megaterium may involve auxin- and-ethylene independent mechanisms.

B. megaterium: !promotes growth of! bean & Arabidopsis
B. megaterium: !inhibits! primary-root growth
B. megaterium: !increases! lateral-root number & growth, root-hair length
aux1-7 & eir1: !increase! lateral-roots & root-hair growth when inoculated
etr1 & ein2: !induce! lateral-root formation & root-hair growth when inoculated