The oxygen isotope composition of CO(2) respired by Ricinus communis leaves (delta(18)O(R)) was measured under non-steady-state conditions with a temporal resolution of 3 min using a tunable diode laser (TDL) absorption spectrometer coupled to a portable gas exchange system. The SD of delta(18)O measurement by the TDL was +/- 0.2 per thousand and close to that of traditional mass spectrometers. Further, delta(18)O(R) values at isotopic steady state were comparable to those obtained using traditional flask sampling and mass spectrometric techniques for R. communis grown and measured in similar environmental conditions. As well as higher temporal resolution, the online TDL method described here has a number of advantages over mass spectrometric techniques. At isotopic steady state among plants grown at high light, the "one-way flux" model was required to accurately predict delta(18)O(R). A comparison of measurements and the model suggests that plants grown under low-light conditions have either a lower proportion of chloroplast CO(2) that isotopically equilibrates with chloroplast water, or more enriched delta(18)O of CO(2) in the chloroplast that has not equilibrated with local water. The high temporal resolution of isotopic measurements allowed the first measurements of delta(18)O(R) when stomatal conductance was rapidly changing. Under non-steady-state conditions, delta(18)O(R) varied between 50 and 220 per thousand for leaves of plants grown under different light and water environments, and varied by as much as 100 per thousand within 10 min for a single leaf. Stomatal conductance ranged from 0.001 to 1.586 mol m(-2) s(-1), and had an important influence on delta(18)O(R) under non-steady-state conditions not only via effects on leaf water H(2) (18)O enrichment, but also via effects on the rate of the one-way fluxes of CO(2) into and out of the leaf.

Stomatal conductance: !influences! delta(18)O(R)
Leaf water H(2) (18)O enrichment: !influences! delta(18)O(R)
One-way fluxes of CO(2): !influences! delta(18)O(R)
TDL absorption spectrometer: !measures! delta(18)O(R)
Mass spectrometers: !measure! delta(18)O(R)
Flask sampling: !measures! delta(18)O(R)
High light: !requires! one-way flux model
Low light: !causes! enriched delta(18)O of CO(2)