['17322336', 'Phosphate (Pi) deficiency limits plant growth and development, resulting in  adaptive stress responses. Among the molecular determinants of Pi stress  responses, transcription factors play a critical role in regulating adaptive  mechanisms. WRKY75 is one of several transcription factors induced during Pi  deprivation. In this study, we evaluated the role of the WRKY75 transcription  factor in regulating Pi starvation responses in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana). WRKY75 was found to be nuclear localized and induced differentially in  the plant during Pi deficiency. Suppression of WRKY75 expression through RNAi  silencing resulted in early accumulation of anthocyanin, indicating that the RNAi  plants were more susceptible to Pi stress. Further analysis revealed that the  expression of several genes involved in Pi starvation responses, including  phosphatases, Mt4/TPS1-like genes, and high-affinity Pi transporters, was  decreased when WRKY75 was suppressed. Consequently, Pi uptake of the mutant plant  was also decreased during Pi starvation. In addition, when WRKY75 expression was  suppressed, lateral root length and number, as well as root hair number, were  significantly increased. However, changes in the root architecture were obvious  under both Pi-sufficient and Pi-deficient conditions. This indicates that the  regulatory effect of WRKY75 on root architecture could be independent of the Pi  status of the plant. Together, these results suggest that WRKY75 is a modulator  of Pi starvation responses as well as root development. WRKY75 is the first  member of the WRKY transcription factor family reported to be involved in  regulating a nutrient starvation response and root development.', '2007 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.106.093971', 'Raghothama']

WRKY75: !localizes to! nucleus 
WRKY75: !induces! Pi starvation responses 
WRKY75: !represses! phosphatases, Mt4/TPS1-like genes, and high-affinity Pi transporters 
WRKY75: !decreases! Pi uptake 
WRKY75: !increases! lateral root length and number, as well as root hair number 
WRKY75: !regulates! root architecture