['17351051', 'Iron, despite being an essential micronutrient, becomes toxic if present at high  levels. As a result, plants possess carefully regulated mechanisms to acquire  iron from the soil. The ferric reductase defective3 (frd3) mutant of Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) is chlorotic and exhibits constitutive expression of its  iron uptake responses. Consequently, frd3 mutants overaccumulate iron; yet,  paradoxically, the frd3 phenotypes are due to a reduction in the amount of iron  present inside frd3 leaf cells. The FRD3 protein belongs to the multidrug and  toxin efflux family, members of which are known to export low-M(r) organic  molecules. We therefore hypothesized that FRD3 loads an iron chelator necessary  for the correct distribution of iron throughout the plant into the xylem. One  such potential chelator is citrate. Xylem exudate from frd3 plants contains  significantly less citrate and iron than the exudate from wild-type plants.  Additionally, supplementation of growth media with citrate rescues the frd3  phenotypes. The ectopic expression of FRD3-GFP results in enhanced tolerance to  aluminum in Arabidopsis roots, a hallmark of organic acid exudation. Consistent  with this result, approximately 3 times more citrate was detected in root exudate  from plants ectopically expressing FRD3-GFP. Finally, heterologous studies in  Xenopus laevis oocytes reveal that FRD3 mediates the transport of citrate. These  results all strongly support the hypothesis that FRD3 effluxes citrate into the  root vasculature, a process important for the translocation of iron to the  leaves, as well as confirm previous reports suggesting that iron moves through  the xylem as a ferric-citrate complex. Our results provide additional answers to  long-standing questions about iron chelation in the vasculature and organic acid  transport.', '2007 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.097162', 'Rogers']

FRD3: !effluxes! citrate 
FRD3: !mediates transport of! citrate 
frd3 mutant: !overaccumulates! iron 
frd3 mutant: !exudes! less citrate and iron 
FRD3-GFP: !enhances tolerance to! aluminum 
FRD3-GFP: !exudes! more citrate 
iron: !moves through xylem as! ferric-citrate complex