['17351048', 'Nitric oxide (NO) has emerged as a key molecule involved in many physiological  processes in plants. To characterize roles of NO in tolerance of Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) to salt stress, effect of NaCl on Arabidopsis wild-type  and mutant (Atnoa1) plants with an impaired in vivo NO synthase (NOS) activity  and a reduced endogenous NO level was investigated. Atnoa1 mutant plants  displayed a greater Na+ to K+ ratio in shoots than wild-type plants due to  enhanced accumulation of Na+ and reduced accumulation of K+ when exposed to NaCl.  Germination of Atnoa1 seeds was more sensitive to NaCl than that of wild-type  seeds, and wild-type plants exhibited higher survival rates than Atnoa1 plants  when grown under salt stress. Atnoa1 plants had higher levels of hydrogen  peroxide than wild-type plants under both control and salt stress, suggesting  that Atnoa1 is more vulnerable to salt and oxidative stress than wild-type  plants. Treatments of wild-type plants with NOS inhibitor and NO scavenger  reduced endogenous NO levels and enhanced NaCl-induced increase in Na+ to K+  ratio. Exposure of wild-type plants to NaCl inhibited NOS activity and reduced  quantity of NOA1 protein, leading to a decrease in endogenous NO levels measured  by NO-specific fluorescent probe. Treatment of Atnoa1 plants with NO donor sodium  nitroprusside attenuated the NaCl-induced increase in Na+ to K+ ratio. Therefore,  these findings provide direct evidence to support that disruption of  NOS-dependent NO production is associated with salt tolerance in Arabidopsis.', '2007 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.096842', 'Zhang']

NOS: !synthesizes! NO 
NO: !affects! salt tolerance 
Atnoa1: !reduces! NOS activity 
Atnoa1: !increases! Na+ to K+ ratio 
Atnoa1: !decreases! survival rate 
Atnoa1: !increases! hydrogen peroxide levels 
NOS inhibitor: !reduces! endogenous NO levels 
NO scavenger: !enhances! NaCl-induced increase in Na+ to K+ ratio 
NaCl: !inhibits! NOS activity 
NaCl: !reduces! quantity of NOA1 protein 
NO donor sodium nitroprusside: !attenuates! NaCl-induced increase in Na+ to K+ ratio