In plants, the glycine decarboxylase complex (GDC) cooperates with serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) to mediate photorespiratory glycine-serine interconversion. GDC is also postulated to be an integral component of one-carbon (C1) metabolism in heterotrophic tissues, although molecular evidence in plants is scarce. An initial report of a xylem-specific isoform of GDC component H-protein, PtgdcH1, in aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx.) provided molecular evidence consistent with an important role for GDC in plant C1 metabolism. PtgdcH1 is phylogenetically distinct from the leaf-abundant photorespiratory PtgdcH3, but both isoforms restored GDC activity in a yeast H-protein knockout mutant, suggesting their functional equivalence. The Populus genome contains eight transcriptionally active GDC genes, encoding four H-proteins, two T-proteins, and single P- and L-proteins. The two Populus T-protein isoforms, PtgdcT1 and PtgdcT2, exhibited differential expression in leaves and xylem, similar to PtgdcH3 and PtgdcH1. In silico identification of AC elements in the promoters of xylem-abundant PtgdcH1 and PtgdcT2, as well as many lignin biosynthetic genes of Populus is consistent with a prominent role for GDC in methyl-intensive lignification during wood formation. The AC element is absent from Arabidopsis GDC promoters, and GDC expression has not been linked to secondary growth in this herbaceous annual. Taken together, the results suggest that the association of distinct H-protein and T-protein isoforms with photorespiration and C1 metabolism is a distinguishing feature of Populus, and may signify molecular adaptation of GDC to cope with the C1 demands of lignification in woody perennials.

GDC: !cooperates with! SHMT
PtgdcH1: !restores! GDC activity
PtgdcH3: !exhibits differential expression! leaves/xylem
PtgdcT1/2: !exhibits differential expression! leaves/xylem
AC element: !present in! Populus GDC promoters
AC element: !absent from! Arabidopsis GDC promoters
GDC: !linked to! secondary growth