['17351116', 'Cellulose is synthesized by cellulose synthases (CESAs) contained in plasma  membrane-localized complexes. In Arabidopsis thaliana, three types of CESA  subunits (CESA4/IRREGULAR XYLEM5 [IRX5], CESA7/IRX3, and CESA8/IRX1) are required  for secondary cell wall formation. We report that mutations in these proteins  conferred enhanced resistance to the soil-borne bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum  and the necrotrophic fungus Plectosphaerella cucumerina. By contrast,  susceptibility to these pathogens was not altered in cell wall mutants of primary  wall CESA subunits (CESA1, CESA3/ISOXABEN RESISTANT1 [IXR1], and CESA6/IXR2) or  POWDERY MILDEW-RESISTANT5 (PMR5) and PMR6 genes. Double mutants indicated that  irx-mediated resistance was independent of salicylic acid, ethylene, and  jasmonate signaling. Comparative transcriptomic analyses identified a set of  common irx upregulated genes, including a number of abscisic acid  (ABA)-responsive, defense-related genes encoding antibiotic peptides and enzymes  involved in the synthesis and activation of antimicrobial secondary metabolites.  These data as well as the increased susceptibility of ABA mutants (abi1-1,  abi2-1, and aba1-6) to R. solanacearum support a direct role of ABA in resistance  to this pathogen. Our results also indicate that alteration of secondary cell  wall integrity by inhibiting cellulose synthesis leads to specific activation of  novel defense pathways that contribute to the generation of an  antimicrobial-enriched environment hostile to pathogens.', '2007 Mar', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.106.048058', 'Molina']

CESA4/IRX5: !synthesizes! Cellulose 
Mutations in CESA proteins: !enhances! Resistance to pathogens 
Primary wall CESA subunits: !no effect on! Susceptibility to pathogens 
PMR5/PMR6 genes: !no effect on! Susceptibility to pathogens 
irx-mediated resistance: !independent of! Salicylic acid, ethylene, jasmonate signaling 
ABA-responsive genes: !upregulated by! irx mutations 
ABA-responsive genes: !encode! Antibiotic peptides and enzymes 
ABA: !directly involved in! Resistance to R. solanacearum 
Alteration of cell wall integrity: !activates! Novel defense pathways