Emission from plants is a major source of atmospheric methanol. Growing tissues contribute most to plant-generated methanol in the atmosphere, but there is still controversy over biological and physico-chemical controls of methanol emission. Methanol as a water-soluble compound is thought to be strongly controlled by gas-phase diffusion (stomatal conductance), but growth rate can follow a different diurnal rhythm from that of stomatal conductance, and the extent to which the emission control is shared between diffusion and growth is unclear. Growth and methanol emissions from Gossypium hirsutum, Populus deltoides, and Fagus sylvatica were measured simultaneously. Methanol emission from growing leaves was several-fold higher than that from adult leaves. A pronounced diurnal rhythm of methanol emission was observed; however, this diurnal rhythm was not predominantly determined by the diurnal rhythm of leaf growth. Large methanol emission peaks in the morning when the stomata opened were observed in all species and were explained by release of methanol that had accumulated in the intercellular air space and leaf liquid pool at night in leaves with closed stomata. Cumulative daily methanol emissions were strongly correlated with the total daily leaf growth, but the diurnal rhythm of methanol emission was modified by growth rate and stomatal conductance in a complex manner. While in G. hirsutum and in F. sylvatica maxima in methanol emission and growth coincided, maximum growth rates of P. deltoides were observed at night, while maximum methanol emissions occurred in the morning. This interspecific variation was explained by differences in the share of emission control by growth processes, by stomatal conductance, and methanol solubilization in tissue water.

Methanol: !emitted from! Growing tissues 
Stomatal conductance: !controls! Methanol emission 
Diurnal rhythm: !modifies! Methanol emission 
Methanol: !accumulates in! Intercellular air space 
Leaf liquid pool: !stores! Methanol 
Cumulative daily methanol emissions: !correlated with! Total daily leaf growth 
Growth rate: !shares control of! Methanol emission 
Stomatal conductance: !shares control of! Methanol emission 
Methanol solubilization: !shares control of! Methanol emission