Raspberry breeding programmes worldwide aim to produce improved cultivars to satisfy market demands and within these programmes there are many targets, including increased fruit quality, yield and season, and improved pest and disease resistance and plant habit. The large raspberry aphid, Amphorophora idaei, transmits four viruses and vector resistance is an objective in raspberry breeding. The development of molecular tools that discriminate between aphid resistance genes from different sources will allow the pyramiding of such genes and the development of raspberry varieties with superior pest resistance. We have raised a red raspberry (Rubus idaeus) F1 progeny from the cross 'Malling Jewel' x 'Malling Orion' (MJ x MO), which segregates for resistance to biotype 1 of the aphid Amphorophora idaei and for a second phenotypic trait, dwarf habit. These traits are controlled by single genes, denoted (A1) and (dw) respectively. The progeny of 94 seedlings was scored for the segregation of 95 AFLP and 22 SSR markers and a linkage map was constructed that covers a total genetic distance of 505 cM over seven linkage groups. The average linkage group length was 72.2 cM and there was an average of 17 markers per linkage group, of which at least two were codominant SSRs, allowing comparisons with previously published maps of raspberry. The two phenotypic traits, A1 and dw, mapped to linkage groups 3 and 6 respectively. The mapping of A1 will facilitate the discrimination of resistance genes from different sources and the pyramiding of aphid resistance genes in new raspberry cultivars; the mapping of dw will allow further investigations into the genetics of dwarfing habit in Rubus.

Aphorophora idaei: !transmits! 4 viruses
Raspberry breeding programmes: !aim to produce! improved cultivars
Malling Jewel x Malling Orion: !segregates for! resistance to biotype 1 of Aphorophora idaei
Malling Jewel x Malling Orion: !segregates for! dwarf habit
A1: !controls! resistance to biotype 1 of Aphorophora idaei
dw: !controls! dwarf habit
A1: !allows discrimination of! resistance genes from different sources
A1: !allows pyramiding of! aphid resistance genes in new raspberry cultivars
dw: !allows further investigations into! genetics of dwarfing habit in Rubus