Increasing the nitrate (N) concentration in the rooting substrate above deficiency decreased stomatal conductance and leaf growth rate compared with sufficient N in maize seedlings (Zea mays L.) growing in drying substrate. Novel effects were detected when N in the non-deficient range was supplied directly to the xylem of detached shoots: concentrations above 2.0 mol m-3 KNO3 reduced transpiration, and concentrations above 12 mol m-3 KNO3 reduced leaf growth rate. Evidence is provided that the novel effects of N on transpiration and growth were mediated by pH-based ABA redistribution. ABA at 0.05 mol m-3, whilst ineffective alone, sensitized leaf growth to increases in KNO3 concentration (from 3.0 mol m-3), and the capacity of higher concentrations of ABA to reduce growth was enhanced by KNO3. Transpiration was sensitively reduced by KNO3, ABA, or buffers adjusted to pH 6.7-7.0 (compared with buffers adjusted to pH 5.0) alone. Nevertheless, a synergistic effect of KNO3 and either ABA or buffers adjusted to pH 6.7-7.0 was observed. Buffers of pH 5.6 supplied to detached shoots alleviated the depression of transpiration caused by 12 mol m-3 KNO3. Buffers adjusted to pH 6.7 increased the sensitivity of growth to KNO3. Xylem sap extracted from intact seedlings growing in drying soil exhibited an initial increase in N concentration, followed by a decrease at progressively lower soil water potentials. The importance for novel N signalling above deficiency is discussed with reference to the generality of fluctuations in soil and xylem N concentration within this range.

N: !increases! ABA redistribution 
KNO3: !reduces! transpiration 
KNO3: !reduces! leaf growth rate 
ABA: !sensitizes! leaf growth to KNO3 
ABA: !enhances! capacity of higher concentrations of ABA to reduce growth 
Buffers adjusted to pH 6.7-7.0: !synergistically affects! KNO3 
Buffers adjusted to pH 5.6: !alleviates! depression of transpiration caused by 12 mol m-3 KNO3 
Buffers adjusted to pH 6.7: !increases! sensitivity of growth to KNO3