NifS-like proteins provide the sulfur (S) for the formation of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters, an ancient and essential type of cofactor found in all three domains of life. Plants are known to contain two distinct NifS-like proteins, localized in the mitochondria (MtNifS) and the chloroplast (CpNifS). In the chloroplast, five different Fe-S cluster types are required in various proteins. These plastid Fe-S proteins are involved in a variety of biochemical pathways including photosynthetic electron transport and nitrogen and sulfur assimilation. In vitro, the chloroplastic cysteine desulfurase CpNifS can release elemental sulfur from cysteine for Fe-S cluster biogenesis in ferredoxin. However, because of the lack of a suitable mutant allele, the role of CpNifS has not been studied thus far in planta. To study the role of CpNifS in Fe-S cluster biogenesis in vivo, the gene was silenced by using an inducible RNAi (interference) approach. Plants with reduced CpNifS expression exhibited chlorosis, a disorganized chloroplast structure, and stunted growth and eventually became necrotic and died before seed set. Photosynthetic electron transport and carbon dioxide assimilation were severely impaired in the silenced plant lines. The silencing of CpNifS decreased the abundance of all chloroplastic Fe-S proteins tested, representing all five Fe-S cluster types. Mitochondrial Fe-S proteins and respiration were not affected, suggesting that mitochondrial and chloroplastic Fe-S assembly operate independently. These findings indicate that CpNifS is necessary for the maturation of all plastidic Fe-S proteins and, thus, essential for plant growth.

NifS-like proteins: !provide! sulfur 
MtNifS: !localizes to! mitochondria 
CpNifS: !localizes to! chloroplast 
CpNifS: !synthesizes! Fe-S clusters 
Fe-S proteins: !involved in! biochemical pathways 
CpNifS: !represses! plant growth 
CpNifS: !enhances! photosynthetic electron transport 
CpNifS: !enhances! carbon dioxide assimilation 
CpNifS: !affects! chloroplastic Fe-S proteins 
MtNifS: !interacts with! mitochondrial Fe-S proteins