['17384167', 'Many plants acquire increased freezing tolerance when they are exposed to  nonfreezing temperatures of a certain duration. This process is known as cold  acclimation and allows plants to protect themselves from freezing injury. A wide  variety of polypeptides are induced during cold acclimation, among which is one  encoded by COR15A in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Previous studies showed  that the COR15A gene encodes a small, plastid-targeted polypeptide that is  processed to a mature form called Cor15am. In this study, we examined the  biochemical properties and activities of Cor15am in more detail. We provide  evidence that Cor15am localizes almost exclusively to the chloroplast stroma. In  addition, the cold-regulated accumulation of Cor15am is affected by chloroplast  functionality. Both gel-filtration chromatography and protein cross-linking  reveal that Cor15am forms oligomers in the stroma of chloroplasts. Although  Cor15am accumulates in response to low temperature, cold acclimation is not a  prerequisite for oligomerization of Cor15am. Structural analysis suggests that  Cor15am is composed of both ordered and random structures, and can stay soluble  with small structural change after boiling and freeze-thaw treatments.  Recombinant Cor15am exhibits in vitro cryoprotection of a freeze-labile enzyme,  l-lactate dehydrogenase. Furthermore, Cor15am is capable of associating with  l-lactate dehydrogenase in vitro and with potential stromal substrates in vivo.  On the basis of these results, we propose that Arabidopsis Cor15am is a  cryoprotective protein that forms oligomers in the chloroplast stroma, and that  direct association of Cor15am with its substrates is part of its cryoprotective  mechanism.', '2007 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.106.094581', 'Inaba']

COR15A: !encodes! Cor15am 
Cor15am: !localizes to! chloroplast stroma 
Cor15am: !accumulates in response to! low temperature 
Cor15am: !forms oligomers in! chloroplast stroma 
Cor15am: !exhibits in vitro cryoprotection of! l-lactate dehydrogenase 
Cor15am: !associates with! l-lactate dehydrogenase in vitro 
Cor15am: !associates with! potential stromal substrates in vivo