Isolated microspores of Brassica napus are developmentally programmed to form gametes; however, microspores can be reprogrammed through stress treatments to undergo appropriate divisions and form embryos. We are interested in the identification and isolation of factors and genes associated with the induction and establishment of embryogenesis in isolated microspores. Standard and normalized cDNA libraries, as well as subtractive cDNA libraries, were constructed from freshly isolated microspores (0 h) and microspores cultured for 3, 5, or 7 d under embryogenesis-inducing conditions. Library comparison tools were used to identify shifts in metabolism across this time course. Detailed expressed sequence tag analyses of 3 and 5 d cultures indicate that most sequences are related to pollen-specific genes. However, semiquantitative and real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analyses at the initial stages of embryo induction also reveal expression of embryogenesis-related genes such as BABYBOOM1, LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1), and LEC2 as early as 2 to 3 d of microspore culture. Sequencing results suggest that embryogenesis is clearly established in a subset of the microspores by 7 d of culture and that this time point is optimal for isolation of embryo-specific expressed sequence tags such as ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3, ATS1, LEC1, LEC2, and FUSCA3. Following extensive polymerase chain reaction-based expression profiling, 16 genes were identified as unequivocal molecular markers for microspore embryogenesis in B. napus. These molecular marker genes also show expression during zygotic embryogenesis, underscoring the common developmental pathways that function in zygotic and gametic embryogenesis. The quantitative expression values of several of these molecular marker genes are shown to be predictive of embryogenic potential in B. napus cultivars (e.g. 'Topas' DH4079, 'Allons,' 'Westar,' 'Garrison').

microspore: !develops into! gamete
stress: !reprograms! microspore
cDNA library: !compared to! identify shifts in metabolism
BABYBOOM1: !expressed in! microspore culture
LEC1: !expressed in! microspore culture
LEC2: !expressed in! microspore culture
ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3: !expressed in! 7d microspore culture
ATS1: !expressed in! 7d microspore culture
FUSCA3: !expressed in! 7d microspore culture
16 genes: !identified as! molecular markers for microspore embryogenesis
molecular marker genes: !show expression during! zygotic embryogenesis
quantitative expression values: !predictive of! embryogenic potential