Although gene expression profile of pollen has been described, there is limited information regarding a particular phase during anther/pollen development. This work characterizes gene expression pattern at desiccation in lily (Lilium longiflorum Thunb. cv Snow Queen) anthers. We have applied a suppression-subtractive hybridization (SSH) strategy, through which 90 clones were identified and sequenced. These clones resulted in the identification of 42 individual cDNAs among which 33 genes were specifically expressed at the desiccation phase of anthers of >150-mm buds. Fourteen cDNAs were chosen for further examination. Six genes were both dehydration- and abscisic acid (ABA)-inducible whereas the other eight genes were apparently dehydration-irrelevant. The group of dehydration- and ABA-induced genes was also induced by desiccation that developmentally occurs in the anther. The application of fluridone has a significant effect of inhibition on mRNA accumulation of these genes in maturing anthers during which desiccation occurs. Pollen germination analysis indicated that, of those dehydration-irrelevant genes, three were ABA-responsive and the other five were not. Thus, three separate signal pathways that function in the activation of late genes at desiccation during anther development are established. The first is the ABA-dependent pathway induced by environmental stress of dehydration. The other two pathways of signaling triggered by developmental cues, through which one is ABA-dependent and another is ABA-independent. The 14 gene proteins showed spatial and temporal expression patterns and may participate in membrane/cell wall synthesis, cytoskeletal organization, signaling, RNA binding, ubiquitin-mediated degradation and transportation during germination and tube growth.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !induces! Dehydration
Gene: !induces! ABA
Gene: !responds to! ABA
Gene: !inhibits! mRNA accumulation
Gene: !participates in! Membrane/Cell wall synthesis
Gene: !participates in! Cytoskeletal organization
Gene: !participates in! Signaling
Gene: !participates in! RNA binding
Gene: !participates in! Ubiquitin-mediated degradation
Gene: !participates in! Transportation