Suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) successfully identified 11 cDNAs in apple skin with highly induced expression as a result of ultraviolet (UV)-B irradiation. Apart from three putative flavonoid biosynthetic genes, chalcone synthase (CHS; A5C), flavanone-3-hydroxylase (F3H; B5F), and flavonol synthase (FLS; D1F), five clones (A1H, A10E, B11G, D5F, and D11H) were induced by low temperature (17 degrees C) as well, which is also known to induce anthocyanin accumulation in apple skin. Moreover, four clones (A1H, A10E, B11G, and D11H), showing higher expression levels in the skin, accumulated higher anthocyanin concentrations than their counterparts. Of the four clones, only A10E, a putative UDP-glucose 4-epimerase (UGE), was deemed to play an important role in anthocyanin accumulation in apple skin based on the facts that: (i) its transcription level was higher in the deep red cultivar, 'Jonathan', than in the pale red cultivar, 'Tsugaru'; and (ii) it could reversibly catalyse UDP-glucose to UDP-galactose, and the latter molecule is a major sugar donor for cyanidin-glycoside in apple. Therefore, the full-length cDNA of A10E was isolated by rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and designated as MdUGE1. Further analysis demonstrated that UGE enzymatic activity was positively correlated with anthocyanin accumulation in apple skin. Thus, MdUGE1 isolated by SSH could play an important role in anthocyanin biosynthesis in apple skin in concert with other flavonoid biosynthetic genes.

CHS: !affects! Flavonoid biosynthesis
F3H: !affects! Flavonoid biosynthesis
FLS: !affects! Flavonoid biosynthesis
A1H: !enhances! Anthocyanin accumulation
A10E: !enhances! Anthocyanin accumulation
B11G: !enhances! Anthocyanin accumulation
D5F: !enhances! Anthocyanin accumulation
D11H: !enhances! Anthocyanin accumulation
MdUGE1: !synthesizes! UDP-galactose
UDP-glucose: !converts to! UDP-galactose
UDP-galactose: !donates! Cyanidin-glycoside
MdUGE1: !correlates with! Anthocyanin accumulation