From a library of 3,000 expression sequence tags (ESTs), derived from the epidermis of a diploid wheat (Triticum monococcum) inoculated with Blumeria graminis f. sp. tritici (Bgt), we cloned 23 cDNAs representing 12 genes that are involved in the pathways of biosynthesis and supply of methyl units. We studied the transcription of these genes to investigate how the methyl units are generated and regulated in response to Bgt infection and abiotic stresses in wheat. Expression of 5, 10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase, methionine synthase, S-adenosylmethionine synthetase, and S-adenosylhomocystein hydrolase transcripts were highly induced at an early stage of infection. This induction was specific to the epidermis and linked to host cell wall apposition (CWA) formation, suggesting that the pathways for generation of methyl units are transcriptionally activated for the host defense response. Levels of S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase, caffeic acid 3-O-methyltransferase, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase mRNA, but not phosphoethanolamine N-methyltransferase and nicotianamine synthase mRNA, were up-regulated after infection and showed similar expression patterns to genes involved in the pathways of generation of methyl units, revealing possible routes of methyl transfer towards polyamine, lignin and ethylene biosynthesis rather than glycine betaine and nicotianamine in response to Bgt attack. After imposing various abiotic stresses, genes involved in the pathways of generation and supply of methyl units were also up-regulated differentially, suggesting that the generation of sufficient methyl units at an early stage might be crucial to the mitigation of multiple stresses.

5,10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase: !induction linked to! host cell wall apposition
methionine synthase: !induction linked to! host cell wall apposition
S-adenosylmethionine synthetase: !induction linked to! host cell wall apposition
S-adenosylhomocystein hydrolase: !induction linked to! host cell wall apposition
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase: !up-regulated after infection! Bgt attack
caffeic acid 3-O-methyltransferase: !up-regulated after infection! Bgt attack
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase mRNA: !up-regulated after infection! Bgt attack
phosphoethanolamine N-methyltransferase: !not up-regulated after infection! Bgt attack
nicotianamine synthase mRNA: !not up-regulated after infection! Bgt attack
methyl units: !generation crucial to! mitigation of multiple stresses