['17420480', 'Understanding plant metabolism as an integrated system is essential for metabolic  engineering aimed at the effective production of compounds useful to human life  and the global environment. The "omics" approach integrates transcriptome and  metabolome data into a single data set and can lead to the identification of  unknown genes and their regulatory networks involved in metabolic pathways of  interest. One of the intriguing, although poorly described metabolic pathways in  plants is the biosynthesis of glucosinolates (GSLs), a group of bioactive  secondary products derived from amino acids that are found in the family  Brassicaceae. Here we report the discovery of two R2R3-Myb transcription factors  that positively control the biosynthesis of GSLs in Arabidopsis thaliana by an  integrated omics approach. Combined transcriptome coexpression analysis of  publicly available, condition-independent data and the condition-specific (i.e.,  sulfur-deficiency) data identified Myb28 and Myb29 as candidate transcription  factor genes specifically involved in the regulation of aliphatic GSL production.  Analysis of a knockout mutant and ectopic expression of the gene demonstrated  that Myb28 is a positive regulator for basal-level production of aliphatic GSLs.  Myb29 presumably plays an accessory function for methyl jasmonate-mediated  induction of a set of aliphatic GSL biosynthetic genes. Overexpression of Myb28  in Arabidopsis-cultured suspension cells, which do not normally synthesize GSLs,  resulted in the production of large amounts of GSLs, suggesting the possibility  of efficient industrial production of GSLs by manipulation of these transcription  factors. A working model for regulation of GSL production involving these genes,  renamed Production of Methionine-Derived Glucosinolate (PMG) 1 and 2, are  postulated.', '2007 Apr 10', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0611629104', 'Saito']

Myb28: !positively regulates! aliphatic GSL production 
Myb29: !accessory function for! methyl jasmonate-mediated induction 
Myb28: !overexpression of! Arabidopsis-cultured suspension cells 
PMG1/2: !regulate! GSL production