['17426018', 'Defining protein complexes is critical to virtually all aspects of cell biology  because many cellular processes are regulated by stable protein complexes, and  their identification often provides insights into their function. We describe the  development and application of a high throughput tandem affinity  purification/mass spectrometry platform for cell suspension cultures to analyze  cell cycle-related protein complexes in Arabidopsis thaliana. Elucidation of this  protein-protein interaction network is essential to fully understand the  functional differences between the highly redundant cyclin-dependent  kinase/cyclin modules, which are generally accepted to play a central role in  cell cycle control, in all eukaryotes. Cell suspension cultures were chosen  because they provide an unlimited supply of protein extracts of actively dividing  and undifferentiated cells, which is crucial for a systematic study of the cell  cycle interactome in the absence of plant development. Here we report the mapping  of a protein interaction network around six known core cell cycle proteins by an  integrated approach comprising generic Gateway-based vectors with high cloning  flexibility, the fast generation of transgenic suspension cultures, tandem  affinity purification adapted for plant cells, matrix-assisted laser desorption  ionization tandem mass spectrometry, data analysis, and functional assays. We  identified 28 new molecular associations and confirmed 14 previously described  interactions. This systemic approach provides new insights into the basic cell  cycle control mechanisms and is generally applicable to other pathways in plants.', '2007 Jul', 'Mol Cell Proteomics', '10.1074/mcp.M700078-MCP200', 'De']

Cell cycle-related protein complexes: !analyzed in! Arabidopsis thaliana 
Gateway-based vectors: !used to! generate transgenic suspension cultures 
Tandem affinity purification: !adapted for! plant cells 
Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization tandem mass spectrometry: !used to! map protein interaction network 
Data analysis: !performed to! identify molecular associations 
Functional assays: !confirmed! previously described interactions