Pinus sylvestris L. is known to activate indirect defence in response to attack by an herbivorous sawfly. Egg deposition by the sawfly Diprion pini L. induces pine to release, three days after egg laying, locally and systemically terpenoid volatiles that attract parasitoids to kill the eggs. The elicitor of the pine's response is located in the sawfly's oviduct secretion enveloping the eggs after deposition. Application of this secretion on twigs with artificially conducted ovipositional woundings mimics the effects of egg deposition. Furthermore, jasmonic acid (JA) induces a volatile pattern similar, but not identical, to the one induced by egg deposition. To gain deeper insight into the transduction of plant signals induced by herbivore egg deposition, it was investigated whether ethylene emission from pine is affected by sawfly egg deposition. Systemically induced ethylene emission from differently treated pine twigs was monitored for a period of 3 d after treatment. Ethylene emissions from untreated control twigs were compared with those from twigs treated as follows: (i) sawfly egg secretion [=oviduct secretion (OVI)] was transferred on artificially wounded pine needles (attractive volatiles), (ii) needles were artificially wounded (non-attractive volatiles), and (iii) the twig was supplied with JA (attractive volatiles). Ethylene emission from systemically OVI-induced twigs was significantly lower than from untreated controls, whereas artificial wounding had no detectable effect. JA-treated twigs released much more ethylene and showed higher variability of ethylene emission than artificially wounded twigs and OVI-treated ones. Ethylene emissions from pine after the various treatments studied here are discussed with respect to known effects of insect feeding on ethylene release from plants.

sawfly: !induces! pine 
pine: !releases! terpenoid volatiles 
sawfly oviduct secretion: !elicits! pine response 
pine twig: !treated with! sawfly egg secretion 
pine twig: !treated with! artificial wounding 
pine twig: !treated with! JA 
JA: !induces! volatile pattern 
pine twig: !emits! ethylene