['17458634', 'Myosins form a large superfamily of molecular motors that move along actin  filaments. The functions of myosins in plant cells are thought to be related to  various processes: cell division, movement of mitochondria and chloroplasts,  cytoplasmic streaming, rearrangement of transvacuolar strands, and statolith  positioning. Class VIII and XI myosins are represented in the Arabidopsis  thaliana genome by 4 and 13 potential genes, respectively. The roles of  individual class XI myosins and their cellular targets in A. thaliana are still  unclear. In this work we implemented a reverse genetic approach to analyse the  loss-of-function mutants of XIK, a representative of class XI myosins in A.  thaliana. Three different T-DNA insertion mutants in the myosin XIK gene showed  similar phenotypes: impaired growth of root hair cells, twisted shape of stem  trichomes, and irregular size, branch positioning, and branch expansion of leaf  trichomes. Morphometric analysis of mutant seedlings showed that the average  length of root hairs was reduced up to 50% in comparison with wild-type root  hairs, suggesting an involvement of the class XI myosin XIK in tip growth. On  leaves, the proportion of trichomes with short branches was doubleed in mutant  plants, and the mutant trichomes possessed a mildly twisted shape. Therefore, we  concluded that myosin XIK is involved also in the elongation of stalks and  branches of trichomes.', '2007', 'Protoplasma', '10.1007/s00709-006-0233-8', 'Truve']

Myosins: !affect! Cell division
Myosins: !affect! Movement of mitochondria and chloroplasts
Myosins: !affect! Cytoplasmic streaming
Myosins: !affect! Rearrangement of transvacuolar strands
Myosins: !affect! Statolith positioning
XIK Myosin: !impairs! Growth of root hair cells
XIK Myosin: !causes! Twisted shape of stem trichomes
XIK Myosin: !causes! Irregular size, branch positioning, and branch expansion of leaf trichomes
XIK Myosin: !reduces! Length of root hairs
XIK Myosin: !increases! Proportion of trichomes with short branches
XIK Myosin: !causes! Mildly twisted shape of trichomes
XIK Myosin: !involves! Elongation of stalks and branches of trichomes