The compatible solute hypothesis posits that maintaining osmotic equilibrium under conditions of high salinity requires synthesis of organic compounds, uptake of potassium ions, and partial exclusion of NaCl. To assess whether osmotic adaptation in Limonium latifolium proceeds according to this hypothesis, a comprehensive analysis of solute accumulation during NaCl treatments was conducted. Determination of prevailing inorganic ions and establishment of the metabolic profiles for low M(r) organic substances revealed that contrary to the mentioned hypothesis the major contributors to osmolarity were constituted by inorganic solutes. Independent of salinity, only 25% of this osmolarity resulted from organic solutes such as Suc and hexoses. Proline (Pro), beta-alanine betaine, and choline-O-sulfate were minor contributors to osmolarity. Compatible inositols also occurred, especially chiro-inositol, characterized for the first time in this species, to our knowledge. Principal component analysis showed that only a limited number of metabolic reconfigurations occurred in response to dynamic changes in salinity. Under such conditions only sugars, chiro-inositol, and Pro behave as active osmobalancers. Analysis of metabolic profiles during acclimatization to either mild salinity or nonsaline conditions showed that organic solute accumulation is predominantly controlled by constitutive developmental programs, some of which might be slightly modulated by salinity. Osmolarity provided under such conditions can be sufficient to maintain turgor in salinized seedlings. Compartmental analysis of Pro and beta-alanine betaine in leaf tissues demonstrated that these solutes, mainly located in vacuoles under nonsaline conditions, could be partly directed to the cytosol in response to salinization. Thus they did not conform with the predictions of the compatible solute hypothesis.

Gene: !synthesizes! Suc
Gene: !synthesizes! Hexoses
Gene: !synthesizes! Proline
Gene: !synthesizes! Beta-alanine betaine
Gene: !synthesizes! Choline-O-sulfate
Gene: !synthesizes! Chiro-inositol
Gene: !localizes to! Vacuoles
Gene: !enhances! Osmolarity