['17461792', 'Transcription factors regulate multiple aspects of plant growth and development.  Here we report the identification and functional analysis of a plant-specific,  novel transcription factor in Arabidopsis. We isolated a dominant,  gain-of-function mutant that displays reduced lengths in all aerial organs  including hypocotyl, rosette leaf, cauline leaf, inflorescence stem, floral  organs and silique. Molecular cloning revealed that these phenotypes are caused  by elevated expression of the Arabidopsis thaliana Ovate Family Protein 1  (AtOFP1). This mutant was designated as Atofp1-1D. We show that the altered  morphology of Atofp1-1D mutant is caused by reduced cell length resulting from  reduced cell elongation, and demonstrate that a mutant harboring a transposon  insertion that disrupts the OVATE domain of AtOFP1 is indistinguishable from  wild-type plants. Plants overexpressing other closely related AtOFP genes  phenocopy plants overexpressing AtOFP1, implying a possible overlapping function  among members of the AtOFP gene family. We found that AtOFP1 localizes in the  nucleus, and that AtOFP1 functions as an active transcriptional repressor.  Chromatin immunoprecipitation results indicated that AtGA20ox1, a gene encoding  the key enzyme in GA biosynthesis, is a target gene regulated by AtOFP1.  Consistent with this, exogenous gibberellic acid can partially restore defects in  cell elongation in plants overexpressing AtOFP1, suggesting that such a reduced  cell elongation is caused, in part, by the deficiency in gibberellin  biosynthesis. Taken together, our results indicate that AtOFP1 is an active  transcriptional repressor that has a role in regulating cell elongation in  plants.', '2007 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03096.x', 'Chen']

AtOFP1: !regulates! AtGA20ox1 
AtOFP1: !localizes to! nucleus 
AtOFP1: !functions as! transcriptional repressor 
AtOFP1: !represses! cell elongation 
AtOFP1: !deficiency in! gibberellin biosynthesis 
Exogenous GA: !partially restores! cell elongation