Exposure to high irradiance results in dramatic changes in nuclear gene expression in plants. However, little is known about the mechanisms by which changes in irradiance are sensed and how the information is transduced to the nucleus to initiate the genetic response. To investigate whether the photoreceptors are involved in the response to high irradiance, we analyzed expression of EARLY LIGHT-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN1 (ELIP1), ELIP2, ASCORBATE PEROXIDASE2 (APX2), and LIGHT-HARVESTING CHLOROPHYLL A/B-BINDING PROTEIN2.4 (LHCB2.4) in the phytochrome A (phyA), phyB, cryptochrome1 (cry1), and cry2 photoreceptor mutants and long hypocotyl5 (hy5) and HY5 homolog (hyh) transcription factor mutants. Following exposure to high intensity white light for 3 h (1,000 mumol quanta m(-2) s(-1)) expression of ELIP1/2 and APX2 was strongly induced and LHCB2.4 expression repressed in wild type. The cry1 and hy5 mutants showed specific misregulation of ELIP1/2, and we show that the induction of ELIP1/2 expression is mediated via CRY1 in a blue light intensity-dependent manner. Furthermore, using the Affymetrix Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) 24 K Gene-Chip, we showed that 77 of the high light-responsive genes are regulated via CRY1, and 26 of those genes were also HY5 dependent. As a consequence of the misregulation of these genes, the cry1 mutant displayed a high irradiance-sensitive phenotype with significant photoinactivation of photosystem II, indicated by reduced maximal fluorescence ratio. Thus, we describe a novel function of CRY1 in mediating plant responses to high irradiances that is essential to the induction of photoprotective mechanisms. This indicates that high irradiance can be sensed in a chloroplast-independent manner by a cytosolic/nucleic component.

ELIP1/2: !induced by! CRY1 
APX2: !induced by! high intensity white light 
LHCB2.4: !repressed by! high intensity white light 
CRY1: !mediates! plant responses to high irradiances 
HY5: !regulates! 77 of the high light-responsive genes 
photosystem II: !photoinactivated by! cry1 mutant