['17472958', 'Insertion of magnesium into protoporphyrin IX by magnesium chelatase is a key  step in the chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway, which takes place in plant  chloroplasts. ATP hydrolysis by the CHLI subunit of magnesium chelatase is an  essential component of this reaction, and the activity of this enzyme is a  primary determinant of the rate of magnesium insertion into the chlorophyll  molecule (tetrapyrrole ring). Higher plant CHLI contains highly conserved  cysteine residues and was recently identified as a candidate protein in a  proteomic screen of thioredoxin target proteins (Balmer, Y., Koller, A., del Val,  G., Manieri, W., Schurmann, P., and Buchanan, B. B. (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  U. S. A. 100, 370-375). To study the thioredoxin-dependent regulation of  magnesium chelatase, we first investigated the effect of thioredoxin on the  ATPase activity of CHLI1, a major isoform of CHLI in Arabidopsis thaliana. The  ATPase activity of recombinant CHLI1 was found to be fully inactivated by  oxidation and easily recovered by thioredoxin-assisted reduction, suggesting that  CHLI1 is a target protein of thioredoxin. Moreover, we identified one crucial  disulfide bond located in the C-terminal helical domain of CHLI1 protein, which  may regulate the binding of the nucleotide to the N-terminal catalytic domain.  The redox state of CHLI was also found to alter in a light-dependent manner in  vivo. Moreover, we successfully observed stimulation of the magnesium chelatase  activity in isolated chloroplasts by reduction. Our findings strongly suggest  that chlorophyll biosynthesis is subject to chloroplast biogenesis regulation  networks to coordinate them with the photosynthetic pathways in chloroplasts.', '2007 Jul 6', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M703324200', 'Masuda']

CHLI1: !inactivated by! oxidation 
CHLI1: !recovered by! thioredoxin-assisted reduction 
disulfide bond: !located in! C-terminal helical domain of CHLI1 
redox state of CHLI: !alters in! light-dependent manner 
magnesium chelatase activity: !stimulated by! reduction