Root growth and function are determined by the action of environmental stresses through specific genes that adapt root development to these restrictive conditions. We have defined in vitro conditions affecting the growth and recovery of Medicago truncatula roots after a salt stress. A dedicated macroarray containing 384 genes, based on a large-scale subtractive hybridization approach, was constructed and used to analyze gene expression during salt stress and recovery of root growth from this stress. Several potential regulatory genes were identified as being linked to this recovery process: a novel RNA-binding protein, a small G-protein homologous to ROP9, a receptor-like kinase, two TF IIIA-like and an AP2-like transcription factors (TF), MtZpt2-1, MtZpt2-2 and MtAp2, and a histidine kinase associated with cytokinin transduction pathways. The two ZPT2-type TFs were also rapidly induced by cold stress in roots. By analyzing transgenic M. truncatula plants showing reduced expression levels of both TFs and affected in their capacity to recover root growth after a salt stress, we identified potential target genes that were either activated or repressed in these plants. Overexpression of MtZpt2-1 in roots conferred salt tolerance and affected the expression of three putative targets in the predicted manner: a cold-regulated A (CORA) homolog, a flower-promoting factor (FPF1) homolog and an auxin-induced proline-rich protein (PRP) gene. Hence, regulatory networks depending on TFIIIA-like transcription factors are involved in the control of root adaptation to salt stress.

Root growth: !determined by! environmental stresses 
genes: !adapt root development to! restrictive conditions 
RNA-binding protein: !linked to! recovery process 
small G-protein: !homologous to! ROP9 
receptor-like kinase: !linked to! recovery process 
TF IIIA-like: !linked to! recovery process 
AP2-like transcription factors: !linked to! recovery process 
MtZpt2-1: !induced by! cold stress 
transgenic M. truncatula plants: !showing reduced expression levels of! TFs 
MtZpt2-1: !overexpressed in! roots 
CORA homolog: !activated or repressed in! transgenic plants 
FPF1 homolog: !activated or repressed in! transgenic plants 
auxin-induced proline-rich protein gene: !activated or repressed in! transgenic plants 
TFIIIA-like transcription factors: !involved in! control of root adaptation to salt stress