Phototropism, or the directional growth (curvature) of various organs toward or away from incident light, represents a ubiquitous adaptive response within the plant kingdom. This response is initiated through the sensing of directional blue light (BL) by a small family of photoreceptors known as the phototropins. Of the two phototropins present in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, phot1 (phototropin 1) is the dominant receptor controlling phototropism. Absorption of BL by the sensory portion of phot1 leads, as in other plant phototropins, to activation of a C-terminal serine/threonine protein kinase domain, which is tightly coupled with phototropic responsiveness. Of the five phot1-interacting proteins identified to date, only one, NPH3 (non-phototropic hypocotyl 3), is essential for all phot1-dependent phototropic responses, yet little is known about how phot1 signals through NPH3. Here, we show that, in dark-grown seedlings, NPH3 exists as a phosphorylated protein and that BL stimulates its dephosphorylation. phot1 is necessary for this response and appears to regulate the activity of a type 1 protein phosphatase that catalyzes the reaction. The abrogation of both BL-dependent dephosphorylation of NPH3 and development of phototropic curvatures by protein phosphatase inhibitors further suggests that this post-translational modification represents a crucial event in phot1-dependent phototropism. Given that NPH3 may represent a core component of a CUL3-based ubiquitin-protein ligase (E3), we hypothesize that the phosphorylation state of NPH3 determines the functional status of such an E3 and that differential regulation of this E3 is required for normal phototropic responsiveness.

phot1: !activates! C-terminal serine/threonine protein kinase domain
NPH3: !essential for! phot1-dependent phototropic responses
BL: !stimulates! dephosphorylation of NPH3
phot1: !regulates! activity of type 1 protein phosphatase
protein phosphatase inhibitors: !abrogate! BL-dependent dephosphorylation of NPH3 and development of phototropic curvatures
NPH3: !determines! functional status of CUL3-based ubiquitin-protein ligase (E3)