['17494768', 'Manganese toxicity is a major problem for plant growth in acidic soils, but  cellular mechanisms that facilitate growth in such conditions have not been  clearly delineated. Established mechanisms that counter metal toxicity in plants  involve chelation and cytoplasmic export of the metal across the plasma or  vacuolar membranes out of the cell or sequestered into a large organelle,  respectively. We report here that expression of the Arabidopsis and poplar MTP11  cation diffusion facilitators in a manganese-hypersensitive yeast mutant restores  manganese tolerance to wild-type levels. Microsomes from yeast expressing AtMTP11  exhibit enhanced manganese uptake. In accord with a presumed function of MTP11 in  manganese tolerance, Arabidopsis mtp11 mutants are hypersensitive to elevated  levels of manganese, whereas plants overexpressing MTP11 are hypertolerant. In  contrast, sensitivity to manganese deficiency is slightly decreased in mutants  and increased in overexpressing lines. Promoter-GUS studies showed that AtMTP11  is most highly expressed in root tips, shoot margins, and hydathodes, but not in  epidermal cells and trichomes, which are generally associated with manganese  accumulation. Surprisingly, imaging of MTP11-EYFP fusions demonstrated that MTP11  localizes neither to the plasma membrane nor to the vacuole, but to a punctate  endomembrane compartment that largely coincides with the distribution of the  trans-Golgi marker sialyl transferase. Golgi-based manganese accumulation might  therefore result in manganese tolerance through vesicular trafficking and  exocytosis. In accord with this proposal, Arabidopsis mtp11 mutants exhibit  enhanced manganese concentrations in shoots and roots. We propose that  Golgi-mediated exocytosis comprises a conserved mechanism for heavy metal  tolerance in plants.', '2007 May 15', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0609507104', 'Sanders']

MTP11: !facilitates! Manganese tolerance 
AtMTP11: !expresses in! Root tips, shoot margins, and hydathodes 
AtMTP11: !localizes to! Punctate endomembrane compartment 
MTP11-EYFP: !visualizes! Vesicular trafficking and exocytosis 
mtp11 mutants: !exhibit hypersensitivity to! Elevated manganese levels 
mtp11 mutants: !exhibit decreased sensitivity to! Manganese deficiency 
mtp11 overexpressing lines: !exhibit hypertolerance to! Elevated manganese levels 
mtp11 overexpressing lines: !exhibit increased sensitivity to! Manganese deficiency