['17507408', 'The effective integration of hormone signals is essential to normal plant growth  and development. Gibberellins (GA) and cytokinins act antagonistically in leaf  formation and meristem maintenance and GA counteract some of the effects of  cytokinins on epidermal differentiation. However, both can stimulate the  initiation of defensive epidermal structures called trichomes. To understand how  their relative influence on epidermal cell fate is modulated, we investigated the  molecular mechanisms through which they regulate trichome initiation in  Arabidopsis. The control by cytokinins of trichome production requires two genes  expressed in late inflorescence organs, ZFP8 and GIS2, which encode C2H2  transcription factors related to GLABROUS INFLORESCENCE STEMS (GIS).  Cytokinin-inducible GIS2 plays a prominent role in the cytokinin response, in  which it acts downstream of SPINDLY and upstream of GLABROUS1. In addition, GIS2  and ZFP8 mediate, like GIS, the regulation of trichome initiation by  gibberellins. By contrast, GIS does not play a significant role in the cytokinin  response. Collectively, GIS, ZFP8 and GIS2, which encode proteins that are  largely equivalent in function, play partially redundant and essential roles in  inflorescence trichome initiation and in its regulation by GA and cytokinins.  These roles are consistent with their pattern of expression and with the regional  influence of GA and cytokinins on epidermal differentiation. Our findings show  that functional specialization within a transcription factor gene family can  facilitate the integration of different developmental cues in the regulation of  plant cell differentiation.', '2007 Jun', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.005017', 'Broun']

GIS2: !mediates! cytokinin response 
ZFP8: !mediates! cytokinin response 
GIS2: !mediates! gibberellin response 
ZFP8: !mediates! gibberellin response 
GIS: !mediates! gibberellin response 
GA: !regulates! trichome initiation 
Cytokinins: !regulates! trichome initiation