Early development and growth of fruit in the domesticated tomato Solanum lycopersicum cultivar Money Maker and two of its wild relatives, S. peruvianum LA0385 and S. habrochaites LA1777, were studied. Although small differences exist, the processes involved and the sequence of events in fruit development are similar in all three species. The growth of developing fruits is exponential and the relative growth rate accelerates from 5 days after pollination (DAP 5) to DAP 8, followed by a decline during further development. Growth is positively correlated to the standard "Brix plus starch'' in the period DAP 8-DAP 20. Carbohydrate composition and levels of sugars and organic acids differ in fruits of the wild accessions compared to domesticated tomato. The wild accessions accumulate sucrose instead of glucose and fructose, and ripe fruits contain higher levels of malate and citrate. The enzymes responsible for the accumulation of glucose and fructose in domesticated tomatoes are soluble invertase and sucrose synthase. The regulation of initial carbohydrate metabolism in the domesticated tomato differs from that in the wild species, as could be concluded from measuring activities of enzymes involved in primary carbohydrate metabolism. Furthermore, changes in the activity of several enzymes, e.g., cell wall invertase, soluble invertase, fructokinase and phosphoglucomutase, could be attributed to changes in gene expression level. For other enzymes, additional control mechanisms play a role in the developing tomato fruits. Localization by in-situ activity staining of enzymes showed comparable results for fruits of domesticated tomato and the wild accessions. However, in the pericarp of S. peruvianum, less activity staining of phosphogluco-isomerase, phosphoglucomutase and UDP-glucosepyrophosphorylase was observed.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !synthesizes! Enzymes
Gene: !regulates! Carbohydrate metabolism
Gene: !controls! Activity of enzymes
Gene: !localizes to! Pericarp
Gene: !enhances! Growth rate
Gene: !represses! Relative growth rate