The effect of constitutive invertase overexpression on the arbuscular mycorrhiza (AM) is shown. The analysis of the enhanced potential for sucrose cleavage was performed with a heterozygous line of Nicotiana tabacum 35S::cwINV expressing a chimeric gene encoding apoplast-located yeast-derived invertase with the CaMV35S promoter. Despite the 35S promoter, roots of the transgenic plants showed no or only minor effects on invertase activity whereas the activity in leaves was increased at different levels. Plants with strongly elevated leaf invertase activity, which exhibited a strong accumulation of hexoses in source leaves, showed pronounced phenotypical effects like stunted growth and chlorosis, and an undersupply of the root with carbon. Moreover, transcripts of PR (pathogenesis related) genes accumulated in the leaves. In these plants, mycorrhization was reduced. Surprisingly, plants with slightly increased leaf invertase activity showed a stimulation of mycorrhization, particularly 3 weeks after inoculation. Compared with wild-type, a higher degree of mycorrhization accompanied by a higher density of all fungal structures and a higher level of Glomus intraradices-specific rRNA was detected. Those transgenic plants showed no accumulation of hexoses in the source leaves, minor phenotypical effects and no increased PR gene transcript accumulation. The roots had even lower levels of phenolic compounds (chlorogenic acid and scopolin), amines (such as tyramine, dopamine, octopamine and nicotine) and some amino acids (including 5-amino-valeric acid and 4-amino-butyric acid), as well as an increased abscisic acid content compared with wild-type. Minor metabolic changes were found in the leaves of these plants. The changes in metabolism and defense status of the plant and their putative role in the formation of an AM symbiosis are discussed.

35S::cwINV: !expresses! chimeric gene
chimeric gene: !encodes! apoplast-located yeast-derived invertase
roots: !show no or only minor effects on! invertase activity
leaves: !show increased! invertase activity
strongly elevated leaf invertase activity: !exhibits! strong accumulation of hexoses
strongly elevated leaf invertase activity: !causes! stunted growth and chlorosis
strongly elevated leaf invertase activity: !reduces! mycorrhization
slightly increased leaf invertase activity: !stimulates! mycorrhization
slightly increased leaf invertase activity: !increases! Glomus intraradices-specific rRNA
slightly increased leaf invertase activity: !decreases! phenolic compounds, amines, amino acids, abscisic acid