Little is known about the effect of hormones on the photosynthetic process. Therefore, we studied Rubisco content and expression along with gas exchange parameters in transgenic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) plants that are not able to sense ethylene. We also tested for a possible interaction between ethylene insensitivity, abscisic acid (ABA), and sugar feedback on photosynthesis. We measured Rubisco content in seedlings grown in agar with or without added sugar and fluridone, and Rubisco expression in hydroponically grown vegetative plants grown at low and high CO(2). Furthermore, we analyzed gas exchange and the photosynthetic machinery of transformants and wild-type plants grown under standard conditions. In the presence of exogenous glucose (Glc), agar-grown seedlings of the ethylene-insensitive genotype had lower amounts of Rubisco per unit leaf area than the wild type. No differences in Rubisco content were found between ethylene-insensitive and wild-type seedlings treated with fluridone, suggesting that inhibition of ABA production nullified the effect of Glc application. When larger, vegetative plants were grown at different atmospheric CO(2) concentrations, a negative correlation was found between Glc concentration in the leaves and Rubisco gene expression, with stronger repression by high Glc concentrations in ethylene-insensitive plants. Ethylene insensitivity resulted in plants with comparable fractions of nitrogen invested in light harvesting, but lower amounts in electron transport and Rubisco. Consequently, photosynthetic capacity of the insensitive genotype was clearly lower compared with the wild type. We conclude that the inability to perceive ethylene results in increased sensitivity to Glc, which may be mediated by a higher ABA concentration. This increased sensitivity to endogenous Glc has negative consequences for Rubisco content and photosynthetic capacity of these plants.

ethylene: !insensitivity affects! Rubisco content 
ABA: !inhibits! effect of Glc 
Glc: !represses! Rubisco gene expression 
Glc: !increases sensitivity to! ethylene-insensitive plants 
Nitrogen: !invested in! light harvesting 
Nitrogen: !invested in! electron transport 
Nitrogen: !invested in! Rubisco