The Arabidopsis thaliana genome sequence provides a catalogue of reference genes that can be used for comparative analysis of other species thereby facilitating map-based cloning in economically important crops. We made use of a coffee bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) contig linked to the S(H)3 leaf rust resistance gene to assess microsynteny between coffee (Coffea arabica L.) and Arabidopsis. Microsynteny was revealed and the matching counterparts to C. arabica contigs were seen to be scattered throughout four different syntenic segments of Arabidopsis on chromosomes (Ath) I, III, IV and V. Coffee BAC filter hybridizations were performed using coffee putative conserved orthologous sequences to Arabidopsis predicted genes located on the different Arabidopsis syntenic regions. The coffee BAC contig related to the S(H)3 region was successfully consolidated and later on validated by fingerprinting. Furthermore, the anchoring markers appeared in same order on the coffee BAC contigs and in all Arabidopsis segments with the exception of a single inversion on AtIII and AtIV Arabidopsis segments. However, the S(H)3 coffee region appears to be closer to the ancestral genome segment (before the divergence of Arabidopsis and coffee) than any of the duplicated counterparts in the present-day Arabidopsis genome. The genome duplication events at the origin of its Arabidopsis counterparts occurred most probably after the separation (i.e. 94 million years ago) of Euasterid (Coffee) and Eurosid (Arabidopsis).

Coffea arabica: !linked to! S(H)3 leaf rust resistance gene
Arabidopsis thaliana: !provides catalogue of reference genes for! comparative analysis
C. arabica: !reveals microsynteny with! Arabidopsis
C. arabica: !filtered hybridizations using! coffee putative conserved orthologous sequences
C. arabica: !validated by! fingerprinting
C. arabica: !anchoring markers appear in same order on! coffee BAC contigs
Arabidopsis: !genome duplication events at origin of! Arabidopsis counterparts