Heme oxygenase (HO, EC 1.14.99.3) catalyzes the oxidative conversion of heme to biliverdin IXalpha with the concomitant release of carbon monoxide and iron. Recently, HO has been involved in the protection against oxidative stress in plants. The fact that nitric oxide (NO), an endogenous signaling molecule in animals and plants mediates responses to abiotic and biotic stresses, prompted us to study whether this molecule could modulate HO-1 gene transcription. To fulfill this objective leaves of soybean (Glycine max L.) plants were stimulated with Cd, employing an acute intoxication model. Cadmium caused dehydration, chlorophyll loss and ion leakage. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed no augmentation of HO-1 transcript levels with respect to controls. Pretreatment with 100 microM sodium nitroprussiate (SNP), a well-known NO donor, prevented the effects caused by Cd. When the HO-1 mRNA levels were analyzed, a significant augmentation (54%) was observed with respect to Cd-treated plants. On the other hand, 50 or 300 microM SNP did not fully prevent the effects elicited by Cd. When HO-1 transcript levels were analyzed, no significant enhancement or a down-regulation was observed. The potassium salt of 2-(4-carboxylphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide (cPTIO), a specific NO scavenger, arrested NO-mediated protective effects against to Cd-induced oxidative damage. These data provide an understanding of one of the possible roles that NO can play against an oxidative insult. NO is cytoprotective depending on its concentration, and it was further demonstrated that this protection could be, at least in part, mediated by an enhancement of HO-1 mRNA, as it happens with genes associated with the antioxidant defense system.

Heme oxygenase: !catalyzes! heme to biliverdin IXalpha
Nitric oxide: !mediates responses to! abiotic and biotic stresses
Nitric oxide: !modulates! HO-1 gene transcription
Cadmium: !causes! dehydration, chlorophyll loss and ion leakage
Sodium nitroprussiate: !prevents! effects caused by Cd
HO-1 mRNA: !augments! with respect to Cd-treated plants
2-(4-carboxylphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide: !arrests! NO-mediated protective effects
NO: !cytoprotective depending on! its concentration
NO: !enhances! HO-1 mRNA