Cyanidioschyzon merolae is considered as a suitable model system for studies of organelle differentiation, proliferation and partitioning. Here, we have identified and characterized vacuoles in this organism and examined the partitioning of vacuoles using fluorescence and electron microscopy. Vacuoles were stained with the fluorescent aminopeptidase substrate 7-amino-4-chloromethylcoumarin L: -arginine amide, acidotrophic dyes quinacrine and LysoTracker, and 4',6-diamidino-2-phenyl indole, which, at a high concentration, stains polyphosphate. Vacuoles have been shown to be approximately 500 nm in diameter with a mean of around five per interphase cell. The vacuolar H(+)-ATPase inhibitor concanamycin A blocked the accumulation of quinacrine in the vacuoles, suggesting the presence of the enzyme on these membranes. Electron microscopy revealed that the vacuoles were single membrane-bound organelles with an electron-dense substance, often containing a thick layer surrounding the membrane. Immunoelectron microscopy using an anti-vacuolar-H(+)-pyrophosphatase antibody revealed the presence of the enzyme on these membranes. In interphase cells, vacuoles were distributed in the cytoplasm, while in mitotic cells they were localized adjacent to the mitochondria. Filamentous structures were observed between vacuoles and mitochondria. Vacuoles were distributed almost evenly to daughter cells and redistributed in the cytoplasm after cytokinesis. The change in localization of vacuoles also happened in microtubule-disrupted cells. Since no actin protein or filaments have been detected in C. merolae, this result suggests an intrinsic mechanism for the movement of vacuoles that differs from commonly known mechanisms mediated by microtubules and actin filaments.

Vacuoles: !stained with! fluorescent aminopeptidase substrate 
Vacuoles: !have been shown to be! 500 nm in diameter 
Vacuoles: !blocked by! concanamycin A 
Vacuoles: !revealed by! electron microscopy 
Vacuoles: !localized adjacent to! mitochondria 
Vacuoles: !distributed almost evenly to! daughter cells 
Vacuoles: !redistributed in! cytoplasm after cytokinesis 
Vacuoles: !moved by! intrinsic mechanism