['17587183', 'Despite the importance of the senescence processes in plants, our knowledge on  regulatory mechanisms of senescence is still poor. WRKY transcription factors  have been shown to be involved in the regulation of leaf senescence. However,  almost nothing is known about the upstream regulation of the senescence specific  expression of WRKY factors. Therefore, we characterized proteins that bind and  activate the promoter of WRKY53, which participates in leaf senescence in  Arabidopsis thaliana. Surprisingly, a mitogen activated protein kinase kinase  kinase (MEKK1) was identified as a DNA-binding protein. The binding motif for  MEKK1 in the WRKY53 promoter could be characterized and promoter:GUS analyses  revealed that this region is important for the switch of WRKY53 expression from a  leaf age dependent to a systemic plant age dependent expression during bolting  time. In addition to its promotor-binding activity, MEKK1 was also able to  interact with the WRKY53 protein. Using bimolecular fluorescence complementation  assays the complex formation of MEKK1 and WRKY53 could be localized predominately  in the nucleus of Arabidopsis cells. MEKK1 could also phosphorylate WRKY53 in  vitro and phosphorylation could increase DNA-binding activity of WRKY53 in vitro  and transcription of a WRKY53 promoter driven reporter gene in vivo. These  results suggest that MEKK1 is a bifunctional protein: it binds to the promoter of  the WRKY53 gene regulating the switch from a leaf age dependent to a plant age  dependent expression and it can phosopharylate WRKY53 in vitro increasing its DNA  binding activity. Thus, MEKK1 might be able to take a very direct short cut in  mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling by directly phosphorylating a  transcription factor.', '2007 Sep', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-007-9198-z', 'Zentgraf']

MEKK1: !binds to! WRKY53 promoter 
MEKK1: !interacts with! WRKY53 
MEKK1: !phosphorylates! WRKY53 
WRKY53: !enhances! DNA-binding activity 
WRKY53: !regulates! switch from leaf age dependent to plant age dependent expression