Concerted changes in the transcriptional pattern and physiological traits that result from long-term (here defined as up to 24 h) limitation of inorganic carbon (C(i)) have been investigated for the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803. Results from reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and genome-wide DNA microarray analyses indicated stable up-regulation of genes for inducible CO(2) and HCO(3)(-) uptake systems and of the rfb cluster that encodes enzymes involved in outer cell wall polysaccharide synthesis. Coordinated up-regulation of photosystem I genes was further found and supported by a higher photosystem I content and activity under low C(i) (LC) conditions. Bacterial-type glycerate pathway genes were induced by LC conditions, in contrast to the genes for the plant-like photorespiratory C2 cycle. Down-regulation was observed for nitrate assimilation genes and surprisingly also for almost all carboxysomal proteins. However, for the latter the observed elongation of the half-life time of the large subunit of Rubisco protein may render compensation. Mutants defective in glycolate turnover (DeltaglcD and DeltagcvT) showed some transcriptional changes under high C(i) conditions that are characteristic for LC conditions in wild-type cells, like a modest down-regulation of carboxysomal genes. Properties under LC conditions were comparable to LC wild type, including the strong response of genes encoding inducible high-affinity C(i) uptake systems. Electron microscopy revealed a conspicuous increase in number of carboxysomes per cell in mutant DeltaglcD already under high C(i) conditions. These data indicate that an increased level of photorespiratory intermediates may affect carboxysomal components but does not intervene with the expression of majority of LC inducible genes.

Gene: !affects! Transcriptional pattern
Gene: !induces! CO2 and HCO3 uptake systems
Gene: !induces! Photosystem I genes
Gene: !induces! Bacterial-type glycerate pathway genes
Gene: !down-regulates! Nitrate assimilation genes
Gene: !down-regulates! Carboxysomal proteins
Gene: !increases! Number of carboxysomes per cell