The poly(A)-binding protein (PABP), a protein that contains four conserved RNA recognition motifs (RRM1-4) and a C-terminal domain, is expressed throughout the eukaryotic kingdom and promotes translation through physical and functional interactions with eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4G and eIF4B. Two highly divergent isoforms of eIF4G, known as eIF4G and eIFiso4G, are expressed in plants. As little is known about how PABP can interact with RNA and three distinct translation initiation factors in plants, the RNA binding specificity and organization of the protein interaction domains in wheat PABP was investigated. Wheat PABP differs from animal PABP in that its RRM1 does not bind RNA as an individual domain and that RRM 2, 3, and 4 exhibit different RNA binding specificities to non-poly(A) sequences. The PABP interaction domains for eIF4G and eIFiso4G were distinct despite the functional similarity between the eIF4G proteins. A single interaction domain for eIF4G is present in the RRM1 of PABP, whereas eIFiso4G interacts at two sites, i.e. one within RRM1-2 and the second within RRM3-4. The eIFiso4G binding site in RRM1-2 mapped to a 36-amino acid region encompassing the C-terminal end of RRM1, the linker region, and the N-terminal end of RRM2, whereas the second site in RRM3-4 was more complex. A single interaction domain for eIF4B is present within a 32-amino acid region representing the C-terminal end of RRM1 of PABP that overlaps with the N-proximal eIFiso4G interaction domain. eIF4B and eIFiso4G exhibited competitive binding to PABP, supporting the overlapping nature of their interaction domains. These results support the notion that eIF4G, eIFiso4G, and eIF4B interact with distinct molecules of PABP to increase the stability of the interaction between the termini of an mRNA.

PABP: !interacts with! eIF4G 
PABP: !interacts with! eIFiso4G 
eIF4G: !binds to! RRM1 
eIFiso4G: !binds to! RRM1-2 
eIFiso4G: !binds to! RRM3-4 
eIF4B: !binds to! RRM1 
eIF4B: !competes with! eIFiso4G