This paper explores the effects of high light stress on Fe-deficient plants. Maize (Zea mays) plants were grown under conditions of Fe deficiency and complete nutrition. Attached, intact leaves of Fe-deficient and control plants were used for gas exchange experiments under suboptimal, optimal and photoinhibitory illumination. Isolated chloroplasts were used to study photosynthetic electron transport system, compromised by the induction of Fe deficiency. The reaction centers of PS II (measured as reduction of Q, the primary electron acceptor of P 680) and PS I (measured as oxidation of P 700) were estimated from the amplitude of light induced absorbance change at 320 and 700 nm, respectively. Plants were subjected to photoinhibitory treatment for different time periods and isolated chloroplasts from these plants were used for electron transport studies. Carbon dioxide fixation in control as well as in Fe-deficient plants decreased in response to high light intensities. Total chlorophyll, P 700 and Q content in Fe-deficient chloroplasts decreased, while Chl a/b ratio and Q/P 700 ratio increased. However, electron transport through PS II suffered more after photoinhibitory treatment as compared to electron transport through PS I or whole chain. Electron transfer through PS I+PS II, excluding the water oxidation complex showed a decrease in Fe-deficient plants. However, electron transport through this part of the chain did not suffer much as a result of photoinhibition, suggesting a defect in the oxidising side of PS II.

Fe-deficiency: !affects! Photosynthetic electron transport system
High light stress: !affects! Carbon dioxide fixation
Total chlorophyll: !decreases! in Fe-deficient chloroplasts
P 700: !decreases! in Fe-deficient chloroplasts
Q: !decreases! in Fe-deficient chloroplasts
Chl a/b ratio: !increases! in Fe-deficient chloroplasts
Q/P 700 ratio: !increases! in Fe-deficient chloroplasts
PS II: !suffers more! after photoinhibitory treatment
PS I: !suffers less! after photoinhibitory treatment
PS I+PS II: !decreases! in Fe-deficient plants