In order to investigate the effects of HBK3, a spruce gene member of the class I KNOX family, during somatic embryogenesis, sense (HBK3-S) and antisense (HBK3-A) Norway spruce (Picea abies) lines were generated. Somatic embryos produced from these lines were then analysed at morphological and structural levels. Compared with control, differentiation of immature somatic embryos from pro-embryogenic masses (PEMs) was accelerated in lines overexpressing HBK3 (HBK3-S). Such immature embryos showed enlarged embryogenic heads and were able to produce fully developed cotyledonary embryos at higher frequency. Furthermore, HBK3-S embryos had enlarged shoot apical meristems (SAMs) and enlarged expression pattern of PgAGO, a molecular marker gene specific to meristematic cells. Lines in which HBK3 (HBK3-A) was down-regulated had reduced ability to produce immature somatic embryos from PEMs and were not able to complete the maturation processes. To assess the function of HBK3 in comparison with that of angiosperm KNOX genes, this gene was ectopically expressed in Arabidopsis plants. As observed for spruce, Arabidopsis embryos overexpressing HBK3 had enlarged meristems and enlarged expression pattern of SHOOTMERISTEMLESS, a SAM molecular marker gene. In addition, transformed embryos were able to germinate at a higher rate and the resulting plants showed a variety of phenotypic aberrations, including abnormal leaves and reduced apical dominance. Overall, these data confirm the importance of KNOTTED genes during development and reveal the participation of HBK3 in conifer embryogeny. Furthermore, the results show redundant functions of this gene during embryonic growth of spruce and Arabidopsis, but not during post-embryonic growth.

HBK3: !accelerates! Differentiation of immature somatic embryos 
HBK3: !enlarges! Shoot apical meristems 
HBK3: !enlarges! Expression pattern of PgAGO 
HBK3: !reduces! Ability to produce immature somatic embryos 
HBK3: !enlarges! Meristems in Arabidopsis 
HBK3: !enlarges! Expression pattern of SHOOTMERISTEMLESS 
HBK3: !increases! Germination rate 
HBK3: !causes! Phenotypic aberrations