['17611230', 'A main developmental switch in the life cycle of a flowering plant is the  transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. In Arabidopsis thaliana,  distinct genetic pathways regulate the timing of this transition. We report here  that brassinosteroid (BR) signaling establishes an unexpected and previously  unidentified genetic pathway in the floral-regulating network. We isolated two  alleles of brassinosteroid-insensitive 1 (bri1) as enhancers of the  late-flowering autonomous-pathway mutant luminidependens (ld). bri1 was found to  predominantly function as a flowering-time enhancer. Further analyses of double  mutants between bri1 and known flowering-time mutants revealed that bri1 also  enhances the phenotype of the autonomous mutant fca and of the dominant FRI line.  Moreover, all of these double mutants exhibited elevated expression of the potent  floral repressor FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC). This molecular response could be  efficiently suppressed by vernalization, leading to accelerated flowering.  Additionally, specific reduction of the expression of FLC via RNA interference  accelerated flowering in bri1 ld double mutants. Importantly, combining the  BR-deficient mutant cpd with ld also resulted in delayed flowering and led to  elevated FLC expression. Finally, we found increased histone H3 acetylation at  FLC chromatin in bri1 ld mutants, as compared with ld single mutants. In  conclusion, we propose that BR signaling acts to repress FLC expression,  particularly in genetic situations, with, for example, dominant FRI alleles or  autonomous-pathway mutants, in which FLC is activated.', '2007 Aug', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.02866', 'Davis']

brassinosteroid: !represses! FLC 
bri1: !enhances! late-flowering autonomous-pathway mutant luminidependens 
bri1: !enhances! autonomous mutant fca 
bri1: !enhances! dominant FRI line 
cpd: !delays! flowering 
RNA interference: !accelerates! flowering in bri1 ld double mutants 
bri1 ld mutants: !exhibit increased! histone H3 acetylation at FLC chromatin