['17616738', 'Embryogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana is marked by a predictable sequence of  oriented cell divisions, which precede cell fate determination. We show that  mutation of the TORMOZ (TOZ) gene yields embryos with aberrant cell division  planes and arrested embryos that appear not to have established normal  patterning. The defects in toz mutants differ from previously described mutations  that affect embryonic cell division patterns. Longitudinal division planes of the  proembryo are frequently replaced by transverse divisions and less frequently by  oblique divisions, while divisions of the suspensor cells, which divide only  transversely, appear generally unaffected. Expression patterns of selected embryo  patterning genes are altered in the mutant embryos, implying that the positional  cues required for their proper expression are perturbed by the misoriented  divisions. The TOZ gene encodes a nucleolar protein containing WD repeats.  Putative TOZ orthologs exist in other eukaryotes including Saccharomyces  cerevisiae, where the protein is predicted to function in 18S rRNA biogenesis. We  find that disruption of the Sp TOZ gene results in cell division defects in  Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Previous studies in yeast and animal cells have  identified nucleolar proteins that regulate the exit from M phase and  cytokinesis, including factors involved in pre-rRNA processing. Our study  suggests that in plant cells, nucleolar functions might interact with the  processes of regulated cell divisions and influence the selection of longitudinal  division planes during embryogenesis.', '2007 Jul', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.106.042697', 'Sundaresan']

TOZ: !affects! Embryogenesis 
TOZ: !encodes! Nucleolar protein 
Mutation: !yields! Aberrant cell division planes 
Expression patterns: !altered in! Mutant embryos 
Putative TOZ orthologs: !exist in! Other eukaryotes 
Sp TOZ gene: !disrupted in! Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
Nucleolar proteins: !regulate! Exit from M phase 
Nucleolar functions: !interact with! Processes of regulated cell divisions