Sapwood respiration often declines towards the sapwood/heartwood boundary, but it is not known if parenchyma metabolic activity declines with cell age. We measured sapwood respiration in five temperate species (sapwood age range of 5-64 years) and expressed respiration on a live cell basis by quantifying living parenchyma. We found no effect of parenchyma age on respiration in two conifers (Pinus strobus, Tsuga canadensis), both of which had significant amounts of dead parenchyma in the sapwood. In angiosperms (Acer rubrum, Fraxinus americana, Quercus rubra), both bulk tissue and live cell respiration were reduced by about one-half in the oldest relative to the youngest sapwood, and all sapwood parenchyma remained alive. Conifers and angiosperms had similar bulk tissue respiration despite a smaller proportion of parenchyma in conifers (5% versus 15-25% in angiosperms), such that conifer parenchyma respired at rates about three times those of angiosperms. The fact that 5-year-old parenchyma cells respired at the same rate as 25-year-old cells in conifers suggests that there is no inherent or intrinsic decline in respiration as a result of cellular ageing. In contrast, it is not known whether differences observed in cellular respiration rates of angiosperms are a function of age per se, or whether active regulation of metabolic rate or positional effects (e.g. proximity to resources and/or hormones) could be the cause of reduced respiration in older sapwood.

Pinus strobus: !has! significant amounts of dead parenchyma in sapwood
Acer rubrum: !has! reduced bulk tissue respiration in oldest relative to youngest sapwood
Fraxinus americana: !has! reduced live cell respiration in oldest relative to youngest sapwood
Quercus rubra: !has! reduced live cell respiration in oldest relative to youngest sapwood
conifers: !have! smaller proportion of parenchyma than angiosperms
conifer parenchyma: !respire at! three times the rate of angiosperms
5-year-old parenchyma cells: !respire at! same rate as 25-year-old cells in conifers