Although Pteris vittata L. and Sedum alfredii Hance have been identified as an As hyperaccumulator and a Zn/Cd hyperaccumulator, respectively, for a few years, variations in metal accumulation among populations and their arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) status have not been fully explored. Six populations of P. vittata and four populations of S. alfredii from southeast China were investigated. Up to 1,373 As, 680 Pb, 376 Zn, 4.8 Cd, 169 Cu mg kg(-1) in fronds of P. vittata and 358 As, 2,290 Pb, 23,403 Zn, 708 Cd, 342 Cu mg kg(-1 )in shoots of S. alfredii were detected. Constitutive properties of As and Zn hyperaccumulation in metallicolous populations of P. vittata and S. alfredii, respectively, were confirmed. However, Cd hyperaccumulation in S. alfredii varied among populations. The two hyperaccumulators varied in efficiency in taking up other heavy metals. Different metal tolerance strategies adopted by the two hyperaccumulators varied among plant species and metal species. Low to moderate levels of AM colonization in P. vittata (4.2-12.8%) and S. alfredii (8.5-45.8%) were observed at uncontaminated and metal-contaminated sites. The relationship between metal concentrations and AM colonization in the two hyperacumulators was also examined. The abundance of AM fungal spores ranged from 16 to 190 spores per 25 g soil. Glomus microaggregatum, Glomus mosseae, Glomus brohultii and Glomus geosporum were the most common species associated with both P. vittata and S. alfredii. To our knowledge, this is the first report of AM fungal status in rhizosphere of P. vittata and S. alfredii.

Pteris vittata: !accumulates! As 
Pteris vittata: !accumulates! Pb 
Pteris vittata: !accumulates! Zn 
Pteris vittata: !accumulates! Cd 
Pteris vittata: !accumulates! Cu 
Sedum alfredii: !accumulates! As 
Sedum alfredii: !accumulates! Pb 
Sedum alfredii: !accumulates! Zn 
Sedum alfredii: !accumulates! Cd 
Sedum alfredii: !accumulates! Cu 
Pteris vittata: !colonized by! AM fungi 
Sedum alfredii: !colonized by! AM fungi 
AM fungi: !associated with! Pteris vittata 
AM fungi: !associated with! Sedum alfredii