['17636254', 'In many invertebrates and plants, the N-glycosylation profile is dominated by  truncated paucimannosidic N-glycans, i.e. glycans consisting of a simple  trimannosylchitobiosyl core often modified by core fucose residues. Even though  they lack antennal N-acetylglucosamine residues, the biosynthesis of these  glycans requires the sequential action of GlcNAc transferase I, Golgi mannosidase  II, and, finally, beta-N-acetylglucosaminidases. In Drosophila, the recently  characterized enzyme encoded by the fused lobes (fdl) gene specifically removes  the non-reducing N-acetylglucosamine residue from the alpha1,3-antenna of  N-glycans. In the present study, we examined the products of five  beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase genes from Caenorhabditis elegans (hex-1 to hex-5,  corresponding to reading frames T14F9.3, C14C11.3, Y39A1C.4, Y51F10.5, and  Y70D2A.2) in addition to three from Arabidopsis thaliana (AtHEX1, AtHEX2, and  AtHEX3, corresponding to reading frames At1g65590, At3g55260, and At1g05590).  Based on homology, the Caenorhabditis HEX-1 and all three Arabidopsis enzymes are  members of the same sub-family as the aforementioned Drosophila fused lobes  enzyme but either act as chitotriosidases or non-specifically remove  N-acetylglucosamine from both N-glycan antennae. The other four Caenorhabditis  enzymes are members of a distinct sub-family; nevertheless, two of these enzymes  displayed the same alpha1,3-antennal specificity as the fused lobes enzyme.  Furthermore, a deletion of part of the Caenorhabditis hex-2 gene drastically  reduces the native N-glycan-specific hexosaminidase activity in mutant worm  extracts and results in a shift in the N-glycan profile, which is a demonstration  of its in vivo enzymatic relevance. Based on these data, it is hypothesized that  the genetic origin of paucimannosidic glycans in nematodes, plants, and insects  involves highly divergent members of the same hexosaminidase gene family.', '2007 Sep 21', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M704235200', 'Wilson']

GlcNAc transferase I: !synthesizes! truncated paucimannosidic N-glycans
Golgi mannosidase II: !synthesizes! truncated paucimannosidic N-glycans
beta-N-acetylglucosaminidases: !synthesizes! truncated paucimannosidic N-glycans
fdl gene: !removes! non-reducing N-acetylglucosamine residue
HEX-1: !acts as! chitotriosidase
HEX-2: !removes! N-acetylglucosamine from N-glycan antennae