['17644627', 'Plant glycoproteins contain substantial amounts of paucimannosidic N-glycans  lacking terminal GlcNAc residues at their nonreducing ends. It has been proposed  that this is due to the action of beta-hexosaminidases during late stages of  N-glycan processing or in the course of N-glycan turnover. We have now cloned the  three putative beta-hexosaminidase sequences present in the Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome. When heterologously expressed as soluble forms in  Spodoptera frugiperda cells, the enzymes (termed HEXO1-3) could all hydrolyze the  synthetic substrates p-nitrophenyl-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-beta-d-glucopyranoside,  p-nitrophenyl-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-beta-d-galactopyranoside,  4-methylumbelliferyl-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-beta-d-glucopyranoside, and  4-methylumbelliferyl-6-sulfo-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-beta-d-glucopyranoside, albeit  to a varying extent. HEXO1 to HEXO3 were further able to degrade pyridylaminated  chitotriose, whereas pyridylaminated chitobiose was only cleaved by HEXO1. With  N-glycan substrates, HEXO1 displayed a much higher specific activity than HEXO2  and HEXO3. Nevertheless, all three enzymes were capable of removing terminal  GlcNAc residues from the alpha1,3- and alpha1,6-mannosyl branches of biantennary  N-glycans without any strict branch preference. Subcellular localization studies  with HEXO-fluorescent protein fusions transiently expressed in Nicotiana  benthamiana plants showed that HEXO1 is a vacuolar protein. In contrast, HEXO2  and HEXO3 are mainly located at the plasma membrane. These results indicate that  HEXO1 participates in N-glycan trimming in the vacuole, whereas HEXO2 and/or  HEXO3 could be responsible for the processing of N-glycans present on secretory  glycoproteins.', '2007 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.101162', 'Mach']

HEXO1: !localizes to! vacuole 
HEXO2: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
HEXO3: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
HEXO1: !trims! N-glycans 
HEXO2/HEXO3: !process! secretory glycoproteins