['17644626', 'The posttranslational addition of small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) to other  intracellular proteins has been implicated in a variety of eukaryotic functions,  including modifying cytoplasmic signal transduction, nuclear import and  subnuclear compartmentalization, DNA repair, and transcription regulation. For  plants, in particular, both genetic analyses and the rapid accumulation of SUMO  conjugates in response to various adverse environmental conditions suggest that  SUMOylation plays a key role in the stress response. Through genetic analyses of  various SUMO conjugation mutants, we show here that the SUMO1 and SUMO2 isoforms,  in particular, and SUMOylation, in general, are essential for viability in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Null T-DNA insertion mutants affecting the  single genes encoding the SUMO-activating enzyme subunit SAE2 and the  SUMO-conjugating enzyme SCE1 are embryonic lethal, with arrest occurring early in  embryo development. Whereas the single genes encoding the SUMO1 and SUMO2  isoforms are not essential by themselves, double mutants missing both are also  embryonic lethal. Viability can be restored by reintroduction of SUMO1 expression  in the homozygous sum1-1 sum2-1 background. Various stresses, like heat shock,  dramatically increase the pool of SUMO conjugates in planta. This increase  involves SUMO1 and SUMO2 and is mainly driven by the SUMO protein ligase SIZ1,  with most of the conjugates accumulating in the nucleus. Taken together, it  appears that SIZ1-mediated conjugation of SUMO1 and SUMO2 to other intracellular  proteins is essential in Arabidopsis, possibly through stress-induced  modification of a potentially diverse pool of nuclear proteins.', '2007 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.102285', 'Vierstra']

SAE2: !activates! SUMO 
SCE1: !conjugates! SUMO 
SUMO1: !essential for! viability 
SUMO2: !essential for! viability 
SIZ1: !mediates conjugation of! SUMO1 & SUMO2 
SUMO1 & SUMO2: !modify! nuclear proteins