['17653191', 'Circumstantial evidence suggests that intracellular membrane trafficking pathways  diversified independently in the plant kingdom, but documented examples are rare.  ARF-GEFs (guanine-nucleotide exchange factors for ADP-ribosylation factor  GTPases) are essential for vesicular trafficking in all eukaryotic kingdoms, but  of the eight ARF-GEF families, only the ancestral BIG and GBF types are found in  plants. Whereas fungal and animal GBF proteins perform conserved functions at the  Golgi, the Arabidopsis thaliana GBF protein GNOM is thought to act in only the  process of recycling from endosomes. We now show that the related Arabidopsis GBF  protein GNOM-LIKE1 (GNL1) has an ancestral function at the Golgi but is also  required for selective internalization from the plasma membrane in the presence  of brefeldin A (BFA). We identified gnl1 mutants that accumulated biosynthetic  and recycling endoplasmic reticulum markers in enlarged internal compartments.  Notably, in the absence of functional GNL1, Golgi stacks were rendered sensitive  to the selective ARF-GEF inhibitor BFA, which caused them to fuse with the  endoplasmic reticulum. Furthermore, in BFA-treated gnl1 roots, the  internalization of a polar plasma-membrane marker, the auxin efflux carrier PIN2,  was selectively inhibited. Thus, GNL1 is a BFA-resistant GBF protein that  functions with a BFA-sensitive ARF-GEF both at the Golgi and in selective  endocytosis, but not in recycling from endosomes. We propose that the evolution  of endocytic trafficking in plants was accompanied by neofunctionalization within  the GBF family, whereas in other kingdoms it occurred independently by  elaboration of additional ARF-GEF families.', '2007 Jul 26', 'Nature', '10.1038/nature06023', 'Moore']

ARF-GEFs: !diversified independently! Plant kingdom 
BIG/GBF: !found in! Plants 
GNOM: !thought to act in! Recycling from endosomes 
GNL1: !functions with! BFA-sensitive ARF-GEF 
GNL1: !required for! Selective internalization from plasma membrane 
BFA: !caused! Golgi stacks to fuse with ER 
PIN2: !internalized by! GNL1