['17666024', 'Deglycosylation of misfolded proteins by the endoplasmic reticulum-associated  degradation (ERAD) pathway is catalyzed by peptide:N-glycanases (PNGases) that  are highly conserved among mammals and yeast. The catalytic mechanism of PNGases  employs a catalytic triad consisting of Cys, His and Asp residues, which is  shared by other enzyme families such as cysteine proteases and protein  cross-linking transglutaminases (TGases). In contrast to the yeast and mammalian  systems, very little is known about ERAD in plants and the enzymes responsible  for proper clearance of misfolded plant proteins. We have used a computer-based  modeling approach to identify an Arabidopsis thaliana PNGase (AtPNG1). AtPNG1 is  encoded by a single-copy gene and displays high structural homology with known  PNGases. Importantly, heterologous expression of AtPNG1 restored N-glycanase  activity in a PNGase-deficient Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutant. The AtPNG1 gene  is uniformly and constitutively expressed at low levels throughout all  developmental stages of the plant, and its expression does not appear to be  subject to substantial regulation by external stimuli. Recently, recombinant  AtPNG1 produced in Escherichia coli was reported to display TGase activity (Della  Mea et al., Plant Physiol. 135, 2046-54, 2004). However, inactivation of the  AtPNG1 gene did not result in decreased TGase activity in the mutant plant, and  recombinant AtPNG1 produced in S. cerevisiae exhibited only residual TGase  activity. We propose that the AtPNG1 gene encodes a bona fide peptide:N-glycanase  that contributes to ERAD-related protein quality control in plants.', '2007 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03215.x', 'Brunner']

PNGases: !catalyze! Deglycosylation 
Cys, His, Asp residues: !form! Catalytic triad 
AtPNG1: !encoded by! Single-copy gene 
AtPNG1: !restores! N-glycanase activity 
AtPNG1: !uniformly expressed! Throughout plant development 
AtPNG1: !not regulated! By external stimuli 
AtPNG1: !contributes to! ERAD-related protein quality control