Sclerotinia sclerotiorum is a necrotrophic plant pathogen which causes serious disease in agronomically important crop species. The molecular basis of plant defense to this pathogen is poorly understood. We investigated gene expression changes associated with S. sclerotiorum infection in a partially resistant and a susceptible genotype of oilseed Brassica napus using a whole genome microarray from Arabidopsis. A total of 686 and 1,547 genes were found to be differentially expressed after infection in the resistant and susceptible genotypes, respectively. The number of differentially expressed genes increased over infection time with the majority being up-regulated in both genotypes. The putative functions of the differentially expressed genes included pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins, proteins involved in the oxidative burst, protein kinase, molecule transporters, cell maintenance and development, abiotic stress, as well as proteins with unknown functions. The gene regulation patterns indicated that a large part of the defense response exhibited as a temporal and quantitative difference between the two genotypes. Genes associated with jasmonic acid (JA) and ethylene signal transduction pathways were induced, but no salicylic acid (SA) responsive genes were identified. Candidate defense genes were identified by integration of the early response genes in the partially resistant line with previously mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL). Expression levels of these genes were verified by Northern blot analyses. These results indicate that genes encoding various proteins involved in diverse roles, particularly WRKY transcription factors and plant cell wall related proteins may play an important role in the defense response to S. sclerotiorum disease.

Gene: !affects! Pathogenesis-related proteins 
Gene: !affects! Oxidative burst proteins 
Gene: !affects! Protein kinases 
Gene: !affects! Molecule transporters 
Gene: !affects! Cell maintenance and development proteins 
Gene: !affects! Abiotic stress proteins 
Gene: !affects! Unknown function proteins 
Gene: !induces! Jasmonic acid signal transduction pathways 
Gene: !induces! Ethylene signal transduction pathways 
Gene: !enhances! Defense response 
Gene: !encodes! WRKY transcription factors 
Gene: !encodes! Plant cell wall related proteins