['17662034', 'Most organisms have evolved a timing mechanism or circadian clock that is able to  generate 24 h rhythmic oscillations in multiple biological events. The  environmental fluctuations in light and temperature synchronize the expression  and activity of key oscillator components that ultimately define the period,  phase and amplitude of output rhythms. In Arabidopsis, overexpression of the  casein kinase 2 (CK2) regulatory subunits, CKB3 or CKB4, alters the function of  the clock under free-running conditions, and results in period-shortening of  genes peaking at different phase angles. Here, we examine the effects of CKB4  overexpression (CKB4-ox) on a number of clock outputs that are modulated by day  length or photoperiod. We have found a phase shift in gene expression, shortening  of hypocotyl elongation and earlier than wild-type initiation of flowering under  short-day conditions. Our study shows that the earlier expression phases of the  floral induction genes GIGANTEA, FLAVIN-BINDING KELCH REPEAT F-BOX1 and CONSTANS  correlate with higher abundance of the FLOWERING LOCUS T transcript under  short-day conditions. Matching the period of the external light/dark cycles  relative to the endogenous short period of the CKB4-ox oscillator restores the  phase of gene expression and the flowering sensitivity to day length, indicating  that a clock defect is responsible for the CKB4-ox phenotypes. Our studies  suggest a function for CKB4 very close to the oscillator, as expression of the  core components TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 and CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 is  also altered in CKB4-ox plants. Based on our results, we propose that oscillator  dysfunction is responsible for the period defect of CKB4-ox plants that leads to  clock dissonance with the environment and reduced sensitivity to day length.', '2007 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03186.x', 'Mas']

CKB4: !alters! clock function 
CKB4: !shifts! gene expression phase 
CKB4: !shortens! hypocotyl elongation 
CKB4: !initiates! flowering earlier 
GIGANTEA/FLAVIN-BINDING KELCH REPEAT F-BOX1/CONSTANS: !correlate with! FLOWERING LOCUS T transcript abundance 
light/dark cycles: !matches! CKB4-ox oscillator period 
TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1/CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1: !altered in! CKB4-ox plants