Young meristematic plant cells contain a large number of small vacuoles, while the largest part of the vacuome in mature cells is composed by a large central vacuole, occupying 80% to 90% of the cell volume. Thus far, only a limited number of vacuolar membrane proteins have been identified and characterized. The proteomic approach is a powerful tool to identify new vacuolar membrane proteins. To analyze vacuoles from growing tissues we isolated vacuoles from cauliflower (Brassica oleracea) buds, which are constituted by a large amount of small cells but also contain cells in expansion as well as fully expanded cells. Here we show that using purified cauliflower vacuoles and different extraction procedures such as saline, NaOH, acetone, and chloroform/methanol and analyzing the data against the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) database 102 cauliflower integral proteins and 214 peripheral proteins could be identified. The vacuolar pyrophosphatase was the most prominent protein. From the 102 identified proteins 45 proteins were already described. Nine of these, corresponding to 46% of peptides detected, are known vacuolar proteins. We identified 57 proteins (55.9%) containing at least one membrane spanning domain with unknown subcellular localization. A comparison of the newly identified proteins with expression profiles from in silico data revealed that most of them are highly expressed in young, developing tissues. To verify whether the newly identified proteins were indeed localized in the vacuole we constructed and expressed green fluorescence protein fusion proteins for five putative vacuolar membrane proteins exhibiting three to 11 transmembrane domains. Four of them, a putative organic cation transporter, a nodulin N21 family protein, a membrane protein of unknown function, and a senescence related membrane protein were localized in the vacuolar membrane, while a white-brown ATP-binding cassette transporter homolog was shown to reside in the plasma membrane. These results demonstrate that proteomic analysis of highly purified vacuoles from specific tissues allows the identification of new vacuolar proteins and provides an additional view of tonoplastic proteins.

Vacuoles: !contain! Proteins 
Proteins: !identified by! Proteomic approach 
Cauliflower buds: !isolated from! Vacuoles 
102 proteins: !identified in! Cauliflower vacuoles 
45 proteins: !already described! From 102 identified proteins 
9 proteins: !known vacuolar proteins! From 45 proteins 
57 proteins: !containing membrane spanning domains! From 102 identified proteins 
Expression profiles: !compared with! Newly identified proteins 
Green fluorescence protein fusion proteins: !constructed and expressed for! 5 putative vacuolar membrane proteins 
Organic cation transporter, nodulin N21 family protein, membrane protein of unknown function, senescence related membrane protein: !localized in! Vacuolar membrane 
White-brown ATP-binding cassette transporter homolog: !localized in! Plasma membrane