Plant canopies are characterized by dramatic gradients of light between canopy top and bottom, and interactions between light, temperature and water vapour deficits. This review summarizes current knowledge of potentials and limitations of acclimation of foliage photosynthetic capacity (A(max)) and light-harvesting efficiency to complex environmental gradients within the canopies. Acclimation of A(max) to high light availability involves accumulation of rate-limiting photosynthetic proteins per unit leaf area as the result of increases in leaf thickness in broad-leaved species and volume: total area ratio and mesophyll thickness in species with complex geometry of leaf cross-section. Enhancement of light-harvesting efficiency in low light occurs through increased chlorophyll production per unit dry mass, greater leaf area per unit dry mass investment in leaves and shoot architectural modifications that improve leaf exposure and reduce within-shoot shading. All these acclimation responses vary among species, resulting in species-specific use efficiencies of low and high light. In fast-growing canopies and in evergreen species, where foliage developed and acclimated to a certain light environment becomes shaded by newly developing foliage, leaf senescence, age-dependent changes in cell wall characteristics and limited foliage re-acclimation capacity can constrain adjustment of older leaves to modified light availabilities. The review further demonstrates that leaves in different canopy positions respond differently to dynamic fluctuations in light availability and to multiple environmental stresses. Foliage acclimated to high irradiance respond more plastically to rapid changes in leaf light environment, and is more resistant to co-occurring heat and water stress. However, in higher light, co-occurring stresses can more strongly curb the efficiency of foliage photosynthetic machinery through reductions in internal diffusion conductance to CO(2). This review demonstrates strong foliage potential for acclimation to within-canopy environmental gradients, but also highlights complex constraints on acclimation and foliage functioning resulting from light x foliage age interactions, multiple environmental stresses, dynamic light fluctuations and species-specific leaf and shoot structural constraints.

Gene: !affects! A(max)
Gene: !enhances! Light-harvesting efficiency
Gene: !represses! Leaf senescence
Gene: !interacts with! Multiple environmental stresses
Gene: !synthesizes! Photosynthetic proteins