High temperature stress-induced male sterility is a critical problem in grain sorghum (Sorghum bicolor L. Moench) that significantly compromises crop yields. Grain sorghum plants were grown season-long under ambient (30/20 degrees C, day-time maximum/night-time minimum) and high temperature (36/26 degrees C) conditions in sunlit Soil-Plant-Atmospheric-Research (SPAR) growth chambers. We report data on the effects of high temperature on sugar levels and expression profiles of genes related to sugar-to-starch metabolism in microspore populations represented by pre- and post-meiotic "early" stages through post-mitotic "late" stages that show detectable levels of starch deposition. Microspores from high temperature stress conditions showed starch-deficiency and considerably reduced germination, translating into 27% loss in seed-set. Sugar profiles showed significant differences in hexose levels at both "early" and "late" stages at the two temperature regimes; and most notably, undetectable sucrose and approximately 50% lower starch content in "late" microspores from heat-stressed plants. Northern blot, quantitative PCR, and immunolocalization data revealed a significant reduction in the steady-state transcript abundance of SbIncw1 gene and CWI proteins in both sporophytic as well as microgametophytic tissues under high temperature conditions. Northern blot analyses also indicated greatly altered temporal expression profiles of various genes involved in sugar cleavage and utilization (SbIncw1, SbIvr2, Sh1, and Sus1), transport (Mha1 and MST1) and starch biosynthesis (Bt2, SU1, GBSS1, and UGPase) in heat-stressed plants. Collectively, these data suggest that impairment of CWI-mediated sucrose hydrolysis and subsequent lack of sucrose biosynthesis may be the most upstream molecular dysfunctions leading to altered carbohydrate metabolism and starch deficiency under elevated growth temperature conditions.

SbIncw1: !represses! CWI proteins 
CWI proteins: !localizes to! sporophytic and microgametophytic tissues 
high temperature: !affects! sugar levels 
high temperature: !affects! expression profiles of genes 
high temperature: !reduces! germination 
high temperature: !reduces! sucrose content 
high temperature: !alters! temporal expression profiles of genes 
CWI-mediated sucrose hydrolysis: !impairs! under high temperature conditions