Two glasshouse studies were conducted to investigate the effect of interspecific complementary and competitive root interactions and rhizosphere effects on the concentration and uptake of Na, Cl and B, and N, P, K, Ca, Mg, Fe, Zn and Mn nutrition of mixed cropped peanut with maize (Experiment I), and barley (Experiment II) grown in nutrient-poor saline-sodic and B toxic soil. Mixed cropped plants were grown in either higher density or lower density. The results of the experiment revealed that dry shoot weight decreased in peanut but increased in maize and barley with associated plant species compared to their monoculture. Shoot Na and Cl concentrations of peanut decreased significantly in both experiments, regardless of higher or lower density. The concentrations of Na also decreased in the shoots of mixed cropped maize and barley, but Cl concentrations increased slightly. The concentration of B significantly decreased in mixed cropping in all plant species regardless of higher or lower density. Rhizosphere chemistry was strongly and differentially modified by the roots of peanut, maize and barley, and mixed growing. There were significant correlations between the root-secreted acid phosphatases (S-APase), acid phosphatase in rhizosphere (RS-APase) and rhizosphere P concentration (RS-P) in the both experiments. The Fe-solubilizing activity (Fe-SA) and ferric reducing (FR) capacity of the roots were generally higher in mixed culture relative to their monoculture, which improved Fe, Zn and Mn nutrition of peanut. Further, there were also significant correlations among FR, Fe-SA and RS-Fe concentrations. Peanut facilitated P nutrition of maize and barley, while maize and barley improved K, Fe, Zn and Mn nutrition of peanut grown in nutrient-poor saline-sodic and B toxic soil.

root: !modifies! rhizosphere chemistry
S-APase: !correlates with! RS-P
Fe-SA: !correlates with! FR
FR: !correlates with! RS-Fe
peanut: !facilitates! P nutrition of maize and barley
maize/barley: !improves! K, Fe, Zn and Mn nutrition of peanut