With the completion of the rice genome sequencing project, the next major challenge is the large-scale determination of gene function. As an important crop and a model organism, rice provides major insights into gene functions important for crop growth or production. Phenomics with detailed information about tagged populations provides a good tool for functional genomics analysis. By a T-DNA insertional mutagenesis approach, we have generated a rice mutant population containing 55,000 promoter trap and gene activation or knockout lines. Approximately 20,000 of these lines have known integration sites. The T0 and T1 plants were grown in net "houses" for two cropping seasons each year since 2003, with the mutant phenotypes recorded. Detailed data describing growth and development of these plants, in 11 categories and 65 subcategories, over the entire four-month growing season are available in a searchable database, along with the genetic segregation information and flanking sequence data. With the detailed data from more than 20,000 T1 lines and 12 plants per line, we estimated the mutation rates of the T1 population, as well the frequency of the dominant T0 mutants. The correlations among different mutation phenotypes are also calculated. Together, the information about mutant lines, their integration sites, and the phenotypes make this collection, the Taiwan Rice Insertion Mutants (TRIM), a good resource for rice phenomics study. Ten T2 seeds per line can be distributed to researchers upon request.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !localizes to! X
Gene: !interacts with! Y
Gene: !enhances! Z
Gene: !represses! U
Gene: !synthesizes! I
Rice: !provides insights into! Gene Functions
Rice: !is a model organism for! Crop Growth
Mutant Population: !contains! 55,000 Lines
Mutant Population: !has known integration sites for! 20,000 Lines
Mutant Phenotypes: !are recorded for! T0 and T1 Plants
Database: !contains! Detailed Data
Mutation Rates: !are estimated for! T1 Population
Correlations: !are calculated among! Different Mutation Phenotypes