Flavonoids are synthesized in response to developmental and environmental signals and perform many functions in plants. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) roots grown in complete darkness do not accumulate flavonoids since the expression of genes encoding enzymes of flavonoid biosynthesis is light dependent. Yet, flavonoids accumulate in root tips of plants with light-grown shoots and light-shielded roots, consistent with shoot-to-root flavonoid movement. Using fluorescence microscopy, a selective flavonoid stain, and localized aglycone application to transparent testa mutants, we showed that flavonoids accumulated in tissues distal to the application site, indicating uptake and movement systems. This was confirmed by time-course fluorescence experiments and high-performance liquid chromatography. Flavonoid applications to root tips resulted in basipetal movement in epidermal layers, with subsequent fluorescence detected 1 cm from application sites after 1 h. Flavonoid application to midroot or cotyledons showed movement of flavonoids toward the root tip mainly in vascular tissue. Naringenin, dihydrokaempferol, and dihydroquercetin were taken up at the root tip, midroot, or cotyledons and traveled long distances via cell-to-cell movement to distal tissues, followed by conversion to quercetin and kaempferol. In contrast, kaempferol and quercetin were only taken up at the root tip. Using ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter and H(+)-ATPase inhibitors suggested that a multidrug resistance-associated protein ABCC transporter facilitated flavonoid movement away from the application site.

Flavonoids: !synthesized in response to! developmental and environmental signals 
Flavonoids: !accumulate in! root tips of plants with light-grown shoots 
Flavonoids: !movement facilitated by! multidrug resistance-associated protein ABCC transporter 
Flavonoids: !taken up at! root tip, midroot, or cotyledons 
Flavonoids: !converted to! quercetin and kaempferol 
Naringenin, dihydrokaempferol, and dihydroquercetin: !traveled long distances via! cell-to-cell movement 
Kaempferol and quercetin: !only taken up at! root tip