Sexual dimorphism is controlled by genes on the Y chromosome in the dioecious plant Silene latifolia. K034 is the first mutant with female flowers and asexual flowers in one individual. Its stamens are suppressed completely, and its gynoecium exhibits two suppression patterns. One gynoecium resembles a thin rod, as in wild-type males (asexual flower); the other is imperfectly suppressed, having 1-3 carpels (female-like flower). The ratio of these patterns was 9 : 1. To exclude the possibility of chimerism in K034, we crossed a female-like flower of K034 with a wild-type male. Progeny obtained from this crossing had asexual and female-like flowers in one individual. This two-flower-type phenotype was inherited without separating. To examine the identity of flower organs in K034, we analyzed the development of asexual and female-like flowers using scanning electron microscopy and in situ hybridization with SLM1 and SLM2 (orthologs of AGAMOUS and PISTILLATA, respectively) as probes. Mitotic spreads of root tip chromosomes from hairy root cultures showed that K034 had 25 chromosomes. Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis, using a subtelomeric repetitive sequence (KpnI subfamily) as a probe, indicated that K034 possessed two X chromosomes and one Y chromosome (Y(d)), of which Y(d) had been rearranged to lose the pseudoautosomal region (PAR). PCR analysis using Y-specific sequence-tagged site (STS) markers clarified that Y(d) of K034 had two other deletions in gynoecium-suppressing and stamen-promoting regions. It is reasonable to suggest that these sex chromosomal abnormalities resulted in two abnormal sexual phenotypes: the asexual and imperfect female (female-like) flowers in K034.

K034: !possesses! two X chromosomes and one Y chromosome 
Y(d): !loses! pseudoautosomal region (PAR) 
K034: !inherits! two-flower-type phenotype 
SLM1/SLM2: !probes! development of asexual and female-like flowers 
KpnI subfamily: !probes! fluorescent in situ hybridization 
Y-specific STS markers: !clarify! deletions in gynoecium-suppressing and stamen-promoting regions