An Indian isolate of Rice tungro bacilliform virus from West Bengal (RTBV-WB) showed significant nucleotide differences in its putative promoter region when compared with a previously characterized isolate from Philippines. The transcription start site of RTBV-WB was mapped followed by assessing the activity and tissue-specificity of the full-length (FL) promoter (-231 to +645) and several of its upstream and downstream deletions by studying the expression of beta-Glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene in transgenic rice (Oryza sativa L. subsp. indica) plants at various stages of development. In addition to the expected vascular-specific expression pattern, studied by histochemical staining, GUS enzymatic assay and northern and RT-PCR analysis, two novel patterns were revealed in some of the downstream deleted versions; a non-expressing type, representing no expression at any stage in any tissue and constitutive type, representing constitutive expression at all stages in most tissues. This indicated the presence of previously unreported positive and negative cis-regulatory elements in the downstream region. The negative element and a putative enhancer region in the upstream region specifically bound to rice nuclear proteins in vitro. The FL and its deletion derivatives were also active in heterologous systems like tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) and wheat (Triticum durum). Expression patterns in tobacco were different from those observed in rice suggesting the importance of upstream elements in those systems and host-specific regulation of the promoter in diverse organisms. Thus, the RTBV-WB FL promoter and its derivatives contain an array of cis-elements, which control constitutive or tissue- and development-specific gene expression in a combinatorial fashion.

Gene: !affects! Expression
Gene: !localizes to! Promoter region
Gene: !interacts with! Rice nuclear proteins
Gene: !enhances! Putative enhancer region
Gene: !represses! Negative element
Gene: !synthesizes! Beta-Glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene