The senescence process is the last stage in leaf development and is characterized by dramatic changes in cellular metabolism and the degeneration of cellular structures. Several reports of senescence-associated genes (SAGs) have appeared, and an overlap in some of the genes induced during senescence and pathogen infections has been observed. For example, the enhanced expression of SAGs in response to diseases caused by fungi, bacteria, and viruses that trigger the hypersensitive response (HR) or during infections induced by virulent fungi and bacteria that elicit necrotic symptoms has been observed. The present work broadens the search for SAGs induced during compatible viral interactions with both the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana and a commercially important grapevine cultivar. The transcript profiles of Arabidopsis ecotype Uk-4 infected with tobacco mosaic virus strain Cg (TMV-Cg) and Vitis vinifera cv. Carménère infected with grapevine leafroll-associated virus strain 3 (GLRaV-3) were analysed using microarray slides of the reference species Arabidopsis. A large number of SAGs exhibited altered expression during these two compatible interactions. Among the SAGs were genes that encode proteins such as proteases, lipases, proteins involved in the mobilization of nutrients and minerals, transporters, transcription factors, proteins related to translation and antioxidant enzymes, among others. Thus, part of the plant's response to virus infection appears to be the activation of the senescence programme. Finally, it was demonstrated that several virus-induced genes are also expressed at elevated levels during natural senescence in healthy plants.

SAGs: !induced by! Pathogen infections 
SAGs: !activated during! Virus infection 
Proteases: !synthesized in response to! Virus infection 
Lipases: !synthesized in response to! Virus infection 
Nutrient/mineral transporters: !synthesized in response to! Virus infection 
Transcription factors: !synthesized in response to! Virus infection 
Translation proteins: !synthesized in response to! Virus infection 
Antioxidant enzymes: !synthesized in response to! Virus infection 
Virus-induced genes: !expressed at elevated levels during! Natural senescence