L-Tryptophan decarboxylase (TDC) and L-tyrosine decarboxylase (TYDC) belong to a family of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylases and catalyze the conversion of tryptophan and tyrosine into tryptamine and tyramine, respectively. The rice genome has been shown to contain seven TDC or TYDC-like genes. Three of these genes for which cDNA clones were available were characterized to assign their functions using heterologous expression in Escherichia coli and rice (Oryza sativa cv. Dongjin). The purified products of two of the genes were expressed in E. coli and exhibited TDC activity, whereas the remaining gene could not be expressed in E. coli. The recombinant TDC protein with the greatest TDC activity showed a K (m) of 0.69 mM for tryptophan, and its activity was not inhibited by phenylalanine or tyrosine, indicating a high level of substrate specificity toward tryptophan. The ectopic expression of the three cDNA clones in rice led to the abundant production of the products of the encoded enzymes, tyramine and tryptamine. The overproduction of TYDC resulted in stunted growth and a lack of seed production due to tyramine accumulation, which increased as the plant aged. In contrast, transgenic plants that produced TDC showed a normal phenotype and contained 25-fold and 11-fold higher serotonin in the leaves and seeds, respectively, than the wild-type plants. The overproduction of either tyramine or serotonin was not strongly related to the enhanced synthesis of tyramine or serotonin derivatives, such as feruloyltyramine and feruloylserotonin, which are secondary metabolites that act as phytoalexins in plants.

L-Tryptophan decarboxylase (TDC): !catalyzes! conversion of tryptophan
L-tyrosine decarboxylase (TYDC): !catalyzes! conversion of tyrosine
rice genome: !contains! seven TDC or TYDC-like genes
three cDNA clones: !characterized to assign! functions
two genes: !expressed in E. coli and exhibited! TDC activity
remaining gene: !could not be expressed in E. coli!
recombinant TDC protein: !showed! K (m) of 0.69 mM for tryptophan
ectopic expression of three cDNA clones: !led to abundant production! of tyramine and tryptamine
overproduction of TYDC: !resulted in stunted growth and lack of seed production! due to tyramine accumulation
transgenic plants producing TDC: !showed normal phenotype and contained! 25-fold and 11-fold higher serotonin in leaves and seeds
overproduction of tyramine or serotonin: !not related to enhanced synthesis! of tyramine or serotonin derivatives