Although A-type cyclin-dependent kinase A (CDKA) is required for plant cell division, our understanding of how CDKA is activated before the onset of commitment to cell division is limited. Here we show that phosphorylation of threonine 161 (T161) in plant CDKA is required for activation of its associated kinase. Western blot analysis revealed that phosphorylation of CDKA T161 increased greatly, in parallel with activation of p13(suc1)-associated kinase activity, when stationary-phase tobacco BY-2 cells were subcultured into fresh medium. Although induced over-expression of a dominant-negative CDKA mutant (D146N) fused with green fluorescent protein (GFP) in BY-2 cells resulted in elongated cells after cell division was arrested, over-expression of this CDKA mutant with a non-phosphorylatable alanine in place of T161 (T161A) had no effect on cellular growth. However, immunoprecipitates of both GFP-fused CDKAs exhibited virtually no histone H1 kinase activity, suggesting that both mutants formed kinase-inactive complexes. In a baculovirus expression system, the recombinant CDKA(T161A)/cyclin D complex possessed no detectable kinase activity, indicating that phosphorylation of T161 is required for CDKA activation. To further elucidate the role of T161 phosphorylation, we used a loss-of-function mutation in the CDKA;1 gene, which encodes the only Arabidopsis CDKA. This mutant displays male gametophyte lethality, and produces bicellular pollen grains instead of the tricellular grains produced in wild-type plants. Introduction of CDKA;1(T161E)-GFP, which mimics phosphorylated T161, resulted in successful complementation of the cdka-1 mutation, whereas no recovery was observed when CDKA;1(T161A)-GFP was introduced. Thus, phosphorylation of T161 in Arabidopsis CDKA;1 is essential for cell division during male gametogenesis.

CDKA: !phosphorylates! T161
CDKA: !activates! p13(suc1)-associated kinase activity
CDKA: !forms! kinase-inactive complexes
CDKA: !requires! phosphorylation of T161 for activation
CDKA;1: !mimics! phosphorylated T161
CDKA;1: !essential for! cell division during male gametogenesis