The monogenic genes Ol-1, ol-2, and Ol-4 confer resistance to tomato powdery mildew Oidium neolycopersici via different mechanisms. The biochemical mechanisms involved in these monogenic resistances were studied by monitoring through time the association of H2O2 and callose accumulation with hypersensitive response (HR) and papilla formation. Our results showed that H2O2 and callose accumulation are coupled with both Ol-1- and Ol-4-mediated HR-associated resistance as well as with the ol-2-mediated papillae-associated resistance. Further, the transcriptomal changes related to these monogenic resistances were studied by using cDNA-amplification fragment length polymorphism. The expression profiling clarified that 81% of DE-TDF (differentially expressed transcript-derived fragments) were up-regulated upon inoculation with O. neolycopersici in both the compatible and Ol-1-mediated incompatible interactions, though with a difference in expression timing. Of these DE-TDF, more than 70% were not detected in the Ol-4-mediated resistance, while 58% were expressed in the ol-2-mediated resistance, generally at later timepoints. Sequence information suggested that most of these DE-TDF are related to genes involved in either basal defense or establishment of compatibility. In addition, DE-TDF (19%) specifically expressed in different incompatible interactions were identified. Expression patterns of some DE-TDF and marker gene GluB suggested that papillae-associated resistance exploits a different defense pathway from that of HR-associated resistance.

Ol-1: !confers resistance to! Oidium neolycopersici
Ol-2: !confers resistance to! Oidium neolycopersici
Ol-4: !confers resistance to! Oidium neolycopersici
H2O2: !associated with! Ol-1- and Ol-4-mediated HR-associated resistance
Callose accumulation: !associated with! Ol-1- and Ol-4-mediated HR-associated resistance
Callose accumulation: !associated with! ol-2-mediated papillae-associated resistance
DE-TDF: !up-regulated in! compatible and Ol-1-mediated incompatible interactions
DE-TDF: !not detected in! Ol-4-mediated resistance
DE-TDF: !expressed in! ol-2-mediated resistance
DE-TDF: !related to! genes involved in either basal defense or establishment of compatibility
DE-TDF: !specifically expressed in! different incompatible interactions
GluB: !suggests! papillae-associated resistance exploits a different defense pathway from that of HR-associated resistance