Somatic embryogenesis is a notable illustration of plant totipotency and involves reprogramming of development in somatic cells toward the embryogenic pathway. Auxins are key components as their exogenous application recuperates the embryogenic potential of the mitotically quiescent somatic cells. In order to unravel the molecular basis of somatic embryogenesis, cDNA library was made from the regeneration proficient wheat leaf base segments treated with auxin. In total, 1440 clones were sequenced and among these 1,196 good quality sequences were assembled into 270 contigs and 425 were singletons. By reverse northern analysis, a total of 57 clones were found to be upregulated during somatic embryogenesis, 64 during 2,4-D treatment, and 170 were common to 2,4-D treatment and somatic embryogenesis. A substantial number of genes involved in hormone response, signal transduction cascades, defense, anti-oxidation, programmed cell death/senescence and cell division were identified and characterized partially. Analysis of data of select genes suggests that the induction phase of somatic embryogenesis is accompanied by the expression of genes that may also be involved in zygotic embryogenesis. The developmental reprogramming process may in fact involve multiple cellular pathways and unfolding of as yet unknown molecular events. Thus, an interaction network draft using bioinformatics and system biology strategy was constructed. The outcome of a systematic and comprehensive analysis of somatic embryogenesis associated interactome in a monocot leaf base system is presented.

Auxin: !recuperates! embryogenic potential
Hormone response: !involved in! somatic embryogenesis
Signal transduction cascades: !involved in! somatic embryogenesis
Defense: !involved in! somatic embryogenesis
Anti-oxidation: !involved in! somatic embryogenesis
Programmed cell death/senescence: !involved in! somatic embryogenesis
Cell division: !involved in! somatic embryogenesis
Zygotic embryogenesis: !may involve! somatic embryogenesis
Bioinformatics: !used to construct! interactome network