['17873090', "The promoter of phytoene synthase, the first specific enzyme of carotenoid  biosynthesis, shows two main regulatory regions: a G-box-containing region  located near the TATA box, and a TATA box distal region containing the cis-acting  element ATCTA, which mediates strong basal promoter activity. This second element  was also present in the promoter of phytoene desaturase, the next step of the  carotenoid pathway, suggesting a common regulatory mechanism. In this work, we  demonstrate that AtRAP2.2, a member of the APETALA2 (AP2)/ethylene-responsive  element-binding protein transcription factor family, binds to the ATCTA element.  In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) leaves, AtRAP2.2 transcript and protein  levels were tightly controlled as indicated by unchanged transcript and protein  levels in T-DNA insertion mutants in the AtRAP2.2 promoter and 5' untranslated  region and the lack of change in AtRAP2.2 protein levels in lines strongly  overexpressing the AtRAP2.2 transcript. Homozygous loss-of-function mutants could  not be obtained for the AtRAP2.2 5' untranslated region T-DNA insertion line  indicating a lethal phenotype. In AtRAP2.2 overexpression lines, modest changes  in phytoene synthase and phytoene desaturase transcripts were only observed in  root-derived calli, which consequently showed a reduction in carotenoid content.  The RING finger protein SEVEN IN ABSENTIA OF ARABIDOPSIS2 (SINAT2) was identified  as an AtRAP2.2 interaction partner using a two-hybrid approach. The structure of  SINAT2 and related proteins of Arabidopsis show homology to the SEVEN IN ABSENTIA  protein of Drosophila that is involved in proteasome-mediated regulation in a  variety of developmental processes. The action of SINAT2 may explain the  recalcitrance of AtRAP2.2 protein levels to change by altering AtRAP2.2  transcription.", '2007 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.104828', 'Beyer']

Promoter of phytoene synthase: !contains! G-box and ATCTA element 
AtRAP2.2: !binds to! ATCTA element 
AtRAP2.2: !transcript and protein levels regulated by! T-DNA insertion mutants 
AtRAP2.2: !overexpression leads to! reduction in carotenoid content 
AtRAP2.2: !interacts with! SINAT2 
SINAT2: !homologous to! SEVEN IN ABSENTIA protein of Drosophila 
SINAT2: !alters! AtRAP2.2 transcription