['17872919', 'Xanthine dehydrogenase (XDH) is a ubiquitous enzyme involved in purine metabolism  which catalyzes the oxidation of hypoxanthine and xanthine to uric acid. Although  the essential role of XDH is well documented in the nitrogen-fixing nodules of  leguminous plants, the physiological importance of this enzyme remains uncertain  in non-leguminous species such as Arabidopsis. To evaluate the impact of an XDH  deficiency on whole-plant physiology and development in Arabidopsis, RNA  interference (RNAi) was used to generate transgenic lines of this species in  which AtXDH1 and AtXDH2, the two paralogous genes for XDH in this plant, were  silenced simultaneously. The nearly complete reduction in the total XDH protein  levels caused by this gene silencing resulted in the dramatic overaccumulation of  xanthine and a retarded growth phenotype in which fruit development and seed  fertility were also affected. A less severe silencing of XDH did not cause these  growth abnormalities. The impaired growth phenotype was mimicked by treating  wild-type plants with the XDH inhibitor allopurinol, and was reversed in the RNAi  transgenic lines by exogenous supplementation of uric acid. Inactivation of XDH  is also associated with precocious senescence in mature leaves displaying  accelerated chlorophyll breakdown and by the early induction of  senescence-related genes and enzyme markers. In contrast, the XDH protein levels  increase with the aging of the wild-type leaves, supporting the physiological  relevance of the function of this enzyme in leaf senescence. Our current results  thus indicate that XDH functions in various aspects of plant growth and  development.', '2007 Oct', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcm119', 'Sakamoto']

XDH: !catalyzes! oxidation of hypoxanthine and xanthine 
RNAi: !silences! AtXDH1 and AtXDH2 
XDH: !causes! retarded growth phenotype 
allopurinol: !inhibits! XDH 
uric acid: !reverses! RNAi transgenic lines 
XDH: !associated with! precocious senescence 
XDH: !increases with! aging of wild-type leaves