['17878303', 'In all land plants, cellulose is synthesized from hexameric plasma membrane  complexes. Indirect evidence suggests that in vascular plants the complexes  involved in primary wall synthesis contain three distinct cellulose synthase  catalytic subunits (CESAs). In this study, we show that CESA3 and CESA6 fused to  GFP are expressed in the same cells and at the same time in the hypocotyl of  etiolated seedlings and migrate with comparable velocities along linear  trajectories at the cell surface. We also show that CESA3 and CESA6 can be  coimmunoprecipitated from detergent-solubilized extracts, their protein levels  decrease in mutants for either CESA3, CESA6, or CESA1 and CESA3, CESA6 and also  CESA1 can physically interact in vivo as shown by bimolecular fluorescence  complementation. We also demonstrate that CESA6-related CESA5 and CESA2 are  partially, but not completely, redundant with CESA6 and most likely compete with  CESA6 for the same position in the cellulose synthesis complex. Using  promoter-beta-glucuronidase fusions we show that CESA5, CESA6, and CESA2 have  distinct overlapping expression patterns in hypocotyl and root corresponding to  different stages of cellular development. Together, these data provide evidence  for the existence of binding sites for three distinct CESA subunits in primary  wall cellulose synthase complexes, with two positions being invariably occupied  by CESA1 and CESA3, whereas at least three isoforms compete for the third  position. Participation of the latter three isoforms might fine-tune the CESA  complexes for the deposition of microfibrils at distinct cellular growth stages.', '2007 Sep 25', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0706569104', 'Vernhettes']

CESA3: !localizes to! Cell surface 
CESA6: !localizes to! Cell surface 
CESA3: !interacts with! CESA6 
CESA1: !interacts with! CESA3 
CESA1: !interacts with! CESA6 
CESA5: !competes with! CESA6 
CESA2: !competes with! CESA6 
CESA5: !enhances! Cellular development 
CESA6: !enhances! Cellular development 
CESA2: !enhances! Cellular development