The constitutive and wound-inducible leucine aminopeptidases (LAP-N and LAP-A, respectively) of tomato encode 60-kDa proteins with 5-kDa presequences that resemble chloroplast-targeting peptides. Cell fractionation studies and immunoblot analyses of chloroplast and total proteins have suggested a dual location of the mature LAP-A proteins in the cytosol and the plastids. In this study, the subcellular localization of tomato LAPs was further investigated using in vitro chloroplast-targeting assays and immunocytochemical techniques at the light and TEM levels. In vitro-translated LAP-A1 and LAP-N preproteins were readily transported into pea chloroplasts and processed into mature proteins of 55 kDa indicating the presence of a functional chloroplast-targeting signal in the LAP-A1 and LAP-N protein precursors. In addition, a LAP polyclonal and a LAP-A-specific antisera were used to immunolocalize LAP proteins in leaves from healthy, wounded and methyl jasmonate (MeJA)-treated plants. Low levels of LAPs and/or LAP-like proteins were detected in leaves from unwounded plants. The LAP polyclonal antiserum, which detected LAP-A, LAP-N and LAP-like proteins, and the LAP-A specific antibodies, which detected only LAP-A, showed that LAP levels increased in leaf sections after wounding and MeJA treatments. LAP-A proteins were primarily detected within the chloroplasts of spongy and palisade mesophyll cells. The localization of LAP-A was distinct from the location of early wound-response proteins that are important in the biosynthesis of jasmonic acid or systemin and more similar to the late wound-response proteins with primary roles in defense. The importance of these findings relative to the potential roles of LAP-A in defense is discussed.

LAP-N: !encodes! 60-kDa proteins
LAP-A: !encodes! 5-kDa presequences
LAP-A1/LAP-N: !transported into! pea chloroplasts
LAP polyclonal/LAP-A specific antisera: !detect! LAP proteins
LAP-A: !localizes to! chloroplasts of spongy/palisade mesophyll cells
LAP-A: !potentially involved in! defense