The peribacteroid membrane (PBM) of symbiosomes from pea root nodules developed in the presence of boron (+B) was labelled by anti-rhamnogalacturonan II (RGII) (anti-rhamnogalacturonan II pectin polysaccharide) antiserum. However, in nodules from plants grown at low boron (-B), anti-RGII pectin polysaccharide did not stain PBMs. Given that RGII pectin binds to borate, and that symbiosomes differentiate aberrantly in -B nodules because of abnormal vesicle traffic, anti-RGII pectin polysaccharide antigens were further analysed. Following electrophoresis and electroblotting, anti-RGII pectin polysaccharide immunostained three bands in +B but not in -B nodule-derived PBMs. A similar banding pattern was observed after the immunostaining of membrane fractions from uninfected roots, indicating that anti-RGII pectin polysaccharide antigens are common to both peribacteroid and plasma membranes. Protease treatment of samples led to disappearance of anti-RGII pectin polysaccharide labelling, indicating that the three immunostained bands correspond to proteins or glycoproteins. The immunochemical study of RGII antigen distribution during nodule development showed that it is strongly present on the PBM of dividing (undifferentiated) symbiosomes but progressively disappeared during symbiosome maturation. In B-deficient nodules, PBMs were never decorated with RGII antigens, and there was an abnormal targeting of vesicles containing pectic polysaccharide (homogalacturanan) to cell membranes. Overall, these results indicate that RGII, boron and certain membrane (glyco)-proteins may interact closely and function cooperatively in membrane processes associated with symbiosome division and general cell growth.

anti-RGII pectin polysaccharide: !binds to! borate 
RGII antigen: !localizes to! PBM of dividing symbiosomes 
RGII antigen: !disappears during! symbiosome maturation 
B-deficient nodules: !prevent! RGII antigen labelling 
RGII, boron and (glyco)-proteins: !interact closely and function cooperatively in! membrane processes