Although the results of some studies indicate that salt stress affects the organization of microtubules, it remains an open question whether microtubules play an active role in the plant's ability to withstand salt stress. In the present study, we showed that salt stress-induced wild-type Arabidopsis seedling roots display right-handed skewed growth and depolymerization of the cortical microtubules. The results of a long-term observational study showed that cortical microtubules depolymerized then reorganized themselves under salt stress. Stabilization of microtubules with paclitaxel resulted in more seedling death under salt stress, while disruption of microtubules with oryzalin or propyzamide rescued seedlings from death. Seedlings in which the cortical microtubules were reorganized did not succumb to salt stress. These results suggest that both depolymerization and reorganization of the cortical microtubules are important for the plant's ability to withstand salt stress. Depolymerizing microtubules by drugs rescues seedlings from death under salt stress. This rescue effect was abolished by removing calcium from the medium or treatment with a calcium channel inhibitor. Depolymerization of the microtubules is followed by an increase in the free cytoplasmic calcium concentration. The addition of calcium to the growth medium increased the number of seedlings in which recovery of the cortical microtubules occurred, whereas the removal of calcium decreased the number of seedlings in which recovery occurred. Therefore, depolymerization of the cortical microtubules raises intracellular calcium concentrations, while reorganization of the cortical microtubules and seedling survival may be mediated by calcium influx in salt stress.

microtubules: !depolymerize under! salt stress
microtubules: !stabilized by! paclitaxel
microtubules: !disrupted by! oryzalin/propyzamide
microtubules: !rescue seedlings from death under! salt stress
calcium: !increases with! depolymerization of microtubules
calcium: !influx mediates! reorganization of microtubules/seedling survival