['17905869', 'Most aerial surfaces of plants are covered by cuticular wax that is synthesized  in epidermal cells. The wax mixture on the inflorescence stems of Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) is dominated by alkanes, secondary alcohols, and ketones,  all thought to be formed sequentially in the decarbonylation pathway of wax  biosynthesis. Here, we used a reverse-genetic approach to identify a cytochrome  P450 enzyme (CYP96A15) involved in wax biosynthesis and characterized it as a  midchain alkane hydroxylase (MAH1). Stem wax of T-DNA insertional mutant alleles  was found to be devoid of secondary alcohols and ketones (mah1-1) or to contain  much lower levels of these components (mah1-2 and mah1-3) than wild type. All  mutant lines also had increased alkane amounts, partially or fully compensating  for the loss of other compound classes. In spite of the chemical variation  between mutant and wild-type waxes, there were no discernible differences in the  epicuticular wax crystals on the stem surfaces. Mutant stem wax phenotypes could  be partially rescued by expression of wild-type MAH1 under the control of the  native promoter as well as the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter. Cauliflower  mosaic virus 35S-driven overexpression of MAH1 led to ectopic accumulation of  secondary alcohols and ketones in Arabidopsis leaf wax, where only traces of  these compounds are found in the wild type. The newly formed leaf alcohols and  ketones had midchain functional groups on or next to the central carbon, thus  matching those compounds in wild-type stem wax. Taken together, mutant analyses  and ectopic expression of MAH1 in leaves suggest that this enzyme can catalyze  the hydroxylation reaction leading from alkanes to secondary alcohols and  possibly also a second hydroxylation leading to the corresponding ketones. MAH1  expression was largely restricted to the expanding regions of the inflorescence  stems, specifically to the epidermal pavement cells, but not in trichomes and  guard cells. MAH1-green fluorescent protein fusion proteins localized to the  endoplasmic reticulum, providing evidence that both intermediate and final  products of the decarbonylation pathway are generated in this subcellular  compartment and must subsequently be delivered to the plasma membrane for export  toward the cuticle.', '2007 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.107300', 'Jetter']

CYP96A15: !synthesizes! wax components 
MAH1: !hydroxylates! alkanes 
MAH1: !localizes to! epidermal pavement cells 
MAH1: !interacts with! endoplasmic reticulum 
MAH1: !enhances! secondary alcohols and ketones 
MAH1: !represses! alkanes