The effects of exogenous abscisic acid (ABA) on the acclimation of Picea asperata to water deficit were investigated in two populations originating from wet and dry climate regions of China. Exogenous ABA was sprayed onto the leaves, and changes in plant growth and structure, gas exchange, water use efficiency (WUE), endogenous ABA content, and antioxidant enzyme levels were monitored. The results demonstrated that ABA application affected the two P. asperata populations in different ways during the water deficit. ABA application resulted in significantly lower CO(2) assimilation rates (A) under water deficit in plants from the wet climate population, whereas there were no significant changes in this parameter in the dry climate population. On the other hand, ABA application significantly decreased the dry shoot biomass, stomatal conductance (g(s)), transpiration rate (E), and malondialdehyde (MDA) content, and it significantly increased the leaf mass per area (LMA), root/shoot ratio (Rs), fine root/total root ratio (Ft), WUE, ABA content, and the superoxide dismutase (SOD), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), and catalase (CAT) activities under water-deficit conditions in the dry climate population, whereas ABA application did not significantly affect these parameters in the wet climate population. The results clearly demonstrated that sensitivity to an exogenous ABA application is population-dependent in P. asperata. Direct evidence is presented that variation in physiological mechanisms rather than different rates of ABA absorption explain the population differentiation in the sensitivity to exogenous ABA, and that the physiological basis for the amplified response to water deficit caused by exogenous ABA, present mainly in the dry climate population, is related to internal ABA accumulation. These results provide evidence for adaptive differentiation between populations of P. asperata, and they support the expected relationship between environmental heterogeneity and the magnitude of plastic responses in plant populations.

ABA: !affects! P. asperata populations
ABA: !decreases! CO2 assimilation rate
ABA: !decreases! dry shoot biomass
ABA: !decreases! stomatal conductance
ABA: !decreases! transpiration rate
ABA: !decreases! MDA content
ABA: !increases! LMA
ABA: !increases! root/shoot ratio
ABA: !increases! fine root/total root ratio
ABA: !increases! WUE
ABA: !increases! ABA content
ABA: !increases! SOD activity
ABA: !increases! APX activity
ABA: !increases! CAT activity