Changes in transcript accumulation for cell wall-modifying proteins were examined in excised soybean root pieces colonized by soybean cyst nematodes (SCN), Heterodera glycines, using RT-PCR and soybean Affymetrix GeneChips. Sequence-specific PCR primer pairs were prepared from sequence data for core sequences in the GenBank soybean database and consensus sequences derived from the assembly of soybean ESTs. In addition, to identify previously uncharacterized soybean transcripts, degenerate primers were prepared for conserved motifs in cellulases (endo-1,4-beta-glucanases, EGases) and polygalacturonases (PGs) and these were used to amplify segments of transcripts that were then extended with 3' and 5' RACE. Several novel EGase and PG transcripts were identified. Gene expression patterns were determined by real-time RT-PCR for 11 EGases, three expansins (EXPs), 14 PGs, two pectate lyases (PLs), and two xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolases (XTHs) in soybean roots inoculated with SCN, non-inoculated roots, serial dissections of root tips, leaf abscission zones, flowers, apical buds, and expanding leaves. A large number of genes associated with cell wall modifications are strongly up-regulated in root pieces colonized by SCN. However, in contrast to most of the transcripts for cell wall proteins, two XTH transcripts were specifically down-regulated in the colonized root pieces. Gene expression in serial dissections of root tips (0-2 mm, and 2-7 mm) and whole roots indicate that the SCN up-regulated genes are associated with a wide range of developmental processes in roots. Also of interest, many of the cDNAs examined were up-regulated in petiole abscission zones induced to abscise with ethylene.

Gene: !affects! Transcript accumulation 
Gene: !localizes to! Soybean root pieces 
Gene: !interacts with! Cell wall-modifying proteins 
Gene: !enhances! Cellulases and polygalacturonases 
Gene: !represses! Xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolases 
Gene: !synthesizes! Expansins 
Gene: !up-regulates! Developmental processes 
Gene: !down-regulates! Ethylene-induced abscission