We report here about the physiological and molecular responses of Populus canadensis (clone Dorskamp) to drought. The stress was applied to young rooted cuttings by PEG 6000 application over 30 days. This stress induces a decrease in predawn leaf water potential. After 10 days of stress, there was a decrease in stomatal conductance and a slight retardation of leaf growth, but the osmotic potential remained constant. Using the differential display technique, we searched for genes differentially expressed in response to drought at this date. Thirty-six differentially expressed leaf cDNAs were detected between stressed and control conditions. Thirty-four cDNAs clones were successfully cloned and 23 were found to share high identity with Arabidopsis thaliana and Populus trichocarpa genes. The transcriptional regulation of 21 genes was examined by reverse RNA dot blot, confirming an increase in expression for 16 of them after 10 days of treatment. Among these 16 genes, most of them are involved in a different cellular metabolic pathway. These differentially expressed genes are also involved and/or regulated by other treatments such as salt, withholding water or auxin application. The maintenance of growth observed during the first 10 days of the stress period could be due to the regulation of these genes and can be a common response between herbaceous plants and trees.

drought: !induces! decrease in predawn leaf water potential
drought: !induces! decrease in stomatal conductance
drought: !induces! retardation of leaf growth
differential display technique: !searches for! genes differentially expressed in response to drought
cDNAs: !detected between! stressed and control conditions
cDNAs: !cloned! successfully
cDNAs: !share high identity with! Arabidopsis thaliana and Populus trichocarpa genes
reverse RNA dot blot: !examines! transcriptional regulation of 21 genes
16 genes: !increase expression! after 10 days of treatment
16 genes: !involved in! different cellular metabolic pathways
16 genes: !regulated by! other treatments such as salt, withholding water or auxin application
growth: !maintained! during first 10 days of stress period