In this study, morphological, ultrastructural and physiological modifications of faba bean (Vicia faba cv Giza 461) leaves in response to bean yellow mosaic virus (BYMV) infection and salicylic acid (SA) treatments were examined. Under BYMV stress, leaves showed symptoms including severe mosaic, mottling, crinkling, size reduction and deformations. Three weeks after virus inoculation, photosynthetic rate, pigment contents and transpiration rate were significantly reduced in response to BYMV infection. Ultrastructural investigations of BYMV-infected leaves demonstrated that most chloroplasts with increased stromal area became spherical in shape and some lost their envelopes, either partially or totally. The internal structures of chloroplast, grana and thylakoids were dilated. Two kinds of inclusions were detected in BYMV-infected leaves: straight or slightly curved bands sometimes coiled or looped at the end, and electron opaque crystals with varied shapes. BYMV-infected cells showed lower chloroplast number in comparison to the control. Spraying of SA on faba bean leaves helped to reduce or prevent the harmful effects produced after virus infection. Application of 100 microM SA three days before inoculation restored the metabolism of infected leaves to the levels of healthy controls. SA treatment improved plant health by increasing the photosynthesis rates, pigment contents and levels of other parameters studied similar to control values. Moreover, SA treatment increased plant resistance against BYMV. This was observed through induction of chloroplast number, reduction in percentage of infected plants, decrease in disease severity and virus concentration of plants treated with SA prior to BYMV inoculation. Cells of SA-treated samples showed well-developed chloroplasts with many starch grains and well-organized cell organelles. The present results provide an overview of the negative effects on faba bean leaves due to BYMV infection from physiological and subcellular perspectives. Also, a role of SA involved in induction of resistance against BYMV infection in bean plants is discussed.

BYMV: !causes! Symptoms 
BYMV: !reduces! Photosynthetic rate 
BYMV: !alters! Chloroplast shape 
BYMV: !decreases! Chloroplast number 
SA: !restores! Metabolism 
SA: !increases! Plant resistance 
SA: !induces! Chloroplast number