Lipoxygenases (LOXs) are members of a large enzyme family that catalyze oxygenation of free polyunsaturated fatty acids into diverse hydroperoxide compounds, collectively called oxylipins. Although LOXs have been well studied in dicot species, reports of the genes encoding these enzymes are scarce for monocots, especially maize. Herein, we reported the cloning, characterization and molecular functional analysis of a novel maize LOX gene, ZmLOX6. The ZmLOX6 nucleotide sequence encodes a deduced translation product of 892 amino acids. Phylogenetic analysis showed that ZmLOX6 is distantly related to previously reported 9- or 13-LOXs from maize and other plant species, including rice and Arabidopsis. Although sequence prediction suggested cytoplasmic localization of this protein, ZmLOX6 protein has been reportedly isolated from mesophyll cell chloroplasts, emphasizing the unique features of this protein. Plastidial localization was confirmed by chloroplast uptake experiments with the in vitro translated protein. Analysis of recombinant protein revealed that ZmLOX6 has lost fatty acid hydroperoxide forming activity but 13-LOX-derived fatty acid hydroperoxides were cleaved into odd-chain omega-oxo fatty acids and as yet not identified C5-compound. In line with its reported abundance in mesophyll cells, ZmLOX6 was predominantly expressed in leaf tissue. Northern blot analysis demonstrated that ZmLOX6 was induced by jasmonic acid, but repressed by abscisic acid, salicylic acid and ethylene and was not responsive to wounding or insects. Further, this gene was strongly induced by the fungal pathogen Cochliobolus carbonum during compatible interactions, suggesting that ZmLOX6 may contribute to susceptibility to this pathogen. The potential involvement of ZmLOX6 in maize interactions with pathogens is discussed.

ZmLOX6: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
ZmLOX6: !synthesizes! odd-chain omega-oxo fatty acids 
ZmLOX6: !enhances! susceptibility to Cochliobolus carbonum 
ZmLOX6: !represses! abscisic acid, salicylic acid and ethylene 
ZmLOX6: !affects! expression in leaf tissue