Promoters play key roles in conferring temporal, spatial, chemical, developmental, or environmental regulation of gene expression. Promoters that are subject to specific regulations are useful for manipulating foreign gene expression in plant cells, tissues, or organs with desirable patterns and under controlled conditions, and have been important for both basic research and applications in agriculture biotechnology. Recent advances in genomics technologies have greatly facilitated identification and study of promoters in a genome scale with high efficiency. Previously we have generated a large T-DNA tagged rice mutant library (TRIM), in which the T-DNA was designed with a gene/promoter trap system, by placing a promoter-less GUS gene next to the right border of T-DNA. GUS activity screens of this library offer in situ and in planta identifications and analyses of promoter activities in their native configurations in the rice genome. In the present study, we systematically performed GUS activity screens of the rice mutant library for genes/promoters constitutively, differentially, or specifically active in vegetative and reproductive tissues. More than 8,200 lines have been screened, and 11% and 22% of them displayed GUS staining in vegetative tissues and in flowers, respectively. Among the vegetative tissue active promoters, the ratio of leaf active versus root active is about 1.6. Interestingly, all the flower active promoters are anther active, but with varied activities in different flower tissues. To identify tissue specific ABA/stress up-regulated promoters, we compared microarray data of ABA/stress induced genes with those of tissue-specific expression determined by promoter trap GUS staining. Following this approach, we showed that the peroxidase 1 gene promoter was ABA up-regulated by 4 fold within 1 day of exposure to ABA and its expression is lateral root specific. We suggest that this be an easy bioinformatics approach in identifying tissue/cell type specific promoters that are up-regulated by hormones or other factors.

Promoters: !confer! temporal, spatial, chemical, developmental, or environmental regulation of gene expression
Promoters: !manipulate! foreign gene expression
Genomics technologies: !facilitate! identification and study of promoters
T-DNA tagged rice mutant library: !identifies! promoter activities in native configurations
GUS activity screens: !identify! constitutively, differentially, or specifically active promoters
ABA/stress up-regulated promoters: !compared! with tissue-specific expression determined by promoter trap GUS staining