Measurements of 810 nm transmittance changes in leaves, simultaneously with Chl fluorescence, CO(2) uptake and O(2) evolution, were carried out on potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) leaves with altered expression of plastidic NADP-dependent malate dehydrogenase. Electron transport rates were calculated: J(C) from the CO(2) uptake rate considering ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) carboxylation and oxygenation, J(O) from the O(2) evolution rate, J(F) from Chl fluorescence parameters and J(I) from the post-illumination re-reduction speed of PSI donors. In the absence of external O(2), J(O) equaled (1.005 +/- 0.003) J(C), independent of the transgenic treatment, light intensity and CO(2) concentration. This showed that nitrite and oxaloacetate reduction rates were very slow. The Mehler-type O(2) reduction was evaluated from the rate of electron accumulation at PSI after the O(2) concentration was decreased from 210 to 20 mmol mol(-1), and resulted in <1% of the linear flow. J(F) and J(I) did not differ from J(C) while photosynthesis was light-limited, but considerably exceeded J(C) at saturating light. Then, typically, J(F) = 1.2 J(C) and J(I) = 1.3 J(C), and J(F) -J(C) and J(I) -J(C) depended little on CO(2) and O(2) concentrations. The results showed that the alternative and cyclic electron flow necessary to compensate variations in the ATP/NADPH ratio were only a few percent of the linear flow. The data do not support the requirement of 14H(+)/3ATP by the chloroplast ATP synthase. We suggest that the fast PSI cyclic electron flow J(I) - J(C), as well as the fast J(F) - J(C) are energy-dissipating cycles around PSI and PSII at light saturation.

Gene: !affects! Measurements of transmittance 
Measurements: !were carried out on! Potato leaves 
Gene: !alters expression of! Plastidic NADP-dependent malate dehydrogenase 
Electron transport rates: !calculated from! CO2 uptake, O2 evolution, Chl fluorescence, PSI donors 
J(O): !equaled! J(C) 
J(F): !exceeded! J(C) at saturating light 
J(I): !exceeded! J(C) at saturating light 
Alternative/cyclic electron flow: !only a few percent of! Linear flow 
Fast PSI cyclic electron flow: !energy-dissipating cycles around! PSI and PSII