['17932772', 'Pantothenate (vitamin B5) is the universal precursor for coenzyme A (CoA), an  essential cofactor that is required in the metabolism of carbohydrates and fatty  acids. The final step of bacterial and eukaryotic pantothenate biosynthesis is  catalyzed by pantothenate synthetase (PTS), which is encoded by a single gene in  Arabidopsis thaliana (AtPTS). There was debate whether PTS represents the only  mode of pantothenate production because previous biochemical evidence pointed to  an additional pantothenate pathway in plants. Here we show that insertional  mutant alleles of AtPTS confer a recessive embryo-lethal phenotype with mutant  embryos arrested at the preglobular stage. Exogenous pantothenate was required  for normal seed development and germination and also facilitated the remaining  life cycle. Complementation of the mutant phenotype was likewise achieved by  heterologous expression of E. coli PTS (panC). The panC transgene increased the  total PTS activity in leaves by up to 500-fold but did not affect the  steady-state level of pantothenate, indicating that PTS is essential but not  limiting for pantothenate production. The auxotrophic AtPTS knockout phenotype  suggests that the embryo and possibly all other tissues are autonomous for the  biosynthesis of pantothenate. This view is consistent with the near-ubiquitous  expression of AtPTS as judged by promoter:beta-glucuronidase analysis. Given the  high demand for CoA during storage oil accumulation, we analyzed transcript and  metabolite patterns of CoA biosynthesis in seeds. The data indicate that the  pantothenate and CoA contents follow distinct developmental programs and that  both transcriptional and posttranslational control mechanisms are important for  CoA homeostasis.', '2008 Jan', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-007-9248-6', 'Genschel']

AtPTS: !encodes! pantothenate synthetase 
AtPTS: !confers! recessive embryo-lethal phenotype 
Exogenous pantothenate: !required for! normal seed development and germination 
E. coli PTS (panC): !complements! AtPTS mutant phenotype 
AtPTS: !expressed ubiquitously! in Arabidopsis thaliana 
AtPTS: !essential but not limiting! for pantothenate production 
Transcriptional control: !important for! CoA homeostasis 
Posttranslational control: !important for! CoA homeostasis