['17953649', 'To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying regulation of seed germination,  we searched enriched cis elements in the upstream regions of Arabidopsis genes  whose transcript levels increased during seed germination. Using available  published microarray data, we found that two cis elements, Up1 or Up2, which  regulate outgrowth of Arabidopsis axillary shoots, were significantly  over-represented. Classification of Up1- and Up2-containing genes by gene  ontology revealed that protein synthesis-related genes, especially ribosomal  protein genes, were highly over-represented. Expression analysis using a reporter  gene driven by a synthetic promoter regulated by these elements showed that the  Up1 is necessary and sufficient for germination-associated gene induction,  whereas Up2 acts as an enhancer of Up1. Up1-mediated gene expression was  suppressed by treatments that blocked germination. Up1 is almost identical to the  site II motif, which is the predicted target of TCP transcription factors. Of 24  AtTCP genes, AtTCP14, which showed the highest transcript level just prior to  germination, was functionally characterized to test its involvement in the  regulation of seed germination. Transposon-tagged lines for AtTCP14 showed  delayed germination. In addition, germination of attcp14 mutants exhibited  hypersensitivity to exogenously applied abscisic acid and paclobutrazol, an  inhibitor of gibberellin biosynthesis. AtTCP14 was predominantly expressed in the  vascular tissues of the embryo, and affected gene expression in radicles in a  non-cell-autonomous manner. Taken together, these results indicate that AtTCP14  regulates the activation of embryonic growth potential in Arabidopsis seeds.', '2008 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03308.x', 'Nambara']

Up1: !regulates! Outgrowth of Arabidopsis axillary shoots
Up2: !enhances! Up1
AtTCP14: !regulates! Activation of embryonic growth potential
AtTCP14: !localizes to! Vascular tissues of embryo
AtTCP14: !represses! Germination