The jasmonate family of phytohormones, as represented by 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid (OPDA), dinor-phytodienoic acid (dn-OPDA), and jasmonic acid in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), has been implicated in a vast array of different developmental processes and stress responses. Recent reports indicate that OPDA and dn-OPDA occur not only as free acids in Arabidopsis, but also as esters with complex lipids, so-called arabidopsides. Recently, we showed that recognition of the two bacterial effector proteins AvrRpm1 and AvrRpt2 induced high levels of a molecule consisting of two OPDAs and one dn-OPDA esterified to a monogalactosyl diacylglycerol moiety, named arabidopside E. In this study, we demonstrate that the synthesis of arabidopsides is mainly independent of the prokaryotic lipid biosynthesis pathway in the chloroplast, and, in addition to what previously has been reported, arabidopside E as well as an all-OPDA analog, arabidopside G, described here accumulated during the hypersensitive response and in response to wounding. We also show that different signaling pathways lead to the formation of arabidopsides during the hypersensitive response and the wounding response, respectively. However, the formation of arabidopsides during both responses is dependent on an intact jasmonate signaling pathway. Additionally, we report inhibition of growth of the fungal necrotrophic pathogen Botrytis cinerea and in planta release of free jasmonates in a time frame that overlaps with the observed reduction of arabidopside levels. Thus, arabidopsides may have a dual function: as antipathogenic substances and as storage compounds that allow the slow release of free jasmonates.

OPDA: !synthesizes! arabidopsides
dn-OPDA: !synthesizes! arabidopsides
AvrRpm1: !induces! arabidopside E
AvrRpt2: !induces! arabidopside E
prokaryotic lipid biosynthesis pathway: !independent of! arabidopsides synthesis
hypersensitive response: !leads to! arabidopsides formation
wounding response: !leads to! arabidopsides formation
jasmonate signaling pathway: !dependent on! arabidopsides formation
arabidopsides: !inhibit! Botrytis cinerea growth
arabidopsides: !allow! slow release of free jasmonates