['17957256', 'Root hair tip growth provides a unique model system for the study of plant cell  polarity. Transgenic plants expressing constitutively active (CA) forms of ROP  (Rho-of-plants) GTPases have been shown to cause the disruption of root hair  polarity likely as a result of the alteration of actin filaments (AF) and  microtubules (MT) organization. Towards understanding the mechanism by which ROP  controls the cytoskeletal organization during root hair tip growth, we have  screened for CA-rop2 suppressors or enhancers using CA1-1, a transgenic line that  expresses CA-rop2 and shows only mild disruption of tip growth. Here, we report  the characterization of a CA-rop2 enhancer (cae1-1 CA1-1) that exhibits bulbous  root hairs. The cae1-1 mutation on its own caused a waving and branching root  hair phenotype. CAE1 encodes the root hair growth-related, ARM domain-containing  kinesin-like protein MRH2 (and thus cae1-1 was renamed to mrh2-3). Cortical MT  displayed fragmentation and random orientation in mrh2 root hairs. Consistently,  the MT-stabilizing drug taxol could partially rescue the wavy root hair phenotype  of mrh2-3, and the MT-depolymerizing drug Oryzalin slightly enhanced the root  hair tip growth defect in CA1-1. Interestingly, the addition of the  actin-depolymerizing drug Latrunculin B further enhanced the Oryzalin effect.  This indicates that the cross-talk of MT and AF organization is important for the  mrh2-3 CA1-1 phenotype. Although we did not observe an apparent effect of the  MRH2 mutation in AF organization, we found that mrh2-3 root hair growth was more  sensitive to Latrunculin B. Moreover, an ARM domain-containing MRH2 fragment  could bind to the polymerized actin in vitro. Therefore, our genetic analyses,  together with cell biological and pharmacological evidence, suggest that the  plant-specific kinesin-related protein MRH2 is an important component that  controls MT organization and is likely involved in the ROP2 GTPase-controlled  coordination of AF and MT during polarized growth of root hairs.', '2007 Oct 24', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0001074', 'Zheng']

ROP: !affects! Root hair polarity 
CA-rop2: !enhances! CAE1 
CAE1: !encodes! MRH2 
MRH2: !controls! MT organization 
MT: !stabilized by! Taxol 
MT: !depolymerized by! Oryzalin 
AF: !depolymerized by! Latrunculin B 
MRH2: !binds to! Polymerized actin