['17961230', 'BACKGROUND: Metabolic variations exist between the methionine salvage pathway of  humans and a number of plants and microbial pathogens. 5-Methylthioribose (MTR)  kinase is a key enzyme required for methionine salvage in plants and many  bacteria. The absence of a mammalian homolog suggests that MTR kinase is a good  target for the design of specific herbicides or antibiotics. RESULTS: The  structure of Arabidopsis thaliana MTR kinase co-crystallized with ATPgammaS and  MTR has been determined at 1.9 A resolution. The structure is similar to B.  subtilis MTR kinase and has the same protein kinase fold observed in other  evolutionarily related protein kinase-like phosphotransferases. The active site  is comparable between the two enzymes with the DXE-motif coordinating the  nucleotide-Mg, the D238 of the HGD catalytic loop polarizing the MTR O1 oxygen,  and the RR-motif interacting with the substrate MTR. Unlike its bacterial  homolog, however, the Gly-rich loop (G-loop) of A. thaliana MTR kinase has an  extended conformation, which shields most of the active site from solvent, a  feature that resembles eukaryotic protein kinases more than the bacterial enzyme.  The G- and W-loops of A. thaliana and B. subtilis MTR kinase adopt different  conformations despite high sequence similarity. The ATPgammaS analog was  hydrolyzed during the co-crystallization procedure, resulting in ADP in the  active site. This suggests that the A. thaliana enzyme, like its bacterial  homolog, may have significant ATPase activity in the absence of MTR. CONCLUSION:  The structure of A. thaliana MTR kinase provides a template for structure-based  design of agrochemicals, particularly herbicides whose effectiveness could be  regulated by nutrient levels. Features of the MTR binding site offer an  opportunity for a simple organic salt of an MTR analog to specifically inhibit  MTR kinase.', '2007 Oct 25', 'BMC Struct Biol', '10.1186/1472-6807-7-70', 'Howell']

Gene: !encodes! MTR kinase 
MTR kinase: !coordinates! nucleotide-Mg 
MTR kinase: !polarizes! MTR O1 oxygen 
MTR kinase: !interacts with! substrate MTR 
G-loop: !shields! active site 
ATPgammaS analog: !hydrolyzed! to ADP 
MTR analog: !inhibits! MTR kinase