In tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), Ralstonia solanacearum OE1-1 (RsOE1-1) is pathogenic, whereas R. solanacearum 8107 (Rs8107) is nonpathogenic and induces the hypersensitive response (HR). To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of plant-R. solanacearum interactions, we used differential display to isolate a cDNA fragment, A6, regulated in tobacco by inoculation with RsOE1-1. The deduced amino acid sequence predicted from full-length A6-cDNA showed similarity to small heat shock proteins from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana; hypothetical protein), Medicago truncatula, and Cucumis melo; we therefore designated A6 to correspond to Ntshsp17 (for tobacco small heat shock protein 17). Recombinant Ntshsp17 overproduced in Escherichia coli exhibited molecular chaperone function. Expression of Ntshsp17 was increased in tobacco leaves inoculated with both RsOE1-1 and Rs8107. Expression was induced by heat treatment and by treatment with aminocyclopropane carboxylic acid, hydrogen peroxide, methyl jasmonate, and salicylic acid. Ntshsp17 expression was induced by inoculation with a HR and pathogenicity gene mutant of Rs8107 that does not induce the HR, but not by Agrobacterium-mediated transient expression of INF1, an HR elicitor. In Nbshsp17-silenced plants (an Ntshsp17 ortholog in Nicotiana benthamiana), expression of ETHYLENE-RESPONSE ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN, PATHOGENESIS-RELATED1a (PR1a), and PR4 genes was compromised, but expression of ELONGATION FACTOR1alpha was scarcely affected. Appearance of the HR was not affected in the silenced plants. In the silenced plants, growth of Rs8107 was accelerated. Bacterial growth and wilt symptoms elicited by RsOE1-1 were also accelerated in the silenced plants. These results indicate that this small heat shock protein might have a role in HR-independent defenses in Nicotiana plants.

Ntshsp17: !enhances! Expression of ETHYLENE-RESPONSE ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN, PATHOGENESIS-RELATED1a (PR1a), and PR4 genes
Ntshsp17: !represses! Appearance of the HR 
Ntshsp17: !enhances! Growth of Rs8107 
Ntshsp17: !enhances! Bacterial growth and wilt symptoms elicited by RsOE1-1