['17971035', 'In dicots, pectins are the major structural determinant of the cell wall at the  pollen tube tip. Recently, immunological studies revealed that esterified pectins  are prevalent at the apex of growing pollen tubes, where the cell wall needs to  be expandable. In contrast, lateral regions of the cell wall contain mostly  de-esterified pectins, which can be cross-linked to rigid gels by Ca(2+) ions. In  pollen tubes, several pectin methylesterases (PMEs), enzymes that de-esterify  pectins, are co-expressed with different PME inhibitors (PMEIs). This raises the  possibility that interactions between PMEs and PMEIs play a key role in the  regulation of cell-wall stability at the pollen tube tip. Our data establish that  the PME isoform AtPPME1 (At1g69940) and the PMEI isoform AtPMEI2 (At3g17220),  which are both specifically expressed in Arabidopsis pollen, physically interact,  and that AtPMEI2 inactivates AtPPME1 in vitro. Furthermore, transient expression  in tobacco pollen tubes revealed a growth-promoting activity of AtPMEI2, and a  growth-inhibiting effect of AtPPME1. Interestingly, AtPPME1:YFP accumulated to  similar levels throughout the cell wall of tobacco pollen tubes, including the  tip region, whereas AtPMEI2:YFP was exclusively detected at the apex. In contrast  to AtPPME1, AtPMEI2 localized to Brefeldin A-induced compartments, and was found  in FYVE-induced endosomal aggregates. Our data strongly suggest that the  polarized accumulation of PMEI isoforms at the pollen tube apex, which depends at  least in part on local PMEI endocytosis at the flanks of the tip, regulates  cell-wall stability by locally inhibiting PME activity.', '2008 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03325.x', 'Greiner']

Pectins: !determine! Cell Wall 
PMEs: !de-esterify! Pectins 
PMEIs: !inhibit! PMEs 
AtPPME1: !interacts with! AtPMEI2 
AtPMEI2: !inactivates! AtPPME1 
AtPMEI2: !promotes! Growth 
AtPPME1: !inhibits! Growth 
AtPPME1: !localizes to! Cell Wall 
AtPMEI2: !localizes to! Apex 
AtPMEI2: !endocytosed at! Flanks 
PMEI: !regulates! Cell-Wall Stability