['17978851', 'The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains more than 30 genes encoding SET-domain  proteins that are thought to be epigenetic regulators of gene expression and  chromatin structure. SET-domain proteins can be divided into subgroups, and  members of the Polycomb group (PcG) and trithorax group (trxG) have been shown to  be important regulators of development. Both in animals and plants some of these  proteins are components of multimeric protein complexes. Here, we have analyzed  the Arabidopsis trxG protein ASHR3 which has a SET domain and pre- and post-SET  domains similar to that of Ash1 in Drosophila. In addition to the SET domain, a  divergent PHD finger is found in the N-terminus of the ASHR3 protein. As expected  from SET-domain proteins involved in transcriptional activation, ASHR3 (coupled  to GFP) localizes to euchromatin. A yeast two-hybrid screening revealed that the  ASHR3 protein interacts with the putative basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)  transcription factor ABORTED MICROSPORES (AMS), which is involved in anther and  stamen development in Arabidopsis. Deletion mapping indicated that both the PHD  finger and the SET domain mediate the interaction between the two proteins.  Overexpression of ASHR3 led in general to growth arrest, and specifically to  degenerated anthers and male sterility. Expression analyses demonstrated that  ASHR3 like AMS is expressed in the anther and in stamen filaments. We therefore  propose that AMS can target ASHR3 to chromatin and regulate genes involved in  stamen development and function.', '2008 Jan', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-007-9251-y', 'Aalen']

SET-domain proteins: !regulate! gene expression and chromatin structure 
PcG/trxG: !important regulators of! development 
ASHR3: !localizes to! euchromatin 
ASHR3: !interacts with! ABORTED MICROSPORES 
PHD finger/SET domain: !mediate! interaction between ASHR3 and ABORTED MICROSPORES 
ASHR3: !enhances! growth arrest 
ASHR3: !represses! anther and stamen development 
AMS: !targets! ASHR3 to chromatin