Isolated vacuoles of the liverwort Conocephalum conicum thallus cells were investigated using the patch-clamp technique. At high cytosolic Ca(2+) activities, slowly activating currents were evoked by positive potentials. The currents were conducted by the SV (slow-vacuolar) channel. When isolation of vacuoles was carried out at high Mg(2+) and low Ca(2+) concentration and the same proportion of the cations was kept in the bath, currents were recorded at negative potentials. Once activated, these currents persisted even after replacing Mg(2+) with K(+) in the bath. Sr(2+) and Ba(2+) were also effective activators of the currents. With a Cl(-) gradient, 10 mM in the bath and 100 mM in the lumen, currents were significantly reduced and the current-voltage characteristics shifted towards the reversal potential of Cl(-), indicating Cl(-) selectivity. Currents almost vanished after substituting Cl(-) with gluconate. They were strongly reduced by anion channel inhibitors 4,4'-diisothicyanatostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid (DIDS; 1 mM), anthracene-9-carboxylic acid (A9C; 2 mM) and ethacrinic acid (0.5 mM). Single-channel recordings revealed a 32 pS channel activating at negative voltages. It is concluded that the currents at negative potentials are carried by anion channels suitable for conducting anions from the cytosol to the vacuole. The anion channels were weakly calcium dependent, remaining active at physiological calcium concentration. The channels were almost equally permeable to Cl(-), NO3(-) and SO4(2-), and much less permeable to malate(2-). Anion channels did not respond to ATP addition. cAMP (10 microM) had a weak effect on anion channels. Protein kinase A (0.4 U) added to the medium caused no significant effect on anion channels.

Gene: !activates! SV channel 
SV channel: !conducts! slowly activating currents 
SV channel: !activated by! Sr2+ and Ba2+ 
SV channel: !selective for! Cl- 
SV channel: !inhibited by! DIDS, A9C, ethacrinic acid 
SV channel: !conducts! anions from cytosol to vacuole 
SV channel: !weakly calcium dependent! 
SV channel: !permeable to! Cl-, NO3-, SO4(2-) 
SV channel: !less permeable to! malate(2-) 
SV channel: !unresponsive to! ATP 
SV channel: !weakly affected by! cAMP 
SV channel: !unaffected by! protein kinase A