['17981999', 'The role of plant mitochondrial outer membrane proteins in the process of  preprotein import was investigated, as some of the principal components  characterized in yeast have been shown to be absent or evolutionarily distinct in  plants. Three outer membrane proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana mitochondria were  studied: TOM20 (translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane), METAXIN, and  mtOM64 (outer mitochondrial membrane protein of 64 kD). A single functional  Arabidopsis TOM20 gene is sufficient to produce a normal multisubunit translocase  of the outer membrane complex. Simultaneous inactivation of two of the three  TOM20 genes changed the rate of import for some precursor proteins, revealing  limited isoform subfunctionalization. Inactivation of all three TOM20 genes  resulted in severely reduced rates of import for some but not all precursor  proteins. The outer membrane protein METAXIN was characterized to play a role in  the import of mitochondrial precursor proteins and likely plays a role in the  assembly of beta-barrel proteins into the outer membrane. An outer mitochondrial  membrane protein of 64 kD (mtOM64) with high sequence similarity to a chloroplast  import receptor was shown to interact with a variety of precursor proteins. All  three proteins have domains exposed to the cytosol and interacted with a variety  of precursor proteins, as determined by pull-down and yeast two-hybrid  interaction assays. Furthermore, inactivation of one resulted in protein  abundance changes in the others, suggesting functional redundancy. Thus, it is  proposed that all three components directly interact with precursor proteins to  participate in early stages of mitochondrial protein import.', '2007 Nov', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.107.050534', 'Whelan']

TOM20: !produces! multisubunit translocase
METAXIN: !plays role in! import of mitochondrial precursor proteins
mtOM64: !interacts with! variety of precursor proteins
TOM20: !changes rate of! import for some precursor proteins
METAXIN: !assembles! beta-barrel proteins into outer membrane
mtOM64: !has domains exposed to! cytosol
TOM20, METAXIN, mtOM64: !interact with! precursor proteins
TOM20, METAXIN, mtOM64: !have functional redundancy!