Long-sized oligogalacturonides (OGs) are cell wall fragments that induce defence and developmental responses. The Ca(2+)-dependent "egg-box" conformation is required for their activity, and polyamines may prevent them from adopting this conformation. Although OGs are known to inhibit auxin-induced growth processes, their effect on cytokinin-induced ones requires investigation. In the present work OGs were shown to promote cytokinin (benzyladenine, BA)-induced vegetative shoot formation from tobacco leaf explants, independent of the presence of CaCl(2) in the medium and of auxin (indoleacetic acid, IAA) supply. The effect of polyamines, putrescine (PU) and spermidine (SD) supplied with/without their biosynthetic inhibitors (DFMO, CHA) was also investigated, and showed that spermidine enhanced adventitious vegetative shoot formation, but only on medium containing Ca(2+) and IAA. Treatments with inhibitors blocked this promotive effect. OGs did not alter free polyamine concentrations, but caused a moderate increase of conjugated ones, and exhibited an early inhibitory effect on polyamine biosynthetic gene expression. OGs, but not SD, caused long-term changes in calcium-associated epifluorescent signals in the cell walls, and, later, inside the cells of specific tissues. Electron microscopy analysis (ESI system) demonstrated that calcium accumulated in the cell walls and vacuoles of OG-cultured explants. The relationship between OGs, cytokinin, calcium, and polyamines in adventitious vegetative shoot formation is discussed.

OGs: !induce! defence and developmental responses
OGs: !require! Ca(2+)-dependent "egg-box" conformation
polyamines: !prevent! OGs from adopting conformation
OGs: !promote! cytokinin-induced vegetative shoot formation
polyamines: !enhance! adventitious vegetative shoot formation
OGs: !alter! conjugated polyamine concentrations
OGs: !inhibit! polyamine biosynthetic gene expression
OGs: !cause! long-term changes in calcium-associated epifluorescent signals