['17991630', 'Xylan, cellulose and lignin are the three major components of secondary walls in  wood, and elucidation of the biosynthetic pathway of xylan is of importance for  potential modification of secondary wall composition to produce wood with  improved properties. So far, three Arabidopsis glycosyltransferases, FRAGILE  FIBER8, IRREGULAR XYLEM8 and IRREGULAR XYLEM9, have been implicated in  glucuronoxylan (GX) biosynthesis. In this study, we demonstrate that PARVUS,  which is a member of family GT8, is required for the biosynthesis of the  tetrasaccharide primer sequence, beta-D-Xyl-(1 --> 3)-alpha-l-Rha-(1 -->  2)-alpha-D-GalA-(1 --> 4)-D-Xyl, located at the reducing end of GX. The PARVUS  gene is expressed during secondary wall biosynthesis in fibers and vessels, and  its encoded protein is predominantly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum.  Mutation of the PARVUS gene leads to a drastic reduction in secondary wall  thickening and GX content. Structural analysis of GX using (1)H-nuclear magnetic  resonance (NMR) spectroscopy revealed that the parvus mutation causes a loss of  the tetrasaccharide primer sequence at the reducing end of GX and an absence of  glucuronic acid side chains in GX. Activity assay showed that the xylan  xylosyltransferase and glucuronyltransferase activities were not affected in the  parvus mutant. Together, these findings implicate a possible role for PARVUS in  the initiation of biosynthesis of the GX tetrasaccharide primer sequence and  provide novel insights into the mechanisms of GX biosynthesis.', '2007 Dec', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcm155', 'Ye']

PARVUS: !synthesizes! tetrasaccharide primer sequence 
PARVUS: !localizes to! endoplasmic reticulum 
PARVUS: !affects! secondary wall thickening 
PARVUS: !affects! GX content 
Mutation of PARVUS: !causes! loss of tetrasaccharide primer sequence 
Mutation of PARVUS: !causes! absence of glucuronic acid side chains in GX 
Xylan xylosyltransferase: !not affected by! parvus mutation 
Glucuronyltransferase: !not affected by! parvus mutation