Cynara cardunculus L. seeds were germinated in vitro under environmentally controlled conditions. Seeds showed a 60% germination rate, and three growth stages were established based on the seedling mean relative growth rate (RGR). Root, stem and cotyledons were compared in these stages with respect to the emergence of total proteases and cardosin activity and its allocation in the seedling. In growth stage I (1st-5th post-germinative days), seedlings grew very slowly. Total proteases and cardosins were already active at the onset of seedlings in the stem. Total soluble protein remained constant in cardoon seedlings during stage I, and the content of all free amino acids (aa) but proline (Pro) was equally allocated on the 1st post-germinative day. In growth stage II (5th-10th post-germinative days), seedlings grew intensively and exhibited fully developed cotyledons. A pronounced increase in the content of all free aa up to the middle of growth stage II in both stems and roots was observed. In addition, the allocation of the total proteolytic activity and cardosins followed a gradient from the root to the seedling shoot. However, the whole seedling soluble protein remained constant up to the 7th day in and tended to peak on the 10th post-germinative day, being allocated mainly to the seedling stem. In growth stage III (10th-15th post-germinative days), cardoon seedlings exhibited the lowest mean RGR and the highest R/S growth ratio. An intensive degradation of total soluble protein present in the whole seedling except for cotyledons (ca. 5-fold) was observed. Nevertheless, in growth stage III, both the gradients exhibited by total proteases and cardosins activities between the root and the seedling shoot were enhanced, as were contents of all aa except Pro, exhibiting the highest levels in cotyledons on the 15th post-germinative day.

Total proteases: !allocated to! stem 
Cardosins: !allocated to! stem 
Total soluble protein: !remained constant in! seedlings 
Free amino acids: !increased up to! middle of growth stage II 
Total proteolytic activity: !followed gradient from! root to shoot 
Whole seedling soluble protein: !peaked on! 10th post-germinative day 
Total soluble protein: !degraded intensively in! growth stage III 
Total proteases and cardosins activities: !enhanced in! growth stage III 
Free amino acids: !exhibited highest levels in! cotyledons