Partial resistance to leaf rust (Puccinia hordei G. H. Otth) in barley is a quantitative resistance that is not based on hypersensitivity. This resistance hampers haustorium formation, resulting in a long latency period in greenhouse tests. The three most consistent quantitative trait loci (QTL) uncovered in the L94 x 'Vada' mapping population were introgressed by marker-assisted backcrossing into the susceptible L94 background to obtain near-isogenic lines (NIL). We also developed the reciprocal Vada-NIL for the susceptibility alleles of those QTL. The QTL Rphq2 affected latency period of P. hordei more than the QTL Rphq3 and Rphq4. The NIL confirmed the contribution of Rphq2 to partial resistance by prolonging the latency period by 28 h on L94-Rphq2 and shortening the latency period by 23 h on Vada-rphq2. On the basis of flanking restriction fragment length polymorphism-based markers, Rphq2 appeared to be located near the telomeric end of the long arm of chromosome 2H, in a physical region of high recombination, making it the target QTL for map-based cloning. Microscopic observations on the NIL confirmed the nonhypersensitive nature of the resistance conferred by Rphq2. A high-resolution genetic map of the Rphq2 region was constructed using a population of 38 subNIL with overlapping L94 introgressions in Vada background across the region. Rphq2 mapped approximately 2 centimorgans (cM) proximal from the MlLa locus. By bulked segregant analysis and use of synteny with rice, we developed additional markers and fine-mapped Rphq2 to a genetic interval of 0.11 cM that corresponds to a stretch of sequence of, at most, 70 kb in rice. Analysis of this rice sequence revealed predicted genes encoding two proteins with unknown function, retrotransposon proteins, peroxidase proteins, and a protein similar to a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAP3K). Possible homologs of those peroxidases and MAP3K in barley are candidates for the gene that contributes to partial resistance to P. hordei.

QTL: !affects! Latency period
NIL: !confirms! Contribution of QTL
Rphq2: !localizes to! Chromosome 2H
Rphq2: !enhances! Partial resistance
MlLa: !maps proximal to! Rphq2
Bulked segregant analysis: !fine-maps! Rphq2
Rice sequence: !reveals! Predicted genes
Predicted genes: !encode! Proteins with unknown function