['17999643', 'Ethylene is an important plant growth regulator perceived by membrane-bound  ethylene receptors. The ETR1 ethylene receptor is positively regulated by a  predicted membrane protein, RTE1, based on genetic studies in Arabidopsis. RTE1  homologs exist in plants, animals and protists, but the molecular function of  RTE1 is unknown. Here, we examine RTE1 expression and subcellular protein  localization in order to gain a better understanding of RTE1 and its function in  relation to ETR1. Arabidopsis plants transformed with the RTE1 promoter fused to  the beta-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene revealed that RTE1 expression partly  correlates with previously described sites of ETR1 expression or sites of  ethylene response, such as the seedling root, root hairs and apical hook. RTE1  transcript levels are also enhanced by ethylene treatment, and reduced by the  inhibition of ethylene signaling. For subcellular localization of RTE1, a  functional RTE1 fusion to red fluorescent protein (RFP) was expressed under the  control of the native RTE1 promoter. Using fluorescence microscopy, RTE1 was  observed primarily at the Golgi apparatus and partially at the endoplasmic  reticulum (ER) in stably transformed Arabidopsis protoplasts, roots and root  hairs. Next, a functional ETR1 fusion to a 5xMyc epitope tag was expressed under  the control of the native ETR1 promoter. Immunohistochemistry of root hairs not  only showed ETR1 residing at the ER as previously reported, but revealed  substantial localization of ETR1 at the Golgi apparatus. Lastly, we demonstrated  the subcellular co-localization of RTE1 and ETR1. These findings support and  enhance the genetic model that RTE1 plays a role in regulating ETR1.', '2008 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03339.x', 'Chang']

RTE1: !enhances! ETR1 
RTE1: !localizes to! Golgi apparatus 
RTE1: !localizes to! Endoplasmic Reticulum 
ETR1: !localizes to! Golgi apparatus 
ETR1: !localizes to! Endoplasmic Reticulum 
RTE1: !co-localizes with! ETR1