The maize (Zea mays L.) stem pulvinus is a disc of tissue located apical to each node that functions to return a tipped stem to a more upright position via increased cell elongation on its lower side. We investigated the possibility that reactive oxygen species (ROS) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), in particular, are involved in the gravitropic response of the pulvinus prior to initiation of the growth response by employing the cytochemical stain 3,3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB). DAB polymers were found in the bundle sheath cells of gravistimulated pulvini in association with amyloplasts after 1 min of gravistimulation, and the signal spread throughout the cytosol of these cells by 30 min. Furthermore, treatment of maize stem explants containing pulvini with 1 mm H2O2 on their upper sides caused reversal of bending polarity. Similar, though less dramatic, results were obtained via application of 1 mm ascorbic acid to the lower side of the explants. In addition, we determined that a maize cytoplasmic aconitase/iron regulatory protein 1 (IRP1) homolog is up-regulated in the pulvinus bundle sheath cells after gravistimulation using suppressive subtractive hybridization PCR (SSH PCR), real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. Although we do not yet know the role of the IRP1 homolog in the pulvinus, the protein is known to be a redox sensor in other systems. Collectively, our results point to an increase in ROS quite early in the gravitropic signalling pathway and its possible role in determining the direction of bending of the pulvini. We speculate that an ROS burst may serve to link the physical phenomenon of amyloplast sedimentation to the changes in cellular biochemistry and gene expression that facilitate directional growth.

ROS: !involved in! gravitropic response 
DAB: !found in! bundle sheath cells 
H2O2: !causes reversal of! bending polarity 
ascorbic acid: !causes less dramatic! reversal of bending polarity 
IRP1 homolog: !up-regulated in! pulvinus bundle sheath cells 
ROS burst: !links! amyloplast sedimentation to cellular biochemistry and gene expression