['18000057', 'Rop/Rac small GTPases are central to diverse developmental and cellular  activities in plants, playing an especially important role in polar growth of  pollen tubes. Although it is established that a class of plant-specific RopGEFs  promotes the activity of Rop/Rac through the catalytic PRONE (Plant-specific Rop  nucleotide exchanger) domain, not much is known about how RopGEF function is  controlled to allow a spatiotemporally regulated Rop activity. To understand such  a process in pollen, we performed functional analysis with a pollen-specific  RopGEF, AtRopGEF12. Overexpression of AtRopGEF12 had minimal phenotypic effects,  whereas overexpression of a C-terminally truncated version disturbed tube growth,  suggesting that the C terminus was inhibitory to GEF function. In contrast to  non-pollen-expressed RopGEFs, pollen-expressed RopGEFs have conserved C termini.  A phospho-mimicking mutation at an invariant serine within the C terminus of  AtRopGEF12 resulted in loss of the C-terminal inhibition, suggesting that  phosphorylation regulates GEF activity in vivo. The PRONE domain of AtRopGEF12  (PRONE12) was not sufficient to induce isotropic tube growth. We used mbSUS to  show that AtRopGEF12 interacts with an Arabidopsis pollen receptor kinase AtPRK2a  through its C terminus, and BiFC to show that they interact in pollen tubes.  Coexpression of AtRopGEF12 and AtPRK2a caused isotropic growth reminiscent of  that seen upon overexpression of a constitutively active (CA) Rop. Coexpression  of AtPRK2a with an N-terminally truncated AtRopGEF12 did not induce isotropic  growth, indicating a positive role for the N-terminal domain. Our results suggest  a mechanism by which the noncatalytic domains of pollen-specific/enriched RopGEFs  regulate PRONE function, leading to polarized pollen tube growth.', '2007 Nov 20', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0705874104', 'McCormick']

Rop/Rac: !promotes! activity 
AtRopGEF12: !inhibited by! C-terminus 
AtRopGEF12: !regulated by! phosphorylation 
PRONE12: !insufficient to induce! isotropic tube growth 
AtRopGEF12: !interacts with! AtPRK2a 
AtRopGEF12: !enhanced by! AtPRK2a 
AtRopGEF12: !positively regulated by! N-terminal domain