This article reports marked modulation of the activity and regulatory properties of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) by temperature and light in leaf discs as well as leaves of Amaranthus hypochondriacus. The activity of PEPC increased by 1.7-fold at 45 degrees C over 25 degrees C. Warm temperature also stimulated the photoactivation of PEPC. The activation by light of PEPC was 1.9-fold at 25 degrees C and increased to 2.2-fold at 45 degrees C. The sensitivity of PEPC to its inhibitor malate was less and the activation by glucose-6-phosphate (G-6-P) or inorganic phosphate (Pi) was more at 45 degrees C than that at 25 degrees C. These effects of temperature were quite pronounced in light. Similar responses were observed when detached leaves were exposed to varying ambient temperature (dry heat). The activity of PEPC increased by 1.6-fold at 45 degrees C over 25 degrees C in the dark. The activation of PEPC by light was 2.1-fold at 25 degrees C and increased to 2.6-fold at 45 degrees C. Inhibition by malate was less and activation by G-6-P or Pi was more at 45 degrees C than that at 25 degrees C. Thus, there was a marked modulation of not only the activity but also the regulatory properties of the enzyme by temperature and light, independently as well as cooperatively with each other. Further experiments suggested that PEPC was able to memorize to a significant extent the changes induced by warm temperature and that these changes were complemented by subsequent illumination. These effects were not due to changes in PEPC protein levels. We conclude that temperature and light can modulate PEPC activity and regulatory properties not only individually but also in a significantly cooperative manner with each other. As significant increases in temperature are common during daytime in tropical or subtropical conditions, we suggest that the synergistic effects of temperature and light are quite relevant in optimizing the activity of PEPC in leaves of C(4) plants.

temperature: !modulates! PEPC activity 
light: !modulates! PEPC activity 
temperature: !enhances! light activation of PEPC 
light: !enhances! temperature activation of PEPC 
temperature: !decreases! PEPC inhibition by malate 
light: !decreases! PEPC inhibition by malate 
temperature: !increases! PEPC activation by G-6-P or Pi 
light: !increases! PEPC activation by G-6-P or Pi