The seeds of most members of the Brassicaceae accumulate high amounts of sinapine (sinapoylcholine) that is rapidly hydrolyzed during early stages of seed germination. One of three isoforms of sinapine esterase activity (BnSCE3) has been isolated from Brassica napus seedlings and subjected to trypsin digestion and spectrometric sequencing. The peptide sequences were used to isolate BnSCE3 cDNA, which was shown to contain an open reading frame of 1170 bp encoding a protein of 389 amino acids, including a leader peptide of 25 amino acids. Sequence comparison identified the protein as the recently cloned BnLIP2, i.e. a GDSL lipase-like protein, which displays high sequence identity to a large number of corresponding plant proteins, including four related Arabidopsis lipases. The enzymes belong to the SGNH protein family, which use a catalytic triad of Ser-Asp-His, with serine as the nucleophile of the GDSL motif. The corresponding B. napus and Arabidopsis genes were heterologously expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves and proved to confer sinapine esterase activity. In addition to sinapine esterase activity, the native B. napus protein (BnSCE3/BnLIP2) showed broad substrate specificity towards various other choline esters, including phosphatidylcholine. This exceptionally broad substrate specificity, which is common to a large number of other GDSL lipases in plants, hampers their functional analysis. However, the data presented here indicate a role for the GDSL lipase-like BnSCE3/BnLIP2 as a sinapine esterase in members of the Brassicaceae, catalyzing hydrolysis of sinapine during seed germination, leading, via 1-O-sinapoyl-beta-glucose, to sinapoyl-l-malate in the seedlings.

BnSCE3/BnLIP2: !catalyzes! hydrolysis of sinapine 
BnSCE3/BnLIP2: !belongs to! SGNH protein family 
BnSCE3/BnLIP2: !uses! catalytic triad of Ser-Asp-His 
BnSCE3/BnLIP2: !has! broad substrate specificity 
BnSCE3/BnLIP2: !confers! sinapine esterase activity 
BnSCE3/BnLIP2: !leads to! sinapoyl-l-malate