['18036205', 'Glutaredoxins (GRXs) are small oxidoreductases that are involved in various  cellular processes and play a crucial role in responses to oxidative stress.  Three GRX subgroups exist in plants, and GRXs with active sites of the CPYC and  CGFS types are common to pro- and eukaryotes. In contrast, GRXs with the CC type  motif have so far only been identified in land plants. Here, we report that the  two CC-type GRXs ROXY1 and ROXY2 together control anther development in  Arabidopsis thaliana. Single roxy1 and roxy2 mutants are fertile and produce  normal anthers. However, roxy1 roxy2 double mutants are sterile and do not  produce pollen. Strikingly, abaxial and adaxial anther lobe differentiation are  differently affected, with early lobe differentiation being defective in the  adaxial lobes, whereas later steps during pollen mother cell differentiation are  disrupted in the abaxial lobes. Expression studies show that ROXY1 and ROXY2 are  expressed with overlapping patterns during anther development. Lack of ROXY1 and  ROXY2 function affects a large number of anther genes at the transcriptional  level. Genetic and RT-PCR data imply that ROXY1/2 function downstream of the  early-acting anther gene SPOROCYTELESS/NOZZLE and upstream of DYSFUNCTIONAL  TAPETUM1, controlling tapetum development. Mutagenesis of a conserved  glutathione-binding glycine in the ROXY1 protein indicates that CC-type GRXs need  to interact with glutathione to catalyze essential biosynthetic reactions.  Analysis of these two novel anther genes indicates that redox regulation, as well  as participating in plant stress defense mechanisms, might play a major role in  the control of male gametogenesis.', '2008 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03375.x', 'Zachgo']

GRXs: !control! anther development 
ROXY1/2: !affect! a large number of anther genes 
ROXY1/2: !localize to! overlapping patterns during anther development 
SPOROCYTELESS/NOZZLE: !interacts with! ROXY1/2 
DYSFUNCTIONAL TAPETUM1: !downstream of! ROXY1/2 
glutathione-binding glycine: !essential for! ROXY1 protein 
redox regulation: !plays major role in! control of male gametogenesis