['18036201', 'Enzymes encoded by bacterial MurE genes catalyze the ATP-dependent formation of  uridine diphosphate-N-acetylmuramic acid-tripeptide in bacterial peptidoglycan  biosynthesis. The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains one gene with homology to  the bacterial MurE:AtMurE. Under normal conditions AtMurE is expressed in leaves  and flowers, but not in roots or stems. Sequence-based predictions and analyses  of GFP fusions of the N terminus of AtMurE, as well as the full-length protein,  suggest that AtMurE localizes to plastids. We identified three T-DNA-tagged and  one Ds-tagged mutant alleles of AtMurE in A. thaliana. All four alleles show a  white phenotype, and A. thaliana antisense AtMurE lines showed a pale-green  phenotype. These results suggest that AtMurE is involved in chloroplast  biogenesis. Cells of the mutants were inhibited in thylakoid membrane  development. RT-PCR analysis of the mutant lines suggested that the expression of  genes that depend on a multisubunit plastid-encoded RNA polymerase was decreased.  To analyze the functional relationships between the MurE genes of cyanobacteria,  the moss Physcomitrella patens and higher plants, a complementation assay was  carried out with a P. patens (Pp) MurE knock-out line, which exhibits a small  number of macrochloroplasts per cell. Although the Anabaena MurE, fused with the  N-terminal region of PpMurE, complemented the macrochloroplast phenotype in P.  patens, transformation with AtMurE did not complement this phenotype. These  results suggest that AtMurE is functionally divergent from the bacterial and moss  MurE proteins.', '2008 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03379.x', 'Takano']

Enzymes encoded by bacterial MurE genes: !catalyze! formation of uridine diphosphate-N-acetylmuramic acid-tripeptide 
AtMurE: !localizes to! plastids 
AtMurE: !enhances! chloroplast biogenesis 
AtMurE: !represses! expression of genes dependent on multisubunit plastid-encoded RNA polymerase 
Anabaena MurE: !complements! macrochloroplast phenotype in P. patens 
AtMurE: !does not complement! macrochloroplast phenotype in P. patens