['18039663', 'The components and pathways that regulate programmed cell death (PCD) in plants  remain poorly understood. Here we describe the impact of drug-induced endoplasmic  reticulum (ER) stress on Arabidopsis seedlings and present evidence for the role  of Arabidopsis BAX inhibitor-1 (AtBI1) as a modulator of ER stress-mediated PCD.  We found that treatment of Arabidopsis seedlings with tunicamycin (TM), an  inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation and an inducer of ER stress by triggering  accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER, results in strong inhibition of root  growth and loss of survival accompanied by typical hallmarks of PCD such as  accumulation of H(2)O(2), chromatin condensation, and oligonucleosomal  fragmentation of nuclear DNA. These phenotypes are alleviated by co-treatment  with either of two different chemical chaperones, sodium 4-phenylbutyrate and  tauroursodeoxycholic acid, both with chaperone properties that can reduce the  load of misfolded protein in the ER. Expression of AtBI1 mRNA and its promoter  activity are increased dramatically prior to initiation of TM-induced PCD.  Compared with wild-type plants, two AtBI1 mutants (atbi1-1 and atbi1-2) exhibit  hypersensitivity to TM with accelerated PCD progression. Conversely,  overexpressing AtBI1 markedly reduces the sensitivity of Arabidopsis seedlings to  TM. However, alterations in AtBI1 gene expression levels do not cause a  significant effect on the expression patterns of typical ER stress-inducible  genes (AtBip2, AtPDI, AtCRT1, and AtCNX1). We propose that AtBI1 plays a pivotal  role as a highly conserved survival factor during ER stress that acts in parallel  to the unfolded protein response pathway.', '2008 Feb 8', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M706659200', 'Lam']

ER stress: !induces! PCD 
TM: !triggers! accumulation of unfolded proteins 
AtBI1: !modulates! ER stress-mediated PCD 
AtBI1: !increases! prior to initiation of TM-induced PCD 
atbi1-1/2 mutants: !exhibit! hypersensitivity to TM 
AtBI1 overexpression: !reduces! sensitivity of Arabidopsis seedlings to TM 
AtBI1: !acts in parallel to! unfolded protein response pathway