['18047473', 'The non-protein amino acid beta-aminobutyric acid (BABA) primes Arabidopsis to  respond more quickly and strongly to pathogen and osmotic stress. Here, we report  that BABA also significantly enhances acquired thermotolerance in Arabidopsis.  This thermotolerance was dependent on heat shock protein 101, a critical  component of the normal heat-shock response. BABA did not enhance basal  thermotolerance under a severe heat-shock treatment. No roles for the hormones  ethylene and salicylic acid in BABA-induced acquired thermotolerance were  identified by mutant analysis. Using global gene expression analysis, transcript  levels for several transcription factors and DNA binding proteins regulating  responses to the stress hormone abscisic acid (ABA) were found to be elevated in  BABA-treated plants compared with water-treated plants. The role of ABA in  BABA-induced thermotolerance was complex. BABA-enhanced thermotolerance was  partially compromised in the ABA-insensitive mutant, abi1-1, but was augmented in  abi2-1. In an unrelated process, BABA, like ABA, inhibited root growth, and the  level of inhibition was roughly additive in roots treated with both compounds.  Root growth of both abi1-1 and abi2-1 was also inhibited by BABA. Unexpectedly,  abi1-1 and abi2-1 root growth was inhibited more strongly by combined ABA and  BABA treatments than by BABA alone. Our results, together with previously  published data, suggest that BABA is a general enhancer of plant stress  resistance, and that cross-talk occurs between BABA and ABA signalling cascades.  Specifically, the BABA-mediated accumulation of ABA transcription factors without  concomitant activation of a downstream ABA response could represent one component  of the BABA-primed state in Arabidopsis.', '2008 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03343.x', 'Somerville']

BABA: !enhances! thermotolerance 
BABA: !inhibits! root growth 
ABA: !regulates! BABA-induced thermotolerance 
ABA: !inhibits! root growth 
HSP101: !critical for! BABA-induced thermotolerance 
Ethylene/Salicylic Acid: !no role in! BABA-induced thermotolerance 
Transcription Factors/DNA Binding Proteins: !elevated by! BABA 
ABA Transcription Factors: !accumulated by! BABA