High-performance liquid chromatography coupled to ultraviolet photodiode array detection and ion-trap mass spectrometry was used to analyze the intra- and extracellular secondary product metabolome of Medicago truncatula cell suspension cultures responding to yeast elicitor (YE) or methyl jasmonate (MeJA). Data analysis revealed three phases of intracellular response to YE: a transient response in mainly (iso)flavonoid metabolites such as formononetin and biochanin-A that peaked at 12 to 18 h following elicitation and then declined; a sustained response through 48 h for compounds such as medicarpin and daidzin; and a lesser delayed and protracted response starting at 24 h postelicitation, e.g. genistein diglucoside. In contrast, most compounds excreted to the culture medium reached maximum levels at 6 to 12 h postelicitation and returned to basal levels by 24 h. The response to MeJA differed significantly from that to YE. Although both resulted in accumulation of the phytoalexin medicarpin, coordinated increases in isoflavonoid precursors were only observed for YE and not MeJA-treated cells. However, MeJA treatment resulted in a correlated decline in isoflavone glucosides, and did not induce the secretion of metabolites into the culture medium. Three novel methylated isoflavones, 7-hydroxy-6,4'-dimethoxyisoflavone (afrormosin), 6-hydroxy-7,4'-dimethoxyisoflavone (alfalone), and 5,7-dihydroxy-4',6-dimethoxy isoflavone (irisolidone), were induced by YE, and labeling studies indicated that the first two were derived from formononetin. Our results highlight the metabolic flexibility within the isoflavonoid pathway, suggest new pathways for complex isoflavonoid metabolism, and indicate differential mechanisms for medicarpin biosynthesis depending on the nature of elicitation.

YE: !induces! formononetin 
YE: !induces! biochanin-A 
YE: !induces! medicarpin 
YE: !induces! daidzin 
YE: !induces! genistein diglucoside 
MeJA: !induces! medicarpin 
MeJA: !decreases! isoflavone glucosides 
YE: !induces! afrormosin 
YE: !induces! alfalone 
YE: !induces! irisolidone