['18057039', 'Arabidopsis cell walls contain large amounts of pectins and hemicelluloses, which  are predominantly synthesized via the common precursor UDP-glucuronic acid. The  major enzyme for the formation of this nucleotide-sugar is UDP-glucose  dehydrogenase, catalysing the irreversible oxidation of UDP-glucose into  UDP-glucuronic acid. Four functional gene family members and one pseudogene are  present in the Arabidopsis genome, and they show distinct tissue-specific  expression patterns during plant development. The analyses of reporter gene lines  indicate gene expression of UDP-glucose dehydrogenases in growing tissues. The  biochemical characterization of the different isoforms shows equal affinities for  the cofactor NAD(+) ( approximately 40 microM) but variable affinities for the  substrate UDP-glucose (120-335 microM) and different catalytic constants,  suggesting a regulatory role for the different isoforms in carbon partitioning  between cell wall formation and sucrose synthesis as the second major  UDP-glucose-consuming pathway. UDP-glucose dehydrogenase is feedback inhibited by  UDP-xylose. The relatively (compared with a soybean UDP-glucose dehydrogenase)  low affinity of the enzymes for the substrate UDP-glucose is paralleled by the  weak inhibition of the enzymes by UDP-xylose. The four Arabidopsis UDP-glucose  dehydrogenase isoforms oxidize only UDP-glucose as a substrate.  Nucleotide-sugars, which are converted by similar enzymes in bacteria, are not  accepted as substrates for the Arabidopsis enzymes.', '2007', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erm209', 'Tenhaken']

UDP-glucose dehydrogenase: !synthesizes! UDP-glucuronic acid 
Four gene family members: !localize to! Arabidopsis genome 
Reporter gene lines: !show! tissue-specific expression patterns 
Different isoforms: !have! variable affinities for substrate 
Different isoforms: !regulate! carbon partitioning 
UDP-glucose dehydrogenase: !feedback inhibited by! UDP-xylose 
Arabidopsis enzymes: !oxidize only! UDP-glucose