To understand better the plant response to ozone, we isolated and characterized an ozone-sensitive (ozs1) mutant strain from a set of T-DNA-tagged Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia. The mutant plants show enhanced sensitivity to ozone, desiccation and sulfur dioxide, but have normal sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide, low temperature and high light levels. The T-DNA was inserted at a single locus which is linked to ozone sensitivity. Identification of the genomic sequences flanking the T-DNA insertion revealed disruption of a gene encoding a transporter-like protein of the tellurite resistance/C(4)-dicarboxylate transporter family. Plants with either of two different T-DNA insertions in this gene were also sensitive to ozone, and these plants failed to complement ozs1. Transpiration levels, stomatal conductance levels and the size of stomatal apertures were greater in ozs1 mutant plants than in the wild type. The stomatal apertures of ozs1 mutant plants responded to light fluctuations but were always larger than those of the wild-type plants under the same conditions. The stomata of the mutant and wild-type plants responded similarly to stimuli such as light, abscisic acid, high concentrations of carbon dioxide and ozone. These results suggest that OZS1 helps to close stomata, being not involved in the responses to these signals.

ozs1: !enhances sensitivity to! ozone
ozs1: !enhances sensitivity to! desiccation
ozs1: !enhances sensitivity to! sulfur dioxide
ozs1: !has normal sensitivity to! hydrogen peroxide
ozs1: !has normal sensitivity to! low temperature
ozs1: !has normal sensitivity to! high light levels
ozs1: !linked to! single locus
ozs1: !encodes! transporter-like protein
ozs1: !fails to complement! ozs1
ozs1: !increases! transpiration levels
ozs1: !increases! stomatal conductance levels
ozs1: !increases! size of stomatal apertures
ozs1: !responds to! light fluctuations
ozs1: !responds similarly to! abscisic acid
ozs1: !responds similarly to! high concentrations of carbon dioxide
ozs1: !responds similarly to! ozone
ozs1: !helps to close! stomata