['18088316', 'In plants, Rop/Rac GTPases have emerged as central regulators of diverse  signalling pathways in plant growth and pathogen defence. When active, they  interact with a wide range of downstream effectors. Using yeast two-hybrid  screening we have found three previously uncharacterized receptor-like protein  kinases to be Rop GTPase-interacting molecules: a cysteine-rich receptor kinase,  named NCRK, and two receptor-like cytosolic kinases from the Arabidopsis RLCK-VIb  family, named RBK1 and RBK2. Uniquely for Rho-family small GTPases, plant Rop  GTPases were found to interact directly with the protein kinase domains. Rop4  bound NCRK preferentially in the GTP-bound conformation as determined by flow  cytometric fluorescence resonance energy transfer measurements in insect cells.  The kinase RBK1 did not phosphorylate Rop4 in vitro, suggesting that the protein  kinases are targets for Rop signalling. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation  assays demonstrated that Rop4 interacted in vivo with NCRK and RBK1 at the plant  plasma membrane. In Arabidopsis protoplasts, NCRK was hyperphosphorylated and  partially co-localized with the small GTPase RabF2a in endosomes. Gene expression  analysis indicated that the single-copy NCRK gene was relatively upregulated in  vasculature, especially in developing tracheary elements. The seven Arabidopsis  RLCK-VIb genes are ubiquitously expressed in plant development, and highly so in  pollen, as in case of RBK2. We show that the developmental context of RBK1 gene  expression is predominantly associated with vasculature and is also locally  upregulated in leaves exposed to Phytophthora infestans and Botrytis cinerea  pathogens. Our data indicate the existence of cross-talk between Rop GTPases and  specific receptor-like kinases through direct molecular interaction.', '2008 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03384.x', 'Palme']

Rop/Rac GTPases: !interact with! downstream effectors 
Rop4: !interacts with! NCRK 
Rop4: !interacts with! RBK1 
NCRK: !localizes to! endosomes 
NCRK: !upregulated in! vasculature 
RBK1: !upregulated in! vasculature 
RBK1: !upregulated in! leaves exposed to pathogens 
RLCK-VIb genes: !ubiquitously expressed in! plant development 
RBK2: !highly expressed in! pollen