['18162597', 'Ionotropic glutamate (Glu) receptors in the central nervous system of animals are  tetrameric ion channels that conduct cations across neuronal membranes upon  binding Glu or another agonist. Plants possess homologous molecules encoded by  GLR genes. Previous studies of Arabidopsis thaliana root cells showed that the  amino acids alanine (Ala), asparagine (Asn), cysteine (Cys), Glu, glycine (Gly),  and serine trigger transient Ca(2+) influx and membrane depolarization by a  mechanism that depends on the GLR3.3 gene. This study of hypocotyl cells  demonstrates that these six effective amino acids are not equivalent agonists.  Instead, they grouped into hierarchical classes based on their ability to  desensitize the response mechanism. Sequential treatment with two different amino  acids separated by a washout phase demonstrated that Glu desensitized the  depolarization mechanism to Gly, but Gly did not desensitize the mechanism to  Glu. All 36 possible pairs of agonists were tested to characterize the  desensitization hierarchy. The results could be explained by a model in which one  class of channels contained a subunit that was activated and therefore  desensitized only by Glu, while a second class could be activated and  desensitized by Ala, Cys, Glu, or Gly. A third class could be activated and  desensitized by any of the six effective amino acids. Analysis of knockout  mutants indicated that GLR3.3 was a required component of all three classes of  channels, while the related GLR3.4 molecule specifically affected only two of the  classes. The resulting model is an important step toward understanding the  biological roles of these enigmatic ion channels.', '2008 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.108134', 'Spalding']

GLR genes: !encode! Glu receptors 
Glu receptors: !conduct cations! across neuronal membranes 
Amino acids: !trigger! Ca(2+) influx 
Amino acids: !group into! hierarchical classes 
Glu: !desensitizes! response mechanism to Gly 
Gly: !does not desensitize! response mechanism to Glu 
GLR3.3: !required component of! all three classes of channels 
GLR3.4: !specifically affects! two of the classes