['18162590', 'Protein dephosphorylation by the serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)  modulates a broad array of cellular functions. PP2A normally acts as a  heterotrimeric holoenzyme complex comprising a catalytic subunit bound by  regulatory A and B subunits. Characterization of the regulatory A subunit  isoforms (ROOTS CURL IN NAPHTHYLPHTHALAMIC ACID1 [RCN1], PP2AA2, and PP2AA3) of  Arabidopsis thaliana PP2A has shown that RCN1 plays a primary role in controlling  root and hypocotyl PP2A activity in seedlings. Here we show that hypocotyl and  root growth exhibit different requirements for RCN1-mediated regulation of PP2A  activity. Roots of rcn1 mutant seedlings exhibit characteristic abnormalities in  cell division patterns at the root apical meristem, as well as reduced growth  under ionic, osmotic, and oxidative stress conditions. We constructed chimeric A  subunit genes and found that restoration of normal root tip development in rcn1  plants requires both regulatory and coding sequences of RCN1, whereas the  hypocotyl elongation defect of rcn1 plants can be complemented by either RCN1 or  PP2AA3 transgenes. Furthermore, the RCN1 and PP2AA3 proteins exhibit ubiquitous  subcellular localization patterns in seedlings and both associate with membrane  compartments. Together, these results show that RCN1-containing PP2A has unique  functions that cannot be attributed to isoform-specific expression and  localization patterns. Postembryonic RCN1 function is required to maintain normal  auxin distribution and stem cell function at the root apex. Our data show that  RCN1-regulated phosphatase activity plays a unique role in regulating  postembryonic root development and stress response.', '2008 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.112995', 'DeLong']

PP2A: !modulates! cellular functions
RCN1: !controls! PP2A activity
RCN1: !regulates! root and hypocotyl growth
rcn1 mutant seedlings: !exhibit! abnormalities in cell division patterns
chimeric A subunit genes: !restore! normal root tip development
RCN1: !associates with! membrane compartments
RCN1-regulated phosphatase activity: !plays a unique role in regulating! postembryonic root development and stress response