Mature seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica napus contain complex mixtures of aliphatic monomers derived from non-extractable lipid polyesters. Most of the monomers are deposited in the seed coat, and their compositions suggest the presence of both cutin and suberin layers. The location of these polyesters within the seed coat, and their contributions to permeability of the seed coat and other functional properties are unknown. Polyester deposition was followed over Brassica seed development and distinct temporal patterns of monomer accumulation were observed. Octadecadiene-1,18-dioate, the major leaf cutin monomer, was transiently deposited. In contrast, the saturated dicarboxylates maintained a constant level during seed desiccation, whereas the fatty alcohols and saturated omega-hydroxy fatty acids continually increased. Dissection and analysis of Brassica seed coats showed that suberization is not specific to the chalaza. Analysis of the Arabidopsis ap2-7 mutant suggested that suberin monomers are preferentially associated with the outer integument. Several Arabidopsis knockout mutant lines for genes involved in polyester biosynthesis (att1, fatB and gpat5) were examined for seed monomer load and composition. The variance in polyester monomers of these mutants is correlated with dye penetration assays. Furthermore, stable transgenic plants expressing promoter::YFP fusions showed ATT1 promoter activity in the inner integument, whereas GPAT5 promoter is active in the outer integument. Together, the Arabidopsis data indicated that there is a suberized layer associated with the outer integument and a cutin-like polyester layer associated with the inner seed coat.

Mature seeds: !contain! Complex mixtures of aliphatic monomers 
Polyesters: !deposit in! Seed coat 
Octadecadiene-1,18-dioate: !transiently deposited! During seed desiccation 
Fatty alcohols/saturated omega-hydroxy fatty acids: !continually increase! During seed desiccation 
Suberization: !not specific to! Chalaza 
Arabidopsis ap2-7 mutant: !suggests! Suberin monomers preferentially associated with outer integument 
ATT1/fatB/gpat5 mutants: !correlated with! Dye penetration assays 
YFP fusions: !show! ATT1 promoter activity in inner integument, GPAT5 promoter active in outer integument 
Arabidopsis data: !indicate! Suberized layer associated with outer integument, cutin-like polyester layer associated with inner seed coat