The development of bacterial rot disease caused by Pseudomonas cichorii is closely associated with programmed cell death. To investigate the molecular events occurring during the development of bacterial rot, we isolated 20 P. cichorii-responsive genes (PcRGs) in lettuce by differential display. Among these PcRGs, signal transduction-, transcription/translation- and defense/stress responses-related PcRGs were subjected to a comparative expression study. We used RNA samples isolated from lettuce leaves inoculated with P. cichorii and hypersensitive response-inducing Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae. Expression of PcRG1-5-5 (spliceosomal protein), 2-9-2 (protein kinase) and 1-6-2 (ACC oxidase), 7-5 (alternative oxidase) and BI-I (bax inhibitor I) significantly increased in lettuce leaves inoculated with both P. cichorii and P. syringae pv. syringae. Intriguingly, PcRG 1-2-6 (protein phosphatase 2C) and 4-D-5 (protein kinase) were only up-regulated in P. cichorii-inoculated lettuce, whereas expression of PcRG1-3-2 (ribonucleoprotein) was only enhanced in P. syringae pv. syringae-inoculated lettuce. Expressions of PcRG1-3-2, 1-5-5, 1-6-2, 2-9-2, 7-5 and BI-I were induced by treatments with salicylic acid and/or methyl jasmonate. However, expression of PcRG1-2-6 and 4-D-5, which were specifically up-regulated by P. cichorii, were scarcely affected by these chemicals. Pharmacological studies suggested that ethylene and alternative oxidase were commonly related to disease development and hypersensitive responses. By contrast, there may be a different role for protein synthesis and protein kinase during disease development and in hypersensitive responses. These results suggested the overall similarity of genes expressed during disease development and in hypersensitive responses. However, there were differences not only in induction kinetics and the level of gene expression but also in the signal transduction pathway between hypersensitive responses and disease development.

PcRG1-5-5: !synthesizes! spliceosomal protein
PcRG2-9-2: !synthesizes! protein kinase
PcRG1-6-2: !synthesizes! ACC oxidase
PcRG7-5: !synthesizes! alternative oxidase
BI-I: !synthesizes! bax inhibitor I
PcRG1-2-6: !synthesizes! protein phosphatase 2C
PcRG4-D-5: !synthesizes! protein kinase
PcRG1-3-2: !synthesizes! ribonucleoprotein
P. cichorii: !induces! PcRG1-2-6, 4-D-5
P. syringae pv. syringae: !induces! PcRG1-3-2
SA/MJ: !induces! PcRG1-3-2, 1-5-5, 1-6-2, 2-9-2, 7-5, BI-I
ethylene: !enhances! disease development