['18182022', 'The conditional flu mutant of Arabidopsis accumulates excess amounts of  protochlorophyllide within plastid membranes in the dark and generates singlet  oxygen upon light exposure. By varying the length of the dark period, the level  of the photosensitizer protochlorophyllide may be modulated, and conditions have  been established that either endorse the cytotoxicity of (1)O(2) or reveal its  signaling role. Two criteria have been used to distinguish between these two  modes of activity of (1)O(2): the impact of the EXECUTER1 mutation and the  prevalence of either non-enzymatic or enzymatic lipid peroxidation. During  illumination of etiolated flu seedlings, toxic effects of (1)O(2) prevail and  non-enzymatic lipid peroxidation proceeds rapidly. In contrast, in light-grown  flu plants that were subjected to an 8 h dark/light shift, lipid peroxidation  occurred almost exclusively enzymatically. The resulting oxidation product,  13-hydroperoxy octadecatrienoic acid (13-HPOT), serves as a substrate for  synthesis of 12-oxo phytodienoic acid (OPDA) and jasmonic acid (JA), both of  which are known to control various metabolic and developmental processes in  plants. Inactivation of the EXECUTER1 protein abrogates not only (1)O(2)-mediated  cell death and growth inhibition of flu plants, but also enzymatic lipid  peroxidation. However, inactivation of jasmonate biosynthesis in the aos/flu  double mutant does not affect (1)O(2)-mediated growth inhibition and cell death.  Hence, JA and OPDA do not act as second messengers during (1)O(2) signaling, but  form an integral part of a stress-related signaling cascade activated by (1)O(2)  that encompasses several signaling pathways known to be activated by abiotic and  biotic stressors.', '2008 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03409.x', 'Apel']

protochlorophyllide: !accumulates in! plastid membranes 
singlet oxygen: !generated by! light exposure 
EXECUTER1 mutation: !impacts! (1)O(2) activity 
non-enzymatic lipid peroxidation: !occurs rapidly in! etiolated flu seedlings 
enzymatic lipid peroxidation: !occurs in! light-grown flu plants 
13-HPOT: !synthesized from! enzymatic lipid peroxidation 
OPDA/JA: !synthesized from! 13-HPOT 
EXECUTER1 protein: !inactivates! (1)O(2)-mediated cell death 
aos/flu double mutant: !inhibits! jasmonate biosynthesis