['18182029', 'In Arabidopsis thaliana, a family of six genes encodes acyl-CoA-binding proteins  (ACBPs) that show conservation at the acyl-CoA-binding domain. They are the  membrane-associated ACBP1 and ACBP2, extracellularly targeted ACBP3,  kelch-motif-containing ACBP4 and ACBP5, and 10-kDa ACBP6. The acyl-CoA domain in  each of ACBP1 to ACBP6 binds long-chain acyl-CoA esters in vitro, suggestive of  possible roles in plant lipid metabolism. We addressed here the use of  Arabidopsis ACBPs in conferring lead [Pb(II)] tolerance in transgenic plants  because the 10-kDa human ACBP has been identified as a molecular target for  Pb(II) in vivo. We investigated the effect of Pb(II) stress on the expression of  genes encoding Arabidopsis ACBP1, ACBP2 and ACBP6. We showed that the expression  of ACBP1 and ACBP2, but not ACBP6, in root is induced by Pb(II) nitrate  treatment. In vitro Pb(II)-binding assays indicated that ACBP1 binds Pb(II)  comparatively better, and ACBP1 was therefore selected for further  investigations. When grown on Pb(II)-containing medium, transgenic Arabidopsis  lines overexpressing ACBP1 were more tolerant to Pb(II)-induced stress than the  wild type. Accumulation of Pb(II) in shoots of the ACBP1-overepxressing plants  was significantly higher than wild type. The acbp1 mutant showed enhanced  sensitivity to Pb(II) when germinated and grown in the presence of Pb(II) nitrate  and tolerance was restored upon complementation using an ACBP1 cDNA. Our results  suggest that ACBP1 is involved in mediating Pb(II) tolerance in Arabidopsis with  accumulation of Pb(II) in shoots. Such observations of Pb(II) accumulation,  rather than Pb(II) extrusion, in the ACBP1-overexpressing plants implicate  possible use of ACBP1 in Pb(II) phytoremediation.', '2008 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03402.x', 'Chye']

ACBP1: !binds! Pb(II) 
ACBP1: !overexpressing in! transgenic Arabidopsis 
ACBP1: !confers! lead tolerance 
ACBP1: !accumulates! Pb(II) 
ACBP1: !restores! tolerance in acbp1 mutant 
ACBP2: !induced by! Pb(II) nitrate 
ACBP6: !not induced by! Pb(II) nitrate