Resurrection plants are able to dehydrate/rehydrate rapidly without cell damage by a mechanism, the understanding of which may be of ecological importance in the adaptation of crop plants to dry conditions. The o-diphenol oxidase in Ramonda serbica Pan. & Petrov, a rare resurrection plant of the Balkan Peninsula, was characterized in respect to different isoforms, preferable substrates and specific inhibitors. Two anionic isoforms with pI 4.6 and 4.7 were separated from turgid leaves. Three additional anionic isoforms (pI 5.1, 5.3 and 5.6) and three neutral isoforms (pI from 6.8 to 7.4) were induced in desiccated leaves. Based on apparent K(m) values, the affinity for reducing substrates decreased as follows: methyl catechol > chlorogenic acid > 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine > caffeic acid > pyrogallol. Polyphenol oxidase (PPO) activity was specifically sensitive to diethyldithiocarbamate and also inhibited by KCN, DTT and salicylic hydroxamic acid but with no inhibitory effect of Na3N. Plants were subjected to drought-to-near complete water loss (approximately 2% relative water content, RWC) and several fold higher PPO activity was detected in desiccated leaves. Ramonda leaves contain high levels of phenolics, which decreased during drought. Rehydration of dry leaves from 2% RWC to 95% RWC led to transient inhibition of PPO in the first few hours. Within a day, the levels completely recovered to those determined in desiccated leaves. The finding of desiccation-induced high activity of PPO and new isoforms, which were also present in rehydrated turgid leaves, indicates a substantial role for PPO in the adaptation mechanism of resurrection plants to desiccation and also to the oxidative stress during rehydration.

Gene: !affects! Process
Process: !involves! Polyphenol oxidase (PPO)
Gene: !localizes to! Ramonda serbica Pan. & Petrov
Gene: !interacts with! Substrates
Substrates: !decreases affinity for! Reducing substrates
Gene: !enhances! PPO activity
Gene: !represses! Inhibition of PPO
Gene: !synthesizes! Phenolics