We investigated the effects of short-term salinity stress and spermidine application to salinized nutrient solution on polyamine metabolism and various stress defense reactions in the roots of two cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) cultivars, Changchun mici and Jinchun No. 2. Seedlings grown in nutrient solution salinized with 50mM NaCl for 8d displayed reduced relative water content, net photosynthetic rates and plant growth, together with increased lipid peroxidation and electrolyte leakage in the roots. These changes were more marked in cv. Jinchun No. 2 than in cv. Changchun mici, confirming that the latter cultivar is more salinity-tolerant than the former. Salinity stress caused an increase in superoxide and hydrogen peroxide production, particularly in cv. Jinchun No. 2 roots, while the salinity-induced increase in antioxidant enzyme activities and proline contents in the roots was much larger in cv. Changchun mici than in cv. Jinchun No. 2. In comparison to cv. Jinchun No. 2, cv. Changchun mici showed a marked increase in arginine decarboxylase, ornithine decarboxylase, S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase and diamine oxidase activities, as well as free spermidine and spermine, soluble conjugated and insoluble bound putrescine, spermidine and spermine contents in the roots during exposure to salinity. On the other hand, spermidine application to salinized nutrient solution resulted in alleviation of the salinity-induced membrane damage in the roots and plant growth and photosynthesis inhibition, together with an increase in polyamine and proline contents and antioxidant enzyme activities in the roots of cv. Jinchun No. 2 but not of cv. Changchun mici. These results suggest that spermidine confers short-term salinity tolerance on cucumber probably through inducing antioxidant enzymes and osmoticants.

Salinity stress: !reduces! Plant growth 
Salinity stress: !increases! Lipid peroxidation 
Salinity stress: !increases! Superoxide and hydrogen peroxide production 
Salinity stress: !increases! Antioxidant enzyme activities 
Salinity stress: !increases! Proline contents 
Salinity stress: !increases! Arginine decarboxylase, ornithine decarboxylase, S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase and diamine oxidase activities 
Salinity stress: !increases! Free spermidine and spermine, soluble conjugated and insoluble bound putrescine, spermidine and spermine contents 
Spermidine application: !alleviates! Salinity-induced membrane damage 
Spermidine application: !increases! Plant growth 
Spermidine application: !increases! Photosynthesis inhibition 
Spermidine application: !increases! Polyamine and proline contents 
Spermidine application: !increases! Antioxidant enzyme activities