['18245455', 'Pterin-4a-carbinolamine dehydratases (PCDs) recycle oxidized pterin cofactors  generated by aromatic amino acid hydroxylases (AAHs). PCDs are known  biochemically only from animals and one bacterium, but PCD-like proteins (COG2154  in the Clusters of Orthologous Groups [COGs] database) are encoded by many plant  and microbial genomes. Because these genomes often encode no AAH homologs, the  annotation of their COG2154 proteins as PCDs is questionable. Moreover, some  COG2154 proteins lack canonical residues that are catalytically important in  mammalian PCDs. Diverse COG2154 proteins of plant, fungal, protistan, and  prokaryotic origin were therefore tested for PCD activity by functional  complementation in Escherichia coli, and the plant proteins were localized using  green fluorescent protein fusions. Higher and lower plants proved to have two  COG2154 proteins, a mitochondrial one with PCD activity and a noncanonical,  plastidial one without. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the latter is unique  to plants and arose from the former early in the plant lineage. All 10 microbial  COG2154 proteins tested had PCD activity; six of these came from genomes with no  AAH, and six were noncanonical. The results suggested the motif  [EDKH]-x(3)-H-[HN]-[PCS]-x(5,6)-[YWF]-x(9)-[HW]-x(8,15)-D as a signature for PCD  activity. Organisms having a functional PCD but no AAH partner include  angiosperms, yeast, and various prokaryotes. In these cases, PCD presumably has  another function. An ancillary role in molybdopterin cofactor metabolism,  hypothesized from phylogenomic evidence, was supported by demonstrating  significantly lowered activities of two molybdoenzymes in Arabidopsis thaliana  PCD knockout mutants. Besides this role, we propose that partnerless PCDs support  the function of as yet unrecognized pterin-dependent enzymes.', '2008 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.114090', 'Hanson']

Pterin-4a-carbinolamine dehydratases (PCDs): !recycle! oxidized pterin cofactors 
COG2154 proteins: !encode! many plant and microbial genomes
COG2154 proteins: !test for! PCD activity
Higher and lower plants: !have two! COG2154 proteins
Microbial COG2154 proteins: !have! PCD activity
Organisms: !have! functional PCD but no AAH partner
Arabidopsis thaliana PCD knockout mutants: !demonstrate! lowered activities of two molybdoenzymes
PCDs: !support! function of unrecognized pterin-dependent enzymes