Dark chilling affects growth and yield of warm-climate crops such as soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.]. Several studies have investigated chilling-stress effects on photosynthesis and other aspects of metabolism, but none have compared effects of whole-plant chilling (WPC; shoots and roots) with that of aboveground chilling in legumes. This is important because low root temperatures might induce additional constraints, such as inhibition of N(2) fixation, thereby aggravating chilling-stress symptoms. Effects of dark chilling on PSII, shoot growth, leaf ureide content and photosynthetic capacity were studied in two soybean genotypes, Highveld Top (chilling tolerant) and PAN809 (chilling sensitive), in experiments comparing effects of WPC with that of shoot chilling (SC). Both treatments inhibited shoot growth in PAN809 but not Highveld Top. Also, WPC in PAN809 caused a decrease in leaf ureide content followed by severe chlorosis and alterations in O-J-I-P fluorescence-rise kinetics, distinct from SC. A noteworthy difference was the appearance of a Delta K peak in the O-J-I-P fluorescence rise in response to WPC. These genotypic and treatment differences also reflected in the degree of inhibition of CO(2) assimilation rates. The appearance of a Delta K peak, coupled with growth inhibition, reduced ureide content, chlorosis and lower CO(2) assimilation rates, provides mechanistic information about how WPC might have aggravated chilling-stress symptoms in PAN809. We introduce a model explaining how chilling soil temperatures might trigger N-limitation in sensitive genotypes and how characteristic changes in O-J-I-P fluorescence-rise kinetics are linked to changes in carbon and nitrogen metabolism.

Dark chilling: !affects! growth and yield of warm-climate crops 
WPC: !inhibits! shoot growth in PAN809 
WPC: !causes decrease! in leaf ureide content 
WPC: !induces! alterations in O-J-I-P fluorescence-rise kinetics 
Delta K peak: !appears in! O-J-I-P fluorescence rise in response to WPC 
Growth inhibition: !reduces! ureide content, chlorosis and CO(2) assimilation rates 
Chilling soil temperatures: !triggers! N-limitation in sensitive genotypes 
Changes in O-J-I-P fluorescence-rise kinetics: !linked to! changes in carbon and nitrogen metabolism