Metabolomics is perhaps the ultimate level of post-genomic analysis as it can reveal changes in metabolite fluxes that are controlled by only minor changes within gene expression measured using transcriptomics and/or by analysing the proteome that elucidates post-translational control over enzyme activity. Metabolic change is a major feature of plant genetic modification and plant interactions with pathogens, pests, and their environment. In the assessment of genetically modified plant tissues, metabolomics has been used extensively to explore by-products resulting from transgene expression and scenarios of substantial equivalence. Many studies have concentrated on the physiological development of plant tissues as well as on the stress responses involved in heat shock or treatment with stress-eliciting molecules such as methyl jasmonic acid, yeast elicitor or bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Plant-host interactions represent one of the most biochemically complex and challenging scenarios that are currently being assessed by metabolomic approaches. For example, the mixtures of pathogen-colonised and non-challenged plant cells represent an extremely heterogeneous and biochemically rich sample; there is also the further complication of identifying which metabolites are derived from the plant host and which are from the interacting pathogen. This review will present an overview of the analytical instrumentation currently applied to plant metabolomic analysis, literature within the field will be reviewed paying particular regard to studies based on plant-host interactions and finally the future prospects on the metabolomic analysis of plants and plant-host interactions will be discussed.

Gene: !affects! Metabolite fluxes 
Metabolite fluxes: !controlled by! Gene expression 
Gene expression: !measured using! Transcriptomics 
Proteome: !elucidates! Post-translational control 
Genetically modified plant tissues: !explored by! Metabolomics 
Plant-host interactions: !assessed by! Metabolomic approaches