This study investigated the mechanisms of salt resistance of four maize (Zea mays L.) hybrids [cultivar (cv.) Pioneer 3906 and newly developed hybrids SR03, SR12 and SR13] during the first phase of salt stress. Plants were grown in aerated nutrient solutions at 1 mM Na+ (control) and 100 mM Na+ (salt stress). Stress was imposed in 25 mM steps and plants were harvested after 2 days at 100 mM Na+. At 100 mM Na+ the area of the fourth leaf, which developed under salt stress, did not change significantly in SR03 and SR12 whereas significant reductions were observed in cv. Pioneer 3906 and SR13. Concentrations of assimilates (i.e. glucose, fructose and sucrose) in the shoot sap were significantly greater under salt stress in SR03 and SR12. However, the greater assimilate supply was not responsible for their salt resistance as there were no significant reductions in assimilate concentrations even in the other two genotypes. Shoot turgor and growth were maintained in SR03 and SR12 at 100 mM Na+ through significant increases in osmolality of the shoot sap. Concentrations of free ABA and ABA-glucose esters (ABA-GE) in the growing region of the fourth leaf increased significantly under salt stress in all genotypes. Leaf area at 100 mM Na(+), expressed as a percentage of that at 1 mM, showed significant positive relationships with free ABA (R(2) = 0.62) and the sum of free ABA and ABA-GE (R(2) = 0.65). Results of this study indicate clearly that a combination of partial osmotic adjustment, a possible reduction of the sensitivity of leaf growth under salt stress to increased ABA concentrations and a growth-promoting function regulated by ABA is responsible for salt resistance in the first phase of salt stress. Genotypic variation in these mechanisms can be utilized to breed salt-resistant genotypes in maize.

genotype: !maintains! Shoot turgor
genotype: !promotes! Growth
ABA: !increases! Leaf area
ABA: !regulates! Growth-promoting function
Assimilates: !greater in! SR03 and SR12
Osmolality: !increases in! SR03 and SR12