The temperature dependence of C3 photosynthesis is known to vary according to the growth environment. Atmospheric CO2 concentration and temperature are predicted to increase with climate change. To test whether long-term growth in elevated CO2 and temperature modifies photosynthesis temperature response, wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) was grown in ambient CO2 (370 micromol mol(-1)) and elevated CO2 (700 micromol mol(-1)) combined with ambient temperatures and 4 degrees C warmer ones, using temperature gradient chambers in the field. Flag leaf photosynthesis was measured at temperatures ranging from 20 to 35 degrees C and varying CO2 concentrations between ear emergence and anthesis. The maximum rate of carboxylation was determined in vitro in the first year of the experiment and from the photosynthesis-intercellular CO2 response in the second year. With measurement CO2 concentrations of 330 micromol mol(-1) or lower, growth temperature had no effect on flag leaf photosynthesis in plants grown in ambient CO2, while it increased photosynthesis in elevated growth CO2. However, warmer growth temperatures did not modify the response of photosynthesis to measurement temperatures from 20 to 35 degrees C. A central finding of this study was that the increase with temperature in photosynthesis and the photosynthesis temperature optimum were significantly higher in plants grown in elevated rather than ambient CO2. In association with this, growth in elevated CO2 increased the temperature response (activation energy) of the maximum rate of carboxylation. The results provide field evidence that growth under CO2 enrichment enhances the response of Rubisco activity to temperature in wheat.

CO2: !enhances! photosynthesis temperature response
CO2: !increases! photosynthesis temperature optimum
CO2: !increases! temperature response of maximum rate of carboxylation
growth temperature: !increases! photosynthesis in elevated CO2
growth temperature: !has no effect on! photosynthesis in ambient CO2