The relationship of zinc (Zn) efficiency in rice to differential tolerance of photosynthetic capacity and chloroplast function to low Zn stress was studied using Zn-efficient (IR8192) and Zn-inefficient (Erjiufeng) rice genotypes (Oryza sativa L.). Zinc deficiency caused extensive declines in leaf chlorophyll (Chl) content, ratios of chl a:b, Pn, Fv/Fm and Fv/Fo, indicating that the intrinsic quantum efficiency of the photosystem II (PSII) units was damaged. A greater decline was observed in the inefficient genotype (Erjiufeng) than the efficient genotype (IR8192). The 77 K chl fluorescence emission spectrum revealed that Zn deficiency blocked energy spillover from PSII to PSI and more excitation energy was distributed to PSII in IR8192 than Erjiufeng. The spectrum of Zn-deficient Erjiufeng was completely disordered, implying that the photosynthetic centers were seriously damaged. Electron microscopy showed that Zn deficiency caused a severe damage to the fine structure of chloroplasts, but IR8192 had a better preserved chloroplast ultrastructure as compared with Erjiufeng. These differences may result from the higher levels of the antioxidant enzyme activities and lower oxidant stress level in IR8192. These results indicate that Zn deficiency decreases leaf photosynthetic capacity primarily by reducing the number of PSII units per unit leaf area, and also reducing the photochemical capacity of the remaining PSII units. Therefore, the maintenance of more efficient photochemical capacity under low Zn stress is a key factor for the high Zn efficiency in rice, which may result from less antioxidant damage caused by low Zn to the chloroplast ultrastructure.

Zn-deficiency: !decreases! Photosynthetic capacity 
Chloroplast ultrastructure: !preserved better in! Zn-efficient genotype 
Antioxidant enzyme activities: !higher in! Zn-efficient genotype 
Oxidant stress level: !lower in! Zn-efficient genotype 
Photochemical capacity: !maintained more efficiently under low Zn stress in! Zn-efficient genotype