Photosynthesis-related proteins and PSII functions of Jatropha curcas seedlings under cold stress were studied using proteomic and chlorophyll fluorescence approaches. The results of chlorophyll fluorescence measurement indicated that electron transport flux per reaction center (ET(o)/RC) and performance index (PI(ABS)) were relatively sensitive to low temperature, especially at early stage of cold stress. The increase in O-J phase and decrease in J-I phase of chlorophyll fluorescence transient indicated a protection mechanism of J. curcas to photoinhibition at early stage of cold stress. Eight photosynthesis-related proteins significantly changed during cold stress were identified using liquid chromatography MS/MS. Results of correlation analyses between photosynthesis-related proteins and chlorophyll fluorescence parameters indicated that (1) ATP synthase and Rieske FeS protein were significantly correlated with electron transport of reaction center in PSII; (2) precursor for 33-kDa protein was positively correlated with fluorescence quenching of the O-J and J-I phases and PI(ABS) during cold stress, which implies that it might be related to multiple process in PSII; (3) contrary correlations were found between F(J) - F(o) and two enzymes in the Calvin cycle, and the relations between these proteins and PSII function were unclear. The combined study using proteomic approaches and chlorophyll fluorescence measurements indicated that the early-stage (0-12 h) acclimation of PSII and the late-stage (after 24 h) H(2)O(2) scavenging might be involved in the cold response mechanisms of J. curcas seedlings.

ATP synthase: !correlated with! electron transport of reaction center in PSII
Rieske FeS protein: !correlated with! electron transport of reaction center in PSII
precursor for 33-kDa protein: !positively correlated with! fluorescence quenching of the O-J and J-I phases and PI(ABS)
F(J) - F(o): !contrary correlations with! two enzymes in the Calvin cycle
PSII: !involved in! cold response mechanisms of J. curcas seedlings