Its superior quantum efficiency renders PSII a model for biomimetic systems. However, also in biological water oxidation by PSII, the efficiency is restricted by recombination losses. By laser-flash illumination, the secondary radical pair, P680(+)Q(-) (A) (where P680 is the primary Chl donor in PSII and Q(A), primary quinone acceptor of PSII), was formed in close to 100% of the PSII. Investigation of the quantum efficiency (or yield) of the subsequent steps by time-resolved delayed (10 micros to 60 ms) and prompt (70 micros to 700 ms) Chl fluorescence measurements on PSII membrane particles suggests that (1) the effective rate for P680(+) Q(-) (A) recombination is approximately 5 ms(-1) with an activation energy of approximately 0.34 eV, circumstantially confirming dominating losses by reformation of the primary radical pair followed by ground-state recombination. (2) Because of compensatory influences on recombination and forward reactions, the efficiency is only weakly temperature dependent. (3) Recombination losses are several-fold enhanced at lower pH. (4) Calculation based on delayed-fluorescence data suggests that the losses depend on the state of the water-oxidizing manganese complex, being low in the S(0)-->S(1) and S(1)-->S(2) transition, clearly higher in S(2)-->S(3) and S(3)-->S(4)-->S(0). (5) For the used artificial electron acceptor, the efficiency is limited by acceptor-side processes/S-state decay at high/low photon-absorption rates resulting in optimal efficiency at surprisingly low rates of approximately 0.15-15 photons s(-1) (per PSII). The pH and S-state dependence can be rationalized by the basic model of alternate electron-proton removal proposed elsewhere. A physiological function of the recombination losses could be limitation of the lifetime of the reactive donor-side tyrosine radical (Y(.) (Z)) in the case of low-pH blockage of water oxidation.

P680(+): !recombines with! Q(-) (A)
P680(+): !limited by! S-state decay
Y(.): !limited by! low-pH blockage