Nostoc punctiforme strain Pasteur Culture Collection (PCC) 73102, a sequenced filamentous cyanobacterium capable of nitrogen fixation, is used as a model organism for characterization of bioenergetic processes during nitrogen fixation in Nostoc. A protocol for isolating thylakoid membranes was developed to examine the biochemical and biophysical aspects of photosynthetic electron transfer. Thylakoids were isolated from filaments of N. punctiforme by pneumatic pressure-drop lysis. The activity of photosynthetic enzymes in the isolated thylakoids was analysed by measuring oxygen evolution activity, fluorescence spectroscopy and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy. Electron transfer was found functional in both PSII and PSI. Electron transfer measurements in PSII, using diphenylcarbazide as electron donor and 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol as electron acceptor, showed that 80% of the PSII centres were active in water oxidation in the final membrane preparation. Analysis of the membrane protein complexes was made by 2D gel electrophoresis, and identification of representative proteins was made by mass spectrometry. The ATP synthase, several oligomers of PSI, PSII and the NAD(P)H dehydrogenase (NDH)-1L and NDH-1M complexes, were all found in the gels. Some differences were noted compared with previous results from Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Two oligomers of PSII were found, monomeric and dimeric forms, but no CP43-less complexes. Both dimeric and monomeric forms of Cyt b(6)/f could be observed. In all, 28 different proteins were identified, of which 25 are transmembrane proteins or membrane associated ones.

Nostoc punctiforme: !isolates! Thylakoids 
Thylakoids: !measure! Oxygen evolution activity 
Oxygen evolution activity: !analyse! Photosynthetic enzymes 
Photosynthetic enzymes: !measure! Electron transfer 
Electron transfer: !measure! PSII and PSI 
2D gel electrophoresis: !identify! Membrane protein complexes 
Membrane protein complexes: !analyse! Mass spectrometry 
Mass spectrometry: !identify! 28 proteins