The changes in plant growth, relative water content (RWC), stomatal conductance, lipid peroxidation and antioxidant system in relation to the tolerance to salt stress were investigated in salt-tolerant Plantago maritima and salt-sensitive Plantago media. The 60 days old P. maritima and P. media seedlings were subjected to 0, 100 and 200 mM NaCl for 7 days. Reduction in shoot length was higher in P. media than in P. maritima after exposure to 200 mM NaCl, but 100 mM NaCl treatment did not show any effect on shoot length of P. maritima. Shoot dry weight decreased in P. media and did not change in P. maritima. Two hundred millimolar NaCl treatment had no effect on leaf RWC in P. maritima, but it was reduced in P. media. Salt stress caused reduction in stomatal conductance being more pronounced in P. media than in P. maritima. Activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD; EC 1.15.1.1), catalase (CAT; EC 1.11.1.6), glutathione reductase (GR; EC 1.6.4.2) decreased in P. media with increasing salinity. Ascorbate peroxidase (APX; EC 1.11.1.11) activity in leaves of P. media was increased and showed no change under 100 and 200 mM NaCl, respectively. However, activities of CAT, APX and GR increased under 200 mM NaCl while their activities did not change under 100 mM NaCl in P. maritima. SOD activity in leaves of P. maritima increased with increasing salinity. Concomitant with this, four SOD activity bands were identified in leaves of P. maritima, two bands only were observed in P. media. Peroxidase (POX; EC 1.11.1.7) activity increased under both salt concentrations in P. maritima, but only under 200 mM NaCl in P. media. Confirming this, five POX activity bands were identified in leaves of P. maritima, but only two bands were determined in P. media. Malondialdehyde levels in the leaves increased under salt stress in P. media but showed no change and decreased in P. maritima at 100 and 200 mM NaCl, respectively. These results suggest that the salt-tolerant P. maritima showed a better protection mechanism against oxidative damage caused by salt stress by its higher induced activities of antioxidant enzymes than the salt-sensitive P. media.

P. maritima: !tolerates! salt stress
P. media: !sensitive to! salt stress
P. maritima: !protects against! oxidative damage
P. media: !vulnerable to! oxidative damage
SOD: !increases in! P. maritima
CAT, APX, GR: !increase in! P. maritima
SOD: !decreases in! P. media
CAT, APX, GR: !decrease in! P. media
POX: !increases in! P. maritima
Malondialdehyde: !increases in! P. media