['18267944', "Arabidopsis thaliana contains a large number of genes encoding carboxylic  acid-activating enzymes, including long-chain fatty acyl-CoA synthetase (LACS),  4-coumarate:CoA ligases (4CL), and proteins closely related to 4CLs with unknown  activities. The function of these 4CL-like proteins was systematically explored  by applying an extensive substrate screen, and it was uncovered that activation  of fatty acids is the common feature of all active members of this protein  family, thereby defining a new group of fatty acyl-CoA synthetase, which is  distinct from the known LACS family. Significantly, four family members also  displayed activity towards different biosynthetic precursors of jasmonic acid  (JA), including 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid (OPDA), dinor-OPDA,  3-oxo-2(2'-[Z]-pentenyl)cyclopentane-1-octanoic acid (OPC-8), and OPC-6. Detailed  analysis of in vitro properties uncovered significant differences in substrate  specificity for individual enzymes, but only one protein (At1g20510) showed  OPC-8:CoA ligase activity. Its in vivo function was analysed by transcript and  jasmonate profiling of Arabidopsis insertion mutants for the gene. OPC-8:CoA  ligase expression was activated in response to wounding or infection in the wild  type but was undetectable in the mutants, which also exhibited OPC-8 accumulation  and reduced levels of JA. In addition, the developmental, tissue- and cell-type  specific expression pattern of the gene, and regulatory properties of its  promoter were monitored by analysing promoter::GUS reporter lines. Collectively,  the results demonstrate that OPC-8:CoA ligase catalyses an essential step in JA  biosynthesis by initiating the beta-oxidative chain shortening of the carboxylic  acid side chain of its precursors, and, in accordance with this function, the  protein is localized in peroxisomes.", '2008', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erm325', 'Kombrink']

LACS: !synthesizes! fatty acyl-CoA 
4CL: !synthesizes! fatty acyl-CoA 
4CL-like proteins: !synthesizes! fatty acyl-CoA 
OPDA/dinor-OPDA/OPC-8/OPC-6: !activated by! 4CL-like proteins 
At1g20510: !activates! OPC-8 
At1g20510: !localized in! peroxisomes 
At1g20510: !represses! JA biosynthesis 
wounding/infection: !activates! At1g20510