['18266916', 'To study cellular morphogenesis genetically, we isolated loss-of-function mutants  of Arabidopsis thaliana, designated ibo1. The ibo1 mutations cause local  outgrowth in the middle of epidermal cells of the hypocotyls and petioles,  resulting in the formation of a protuberance. In Arabidopsis, the hypocotyl  epidermis differentiates into two alternate cell files, the stoma cell file and  the non-stoma cell file, by a mechanism involving TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1  (TTG1) and GLABRA2 (GL2). The ectopic protuberances of the ibo1 mutants were  preferentially induced in the non-stoma cell files, which express GL2.  TTG1-dependent epidermal patterning is required for protuberance formation in  ibo1, suggesting that IBO1 functions downstream from epidermal cell  specification. Pharmacological and genetic analyses demonstrated that ethylene  promotes protuberance formation in ibo1, implying that IBO1 acts antagonistically  to ethylene to suppress radial outgrowth. IBO1 is identical to NEK6, which  encodes a Never In Mitosis A (NIMA)-related protein kinase (Nek) with sequence  similarity to Neks involved in microtubule organization in fungi, algae, and  animals. The ibo1-1 mutation, in which a conserved Glu residue in the activation  loop is substituted by Arg, completely abolishes its kinase activity. The  intracellular localization of GFP-tagged NEK6 showed that NEK6 mainly accumulates  in cytoplasmic spots associated with cortical microtubules and with a putative  component of the gamma-tubulin complex. The localization of NEK6 is regulated by  the C-terminal domain, which is truncated in the ibo1-2 allele. These results  suggest that the role of NEK6 in the control of cellular morphogenesis is  dependent on its kinase action and association with the cortical microtubules.', '2008 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03445.x', 'Watanabe']

IBO1: !affects! Epidermal patterning 
TTG1: !regulates! IBO1 
Ethylene: !promotes! Protuberance formation in IBO1 
NEK6: !encodes! IBO1 
NEK6: !localizes to! Cortical microtubules 
NEK6: !interacts with! Putative component of gamma-tubulin complex 
NEK6: !enhances! Cellular morphogenesis 
NEK6: !synthesizes! Kinase action