The protein complexes of pea (Pisum sativum L.) etioplasts, etio-chloroplasts and chloroplasts were examined using 2D Blue Native/SDS-PAGE. The most prominent protein complexes in etioplasts were the ATPase and the Clp and FtsH protease complexes which probably have a crucial role in the biogenesis of etioplasts and chloroplasts. Also the cytochrome b(6)f (Cyt b(6)f) complex was assembled in the etioplast membrane, as well as Rubisco, at least partially, in the stroma. These complexes are composed of proteins encoded by both the plastid and nuclear genomes, indicating that a functional cross-talk exists between pea etioplasts and the nucleus. In contrast, the proteins and protein complexes that bind chlorophyll, with the PetD subunit and the entire Cyt b(6)f complex as an exception, did not accumulate in etioplasts. Nevertheless, some PSII core components such as PsbE and the luminal oxygen-evolvong complex (OEC) proteins PsbO and PsbP accumulated efficiently in etioplasts. After 6 h de-etiolation, a complete PSII core complex appeared with 40% of the maximal photochemical efficiency, but a fully functional PSII was recorded only after 24 h illumination. Similarly, the core complex of PSI was assembled after 6 h illumination, whereas the PSI-light-harvesting complex I was stably assembled only in chloroplasts illuminated for 24 h. Moreover, a battery of proteins responsible for defense against oxidative stress accumulated particularly in etioplasts, including the stromal and thylakoidal forms of ascorbate peroxidase, glutathione reductase and PsbS.

ATPase: !assembles in! etioplasts
Clp/FtsH protease complexes: !have crucial role in! biogenesis of etioplasts/chloroplasts
Cyt b(6)f complex: !assembles in! etioplast membrane
Rubisco: !partially assembles in! stroma
plastid/nuclear genomes: !encode proteins for! functional cross-talk
PetD subunit/Cyt b(6)f complex: !bind chlorophyll in! etioplasts
PsbE/OEC proteins PsbO/PsbP: !accumulate efficiently in! etioplasts
PSII core complex: !assembles after! 6 h de-etiolation
PSI core complex: !assembles after! 6 h illumination
PSI-light-harvesting complex I: !stably assembles after! 24 h illumination
ascorbate peroxidase/glutathione reductase/PsbS: !accumulate particularly in! etioplasts