There is a trade-off between nitrogen (N) allocation to photosynthesis and to defence. Invasive species may reduce N allocation to defence because of the absence of natural enemies. Thus, I hypothesised that invasive species may allocate a higher fraction of total leaf N to photosynthesis and have higher light-saturated photosynthetic rate (P(max)) and photosynthetic N-use efficiency (PNUE) than closely related native species. To test these hypotheses, invasive Eupatorium adenophorum and native E. chinense and E. heterophyllum were compared in a limestone shrub. Unlike expectation, the invader did not allocate a higher fraction of leaf N to photosynthesis than the natives. However, it was more efficient in photosynthetic N partitioning than the natives. It partitioned a higher fraction of the photosynthetic N to carboxylation and showed higher use efficiency of the photosynthetic N, while the natives partitioned a higher fraction of the photosynthetic N to light-harvesting components. Total leaf N content was not significantly different among the three studied invasive and native species. For the invader, the higher fraction of leaf N allocated to carboxylation resulted in the higher N content in carboxylation and in both carboxylation and bioenergetics, which led to higher P(max), and therefore to higher PNUE, water-use efficiency, respiration efficiency and apparent quantum yield. These physiological advantages of the invader and its higher leaf area ratio may contribute to its invasiveness.

N allocation: !invasive species! photosynthesis
N allocation: !native species! defence
Eupatorium adenophorum: !partitions higher fraction of photosynthetic N! carboxylation
Eupatorium chinense/heterophyllum: !partitions higher fraction of photosynthetic N! light-harvesting components
Eupatorium adenophorum: !higher N content in carboxylation and bioenergetics! higher P(max)
Eupatorium adenophorum: !higher P(max)! higher PNUE, water-use efficiency, respiration efficiency, apparent quantum yield
Eupatorium adenophorum: !higher leaf area ratio! invasiveness