The photosynthetic light reactions of green plants are mediated by chlorophyll-binding protein complexes located in the thylakoid membranes within the chloroplasts. Thylakoid membranes have a complex structure, with lateral segregation of protein complexes into distinct membrane regions known as the grana and the stroma lamellae. It has long been clear that some protein complexes can diffuse between the grana and the stroma lamellae, and that this movement is important for processes including membrane biogenesis, regulation of light harvesting, and turnover and repair of the photosynthetic complexes. In the grana membranes, diffusion may be problematic because the protein complexes are very densely packed (approximately 75% area occupation) and semicrystalline protein arrays are often observed. To date, direct measurements of protein diffusion in green plant thylakoids have been lacking. We have developed a form of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching that allows direct measurement of the diffusion of chlorophyll-protein complexes in isolated grana membranes from Spinacia oleracea. We show that about 75% of fluorophores are immobile within our measuring period of a few minutes. We suggest that this immobility is due to a protein network covering a whole grana disc. However, the remaining fraction is surprisingly mobile (diffusion coefficient 4.6 +/- 0.4 x 10(-11) cm(2) s(-1)), which suggests that it is associated with mobile proteins that exchange between the grana and stroma lamellae within a few seconds. Manipulation of the protein-lipid ratio and the ionic strength of the buffer reveals the roles of macromolecular crowding and protein-protein interactions in restricting the mobility of grana proteins.

Gene: !mediates! Photosynthetic light reactions 
Gene: !localizes to! Thylakoid membranes 
Gene: !diffuses between! Grana and stroma lamellae 
Gene: !restricts mobility of! Grana proteins 
Gene: !influenced by! Macromolecular crowding 
Gene: !interacts with! Protein-protein interactions