Regulatory ACT domains serve as amino acid-binding sites in certain amino acid metabolic enzymes and transcriptional regulators in bacteria. The ACT domain repeat protein (ACR) family in plants is primarily composed of four copies of the domain homologous to those of the bacteria Gln sensor GLND. In the current study, to evaluate the possible involvement of the protein OsACR9 in the Gln-sensing system related to nitrogen (N) metabolism in rice (Oryza sativa L.), subcellular localization of OsACR9 and its accumulation and cellular distribution in various rice organs were examined by transient expression analysis and immunological methods using a monospecific antibody, respectively. Transient expression analysis of OsACR9 fused with a synthetic green fluorescent protein in cultured rice cells suggested nuclear localization of OsACR9. In rice roots, OsACR9 protein was distributed in epidermis, exodermis, sclerenchyma and vascular parenchyma cells, and its accumulation markedly increased after supply of NH(+)(4). In rice leaf samples, OsACR9 protein was abundant in the vascular parenchyma and mestome-sheath cells of young leaf blades at the early stage of development and in the vascular parenchyma and phloem-companion cells of mature leaf sheaths. OsACR9 protein also showed a high level of accumulation in vascular parenchyma cells of dorsal vascular bundles and aleurone cells in young rice grains at the early stage of ripening. The possibility of the nuclear protein OsACR9 acting as a Gln sensor in rice is subsequently discussed through comparison of its spatiotemporal expression with that of Gln-responsive N-assimilatory genes.

OsACR9: !localizes to! nucleus 
OsACR9: !accumulates in! epidermis, exodermis, sclerenchyma and vascular parenchyma cells 
OsACR9: !accumulates in! vascular parenchyma and mestome-sheath cells of young leaf blades 
OsACR9: !accumulates in! vascular parenchyma and phloem-companion cells of mature leaf sheaths 
OsACR9: !accumulates in! vascular parenchyma cells of dorsal vascular bundles and aleurone cells in young rice grains 
OsACR9: !may act as! Gln sensor