['18298409', 'Cytosolic NAD-dependent glyceraldehyde 3-P dehydrogenase (GAPDH; GapC; EC  1.2.1.12) catalyzes the oxidation of triose phosphates during glycolysis in all  organisms, but additional functions of the protein has been put forward. Because  of its reactive cysteine residue in the active site, it is susceptible to protein  modification and oxidation. The addition of GSSG, and much more efficiently of  S-nitrosoglutathione, was shown to inactivate the enzymes from Arabidopsis  thaliana (isoforms GapC1 and 2), spinach, yeast and rabbit muscle. Inactivation  was fully or at least partially reversible upon addition of DTT. The  incorporation of glutathione upon formation of a mixed disulfide could be shown  using biotinylated glutathione ethyl ester. Furthermore, using the biotin-switch  assay, nitrosylated thiol groups could be shown to occur after treatment with  nitric oxide donors. Using mass spectrometry and mutant proteins with one  cysteine lacking, both cysteines (Cys-155 and Cys-159) were found to occur as  glutathionylated and as nitrosylated forms. In preliminary experiments, it was  shown that both GapC1 and GapC2 can bind to a partial gene sequence of the  NADP-dependent malate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.37; At5g58330). Transiently  expressed GapC-green fluorescent protein fusion proteins were localized to the  nucleus in A. thaliana protoplasts. As nuclear localization and DNA binding of  GAPDH had been shown in numerous systems to occur upon stress, we assume that  such mechanism might be part of the signaling pathway to induce increased  malate-valve capacity and possibly other protective systems upon overreduction  and initial formation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species as well as to  decrease and protect metabolism at the same time by modification of essential  cysteine residues.', '2008 Jun', 'Physiol Plant', '10.1111/j.1399-3054.2008.01066.x', 'Scheibe']

GAPDH: !catalyzes! glycolysis 
GAPDH: !inactivated by! GSSG/S-nitrosoglutathione 
GAPDH: !reversible with! DTT 
GAPDH: !incorporates! glutathione 
GAPDH: !nitrosylated by! nitric oxide donors 
GAPDH: !glutathionylated at! Cys-155/Cys-159 
GAPDH: !binds to! NADP-dependent malate dehydrogenase 
GAPDH: !localizes to! nucleus 
GAPDH: !signals! increased malate-valve capacity