We define the photoresponsiveness, during seedling de-etiolation, of PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR 3-LIKE 1 (PIL1), initially identified by microarray analysis as an early-response gene that is robustly repressed by first exposure to light. We show that PIL1 mRNA abundance declines rapidly, with a half-time of 15 min, to a new steady-state level, 10-fold below the initial dark level, within 45 min of first exposure to red light. Analysis of phy-null mutants indicates that multiple phytochromes, including phyA and phyB, impose this repression. Conversely, PIL1 expression is rapidly derepressed by subsequent far-red irradiation of previously red light-exposed seedlings. However, the magnitude of this derepression is modulated over time, in a biphasic manner, in response to increasing duration of pre-exposure to continuous red light: (i) an early phase (up to about 6 h) of relatively rapidly increasing effectiveness of far-red reversal of repression, as declining phyA levels relieve initial very low fluence suppression of this response; and (ii) a second phase (beyond 6 h) of gradually declining effectiveness of far-red reversal, to only 20% of maximal derepression, within 36 h of continuous red light exposure, with no evidence of circadian modulation of this responsiveness, an observation in striking contrast to a previous report for entrained, green seedlings exposed to vegetative shade. These data, together with analysis of phytochrome signaling mutants and overexpressors with aberrant de-etiolation phenotypes, suggest that the second-phase decline in robustness of PIL1 derepression is an indirect consequence of the global developmental transition from the etiolated to the de-etiolated state, and that circadian coupling of derepression requires entrainment.

phyA: !represses! PIL1
phyB: !represses! PIL1
far-red light: !derepresses! PIL1
phyA levels: !relieves! PIL1 repression
phytochrome signaling mutants: !affects! PIL1 derepression
overexpressors with aberrant de-etiolation phenotypes: !affects! PIL1 derepression
circadian coupling of derepression: !requires! entrainment