Along with sucrose, sorbitol represents the main photosynthetic product and form of translocated carbon in peach. This study aimed at determining whether peach fruit carbohydrate metabolism is affected by changes in source-sink balance, and specifically whether sorbitol or sucrose availability regulates fruit enzyme activities and growth. In various trials, different levels of assimilate availability to growing fruits were induced in vivo by varying crop load of entire trees, leaf : fruit ratio (L:F) of fruiting shoots, or by interrupting the phloem stream (girdling) to individual fruits. In vitro, fruit tissue was incubated in presence/absence of sorbitol and sucrose. Relative growth rate (RGR), enzyme activities and carbohydrates were measured at different fruit growth stages of various peach cultivars in different years. At stage III, high crop load induced higher acid invertase (AI, EC 3.2.1.26) activities and hexose : sucrose ratios. Both sorbitol and sucrose contents were proportional to L:F, while sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH, EC 1.1.1.14) activity was the only enzyme activity directly related to L:F in both fruit growth stages. Girdling reduced fruit RGR and all major carbohydrates after 4 days and SDH activity already after 48 h, but it did not affect sucrose synthase (SS, EC 2.4.1.13), AI and neutral invertase (NI, EC 3.2.1.27). Fruit incubation in sorbitol for 24 h induced higher SDH activities than in buffer alone. In general, assimilate availability affected both sorbitol and sucrose metabolism in peach fruit, and sorbitol may function as a signal for modulating SDH activity. Under highly competitive conditions, AI activity may be enhanced by assimilate depletion, providing a mechanism to increase fruit sink strength by increasing hexose concentrations.

sucrose: !represents! photosynthetic product
L:F: !affects! sorbitol content
L:F: !affects! SDH activity
girdling: !reduces! RGR
girdling: !reduces! carbohydrates
sorbitol: !induces! SDH activity
assimilate availability: !affects! sorbitol metabolism
assimilate availability: !affects! sucrose metabolism
sorbitol: !functions as! signal
assimilate depletion: !enhances! AI activity