Heterotrophic carbon metabolism has been demonstrated to be limited by oxygen availability in a variety of plant tissues, which in turn inevitably affects the adenylate status. To study the effect of altering adenylate energy metabolism, without changing the oxygen supply, we expressed a plastidially targeted ATP/ADP hydrolyzing phosphatase (apyrase) in tubers of growing potato (Solanum tuberosum) plants under the control of either inducible or constitutive promoters. Inducible apyrase expression in potato tubers, for a period of 24 h, resulted in a decrease in the ATP-content and the ATP-ADP ratio in the tubers. As revealed by metabolic profiling, this was accompanied by a decrease in the intermediates of sucrose to starch conversion and several plastidially synthesized amino acids, indicating a general depression of tuber metabolism. Constitutive tuber-specific apyrase expression did not lead to a reduction of ATP, but rather a decrease in ADP and an increase in AMP levels. Starch accumulation was strongly inhibited and shifted to the production of amylopectin instead of amylose in these tubers. Furthermore, the levels of almost all amino acids were decreased, although soluble sugars and hexose-Ps were highly abundant. Respiration was elevated in the constitutively expressing lines indicating a compensation for the dramatic increase in ATP hydrolysis. The increase in respiration did not affect the internal oxygen tensions in the tubers. However, the tubers developed a ginger-like phenotype having an elevated surface-volume ratio and a reduced mass per tuber. Decreased posttranslational redox activation of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase and a shift in the ratio of soluble starch synthase activity to granule-bound starch synthase activity were found to be partially responsible for the alterations in starch structure and abundance. The activity of alcohol dehydrogenase was decreased and pyruvate decarboxylase was induced, but this was neither reflected by an increase in fermentation products nor in the cellular redox state, indicating that fermentation was not yet induced in the transgenic lines. When taken together the combined results of these studies allow the identification of both short- and long-term adaptation of plant metabolism and development to direct changes in the adenylate status.

apyrase: !induces! decrease in ATP-content 
apyrase: !induces! decrease in intermediates of sucrose to starch conversion 
apyrase: !induces! decrease in plastidially synthesized amino acids 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! decrease in ADP 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! increase in AMP 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! inhibition of starch accumulation 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! decrease in almost all amino acids 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! increase in respiration 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! decrease in posttranslational redox activation of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! shift in ratio of soluble starch synthase activity to granule-bound starch synthase activity 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! decrease in activity of alcohol dehydrogenase 
apyrase: !constitutively induces! induction of pyruvate decarboxylase