Modern wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is one of the most ozone (O(3))-sensitive crops. However, little is known about its genetic background of O(3) sensitivity, which is fundamental for breeding O(3)-resistant cultivars. Wild and cultivated species of winter wheat including donors of the A, B and D genomes of T. aestivum were exposed to 100 ppb O(3) or charcoal-filtered air in open top chambers for 21 d. Responses to O(3) were assessed by visible O(3) injury, gas exchange, chlorophyll fluorescence, relative growth rate, and biomass accumulation. Ozone significantly decreased light-saturated net photosynthetic rate (-37%) and instantaneous transpiration efficiency (-42%), but increased stomatal conductance (+11%) and intercellular CO(2) concentration (+11%). Elevated O(3) depressed ground fluorescence (-8%), maximum fluorescence (-26%), variable fluorescence (-31%), and maximum photochemical efficiency (-7%). Ozone also decreased relative growth rate and the allometric coefficient, which finally reduced total biomass accumulation (-54%), but to a greater extent in roots (-77%) than in the shoot (-44%). Winter wheat exhibited significant interspecies variation in the impacts of elevated O(3) on photosynthesis and growth. Primitive cultivated wheat demonstrated the highest relative O(3) tolerance followed by modern wheat and wild wheat showed the lowest. Among the genome donors of modern wheat, Aegilops tauschii (DD) behaved as the most O(3)-sensitive followed by T. monococcum (AA) and Triticum turgidum ssp. durum (AABB) appeared to be the most O(3)-tolerant. It was concluded that the higher O(3) sensitivity of modern wheat was attributed to the increased O(3) sensitivity of Aegilops tauschii (DD), but not to Triticum turgidum ssp. durum (AABB) during speciation.

Ozone: !decreases! Light-saturated net photosynthetic rate
Ozone: !decreases! Instantaneous transpiration efficiency
Ozone: !increases! Stomatal conductance
Ozone: !increases! Intercellular CO2 concentration
Ozone: !decreases! Ground fluorescence
Ozone: !decreases! Maximum fluorescence
Ozone: !decreases! Variable fluorescence
Ozone: !decreases! Maximum photochemical efficiency
Ozone: !decreases! Relative growth rate
Ozone: !decreases! Allometric coefficient
Ozone: !decreases! Total biomass accumulation
Ozone: !decreases! Root biomass accumulation
Ozone: !decreases! Shoot biomass accumulation
Aegilops tauschii: !exhibits highest! O3 sensitivity
Triticum monococcum: !exhibits higher! O3 tolerance
Triticum turgidum ssp. durum: !exhibits highest! O3 tolerance