['18315540', 'The SPATULA (SPT) gene is involved in generating the septum, style and stigma:  specialized tissues that arise from carpel margins. By matching sequences within  the extended bHLH region of AtSPT across species databases, twelve orthologues  were identified in eudicots, rice and a gymnosperm. Two conserved structural  domains were revealed in addition to the bHLH region: an amphipathic helix and an  acidic domain. These are conserved in the tomato orthologue, which can restore  carpel function to spt mutants of Arabidopsis. The acidic domain is essential for  SPT carpel function, and the amphipathic helix supports it. A bipartite sequence  overlapping the bHLH domain is required for nuclear localization, and a mutation  in the conserved beta strand adjacent to the bHLH C terminus results in the loss  of SPT function. SPT apparently acts as a transcriptional activator, as the  addition of the SRDX repression domain phenocopies the spt mutant phenotype.  Expression of an artificially activating 35S:SPT-VP16 construct can induce  carpelloid properties in sepals, and new defects in the gynoecium. These  disruptions are associated with ectopic expression of the STYLISH2 gene, although  STYLISH2 expression does not require SPT function. Ectopic expression of  unmodified SPT does not induce such changes, implying that SPT acts in  association with essential coactivators present only in regions where SPT is  normally active. Because the VP16 activation domain can compensate to some extent  for the loss of the amphipathic helix and acidic domain, these domains may  normally interact with such co-activators.', '2008 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03469.x', 'Smyth']

SPT: !generates! specialized tissues 
SPT: !matches! sequences 
SPT: !reveals! conserved domains 
SPT: !restores! carpel function 
acidic domain: !essential for! SPT carpel function 
amphipathic helix: !supports! SPT carpel function 
bipartite sequence: !required for! nuclear localization 
beta strand: !results in loss of! SPT function 
SPT: !acts as! transcriptional activator 
SRDX repression domain: !phenocopies! spt mutant phenotype 
35S:SPT-VP16 construct: !induces! carpelloid properties 
STYLISH2 gene: !associated with! ectopic expression of SPT 
STYLISH2 expression: !does not require! SPT function 
unmodified SPT: !does not induce! changes 
VP16 activation domain: !can compensate for! loss of amphipathic helix and acidic domain 
domains: !may interact with! co-activators