The effects of viral infection involve concomitant plant gene variations and cellular changes. A simple system is required to assess the complexity of host responses to viral infection. The genome of the Rice yellow mottle virus (RYMV) is a single-stranded RNA with a simple organisation. It is the most well-known monocotyledon virus model. Several studies on its biology, structure and phylogeography have provided a suitable background for further genetic studies. 12 rice chromosome sequences are now available and provide strong support for genomic studies, particularly physical mapping and gene identification. The present data, obtained through the cDNA-AFLP technique, demonstrate differential responses to RYMV of two different rice cultivars, i.e. susceptible IR64 (Oryza sativa indica), and partially resistant Azucena (O. s. japonica). This RNA profiling provides a new original dataset that will enable us to gain greater insight into the RYMV/rice interaction and the specificity of the host response. Using the SIM4 subroutine, we took the intron/exon structure of the gene into account and mapped 281 RYMV stress responsive (RSR) transcripts on 12 rice chromosomes corresponding to 234 RSR genes. We also mapped previously identified deregulated proteins and genes involved in partial resistance and thus constructed the first global physical map of the RYMV/rice interaction. RSR transcripts on rice chromosomes 4 and 10 were found to be not randomly distributed. Seven genes were identified in the susceptible and partially resistant cultivars, and transcripts were colocalized for these seven genes in both cultivars. During virus infection, many concomitant plant gene expression changes may be associated with host changes caused by the infection process, general stress or defence responses. We noted that some genes (e.g. ABC transporters) were regulated throughout the kinetics of infection and differentiated susceptible and partially resistant hosts. We enhanced the first RYMV/rice interaction map by combining information from the present study and previous studies on proteins and ESTs regulated during RYMV infection, thus providing a more comprehensive view on genes related to plant responses. This combined map provides a new tool for exploring molecular mechanisms underlying the RYMV/rice interaction.

RYMV: !interacts with! Rice
Rice: !responds to! RYMV
RSR transcripts: !localize to! 12 rice chromosomes
Susceptible IR64: !differs from! Partially resistant Azucena
SIM4 subroutine: !takes into account! Intron/exon structure of gene
234 RSR genes: !mapped on! 12 rice chromosomes
7 genes: !identified in! Susceptible and partially resistant cultivars
ABC transporters: !regulated throughout! Kinetics of infection
Previous studies: !combined with! Present study
Combined map: !provides! New tool for exploring molecular mechanisms