The biosynthesis of the polyamines spermidine (Spd) and spermine (Spm) from putrescine (Put) is catalysed by the consequent action of two aminopropyltransferases, spermidine synthase (SPDS EC: 2.5.1.16) and spermine synthase (SPMS EC: 2.5.1.22). Two cDNA clones coding for SPDS and SPMS homologues in the nitrogen-fixing nodules of the model legume Lotus japonicus were identified. Functionality of the encoded polypeptides was confirmed by their ability to complement spermidine and spermine deficiencies in yeast. The temporal and spatial expression pattern of the respective genes was correlated with the accumulation of total polyamines in symbiotic and non-symbiotic organs. Expression of both genes was maximal at early stages of nodule development, while at later stages the levels of both transcripts declined. Both genes were expressed in nodule inner cortical cells, vascular bundles, and central tissue. In contrast to gene expression, increasing amounts of Put, Spd, and Spm were found to accumulate during nodule development and after maturity. Interestingly, nodulated plants exhibited systemic changes in both LjSPDS and LjSPMS transcript levels and polyamine content in roots, stem and leaves, in comparison to uninoculated plants. These results give new insights into the neglected role of polyamines during nodule development and symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF).

SPDS: !catalyses! spermidine biosynthesis
SPMS: !catalyses! spermine biosynthesis
LjSPDS: !complements! spermidine deficiency in yeast
LjSPMS: !complements! spermine deficiency in yeast
LjSPDS: !localizes to! nodule inner cortical cells, vascular bundles, and central tissue
LjSPMS: !localizes to! nodule inner cortical cells, vascular bundles, and central tissue
LjSPDS: !enhances! total polyamine accumulation during nodule development
LjSPMS: !enhances! total polyamine accumulation during nodule development
Nodulated plants: !exhibit systemic changes in! LjSPDS and LjSPMS transcript levels and polyamine content