Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) cv. Xintaimici (a chilling-resistant cultivar) and cv. Jinyan no. 4 (a chilling-sensitive cultivar) were subjected to two temperatures (15/15 and 25/18 degrees C) under low light (100 mumol m(-2) s(-1)) to understand the relationship between ultrastructural changes and the antioxidant abilities caused by low temperature (15/15 degrees C). We also aimed to find indicators for chilling resistance that could be used on a routine basis in breeding programs of greenhouse crops. At the 15/15 degrees C treatment, the membranes of chloroplast, mitochondrion, ER and plasma were not significantly changed in Xintaimici, whereas they were seriously affected in Jinyan no. 4. This result was consistent with the changes of malonaldehyde in chilling-stressed cucumber leaves. The antioxidant activities were changed under low temperature according to cultivar-expected resistance, relating in part to the described ultrastructural changes. The activities of superoxide dismutase (EC 1.15.1.1) and guaiacol peroxidase (EC 1.11.1.7) increased in chilling-stressed leaves of both cultivars, but the two enzymes were not responsible for the difference between cucumber cultivars. At 15/15 degrees C, contents of GSH and activities of glutathione reductase (GR, EC 1.6.4.2) increased more in leaves of Xintaimici than in those of Jinyan no. 4, while catalase (CAT, EC 1.11.1.6) activities decreased less. GSH, GR and CAT were affected by low temperature and cultivars and correlated with the difference in ultrastructure between chilling-stressed cucumber cultivars. We propose that the three antioxidants might be therefore used as biochemical indicators to screen chilling-resistant cucumber cultivars.

Chloroplast: !affected by! Temperature 
Mitochondrion: !affected by! Temperature 
ER: !affected by! Temperature 
Plasma: !affected by! Temperature 
Malonaldehyde: !changed by! Chilling-Stressed Cucumber Leaves 
Superoxide Dismutase: !increased by! Chilling-Stressed Leaves 
Guaiacol Peroxidase: !increased by! Chilling-Stressed Leaves 
GSH: !increased more in! Xintaimici 
GR: !increased more in! Xintaimici 
CAT: !decreased less in! Xintaimici