Soil flooding constitutes a seasonal factor that negatively affects plant performance and crop yields. In this work, the relationship between oxidative damage and flooding sensitivity was addressed in three citrus genotypes with different abilities to tolerate waterlogging. We examined leaf visible damage, oxidative damage in terms of malondialdehyde (MDA) concentration, leaf proline concentration, leaf and root ascorbate and glutathione contents and the antioxidant enzyme activities superoxide dismutase (EC 1.15.1.1), ascorbate peroxidase (EC 1.11.1.11), catalase (EC 1.11.1.6) and glutathione reductase (EC 1.8.1.7). No differences in the extent of oxidative damage relative to controls were found among genotypes. However, a different ability to delay the apparition of oxidative damage was associated to a higher tolerance to waterlogging. This ability was linked to an enhanced activated oxygen species' scavenging capacity in terms of an increased antioxidant enzyme activity and higher content in polar antioxidant compounds. Therefore, the existence of a direct relationship between stress sensitivity and the early accumulation of MDA is proposed. In addition, data indicate that the protective role of proline has to be considered minimal as its accumulation was inversely correlated with tolerance to the stress. The positive antioxidant response in Carrizo citrange (Poncirus trifoliata L. Raf. x Citrus sinensis L. Osb.) and Citrumelo CPB 4475 (Poncirus trifoliata L. Raf. x Citrus paradisi L. Macf.) might be responsible for a higher tolerance to flooding stress, whereas in Cleopatra mandarin (Citrus reshni Hort. Ex Tan.), the early accumulation of MDA seems to be associated to an impaired ability for H2O2 scavenging.

Soil flooding: !negatively affects! Plant performance
Oxidative damage: !associated with! Flooding sensitivity
Genotypes: !differ in! Ability to tolerate waterlogging
Activated oxygen species: !scavenged by! Antioxidant enzymes
Antioxidant enzymes: !enhanced in! Tolerant genotypes
Proline: !inversely correlated with! Stress tolerance
MDA: !accumulated early in! Sensitive genotypes