Blue light effects on the acclimation of energy partitioning characteristics in PSII and CO2 assimilation capacity in spinach to high growth irradiance were investigated. Plants were grown hydroponically in different light treatments that were a combination of two light qualities and two irradiances,i.e. white light and blue-deficient light at photosynthetic photon flux densities (PPFDs) of 100 and 500 micromol m(-2) s(-1). The CO2 assimilation rate, the quantum efficiency of PSII(PhiPSII) and thermal dissipation activity (F(v)/F(m)-F'(v)/F'(m)) in young, fully expanded leaves were measured under 1,600 micromol m(-2) s(-1) white light. The CO2 assimilation rate and (PhiPSII) were higher, while F(v)/F(m)-F'(v)/F'(m) was lower in plants grown under high irradiance than in plants grown under low irradiance. These responses were observed irrespective of the presence or absence of blue light during growth. The extent of the increase in the CO2 assimilation rate and PhiPSII and the decrease in F(v)/F(m)-F'(v)/F'(m) by high growth irradiance was smaller under blue light-deficient conditions. These results indicate that blue light helps to boost the acclimation responses of energy partitioning in PSII and CO2 assimilation to high irradiance. Similarly, leaf N, Cyt f and Chl contents per unit leaf area increased by high growth irradiance, and the extent of the increment in leaf N, Cyt f and Chl was smaller under blue light-deficient conditions. Regression analysis showed that the differences in energy partitioning in PSIIand CO2 assimilation between plants grown under high white light and high blue-deficient light were closely related to the difference in leaf N.

Blue light: !enhances! acclimation responses of energy partitioning in PSII and CO2 assimilation
Blue light: !reduces! extent of increase in CO2 assimilation rate and PhiPSII, decrease in F(v)/F(m)-F'(v)/F'(m)
High growth irradiance: !increases! CO2 assimilation rate and PhiPSII, decreases F(v)/F(m)-F'(v)/F'(m)
High growth irradiance: !increases! leaf N, Cyt f and Chl contents per unit leaf area
Leaf N: !related to! differences in energy partitioning in PSII and CO2 assimilation