Early-flowered superior spikelets usually exhibit a faster grain filling rate and heavier grain weight than late-flowered inferior spikelets in rice (Oryza sativa L.). But the intrinsic factors responsible for the variations between the two types of spikelets are unclear. This study investigated whether and how polyamines (PAs) are involved in regulating post-anthesis development of rice spikelets. Six rice genotypes differing in grain filling rate were field grown, and PA levels and activities of the enzymes involved in PA biosynthesis were measured in both superior and inferior spikelets. The results showed that superior spikelets exhibited higher levels of free spermidine (Spd) and free spermine (Spm) and higher activities of arginine decarboxylase (ADC, EC 4.1.1.19), S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase (SAMDC, EC 4.1.1.50) and Spd synthase (EC 2.5.1.16) than inferior spikelets at the early endosperm cell division and grain filling stage. The maximum concentrations of free Spd and free Spm and the maximum activities of ADC, SAMDC and Spd synthase were significantly correlated with the maximum cell division and grain filling rates, maximum cell number and grain weight. Application of Spd and Spm to panicles resulted in significantly higher rates of endosperm cell division and grain filling in inferior spikelets along with the activities of sucrose synthase (EC 2.4.1.13), ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase (EC 2.7.7.27) and soluble starch synthase (EC 2.4.1.21), suggesting that these PAs are involved in the sucrose-starch metabolic pathway. The results indicate that the poor development of inferior spikelets is attributed, at least partly, to the low PA level and its low biosynthetic activity.

Gene: !affects! PA levels 
Gene: !synthesizes! ADC 
Gene: !synthesizes! SAMDC 
Gene: !synthesizes! Spd synthase 
Gene: !enhances! Cell division rate 
Gene: !enhances! Grain filling rate 
Gene: !enhances! Cell number 
Gene: !enhances! Grain weight 
Gene: !enhances! Sucrose synthase 
Gene: !enhances! ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase 
Gene: !enhances! Soluble starch synthase