['18347017', 'A lignan, lariciresinol, was isolated from Arabidopsis thaliana, the most widely  used model plant in plant bioscience sectors, for the first time. In the A.  thaliana genome database, there are two genes (At1g32100 and At4g13660) that are  annotated as pinoresinol/lariciresinol reductase (PLR). The recombinant AtPLRs  showed strict substrate preference toward pinoresinol but only weak or no  activity toward lariciresinol, which is in sharp contrast to conventional PLRs of  other plants that can reduce both pinoresinol and lariciresinol efficiently to  lariciresinol and secoisolariciresinol, respectively. Therefore, we renamed  AtPLRs as A. thaliana pinoresinol reductases (AtPrRs). The recombinant AtPrR2  encoded by At4g13660 reduced only (-)-pinoresinol to (-)-lariciresinol and not  (+)-pinoresinol in the presence of NADPH. This enantiomeric selectivity accords  with that of other PLRs of other plants so far reported, which can reduce one of  the enantiomers selectively, whatever the preferential enantiomer. In sharp  contrast, AtPrR1 encoded by At1g32100 reduced both (+)- and (-)-pinoresinols to  (+)- and (-)-lariciresinols efficiently with comparative k(cat)/K(m) values.  Analysis of lignans and spatiotemporal expression of AtPrR1 and AtPrR2 in their  functionally deficient A. thaliana mutants and wild type indicated that both  genes are involved in lariciresinol biosynthesis. In addition, the analysis of  the enantiomeric compositions of lariciresinol isolated from the mutants and wild  type showed that PrRs together with a dirigent protein(s) are involved in the  enantiomeric control in lignan biosynthesis. Furthermore, it was demonstrated  conclusively for the first time that differential expression of PrR isoforms that  have distinct selectivities of substrate enantiomers can determine enantiomeric  compositions of the product, lariciresinol.', '2008 Jun 6', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M801131200', 'Umezawa']

At1g32100: !encodes! AtPrR1 
At4g13660: !encodes! AtPrR2 
AtPrR1: !reduces! (+)- and (-)-pinoresinols 
AtPrR2: !reduces! (-)-pinoresinol 
AtPrRs: !involved in! lariciresinol biosynthesis 
PrRs: !together with! dirigent protein(s) 
PrR isoforms: !determine! enantiomeric compositions of lariciresinol