Sucrose synthase (Sus; EC 2.4.1.13) is a key enzyme of sucrose metabolism in plant cells, providing carbon for respiration and for the synthesis of cell wall polymers and starch. Since Sus is important for plant cell growth, insights into its structure, localization, and features are useful for defining the relationships between nutrients, growth, and cell morphogenesis. We used the pollen tube of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) as a cell model to characterize the main features of Sus with regard to cell growth and cell wall synthesis. Apart from its role during sexual reproduction, the pollen tube is a typical tip-growing cell, and the proper construction of its cell wall is essential for correct shaping and direction of growth. The outer cell wall layer of pollen tubes consists of pectins, but the inner layer is composed of cellulose and callose; both polymers require metabolic precursors in the form of UDP-glucose, which is synthesized by Sus. We identified an 88-kD polypeptide in the soluble, plasma membrane and Golgi fraction of pollen tubes. The protein was also found in association with the cell wall. After purification, the protein showed an enzyme activity similar to that of maize (Zea mays) Sus. Distribution of Sus was affected by brefeldin A and depended on the nutrition status of the pollen tube, because an absence of metabolic sugars in the growth medium caused Sus to distribute differently during tube elongation. Analysis by bidimensional electrophoresis indicated that Sus exists as two isoforms, one of which is phosphorylated and more abundant in the cytoplasm and cell wall and the other of which is not phosphorylated and is specific to the plasma membrane. Results indicate that the protein has a role in the construction of the extracellular matrix and thus in the morphogenesis of pollen tubes.

Sucrose synthase: !synthesizes! UDP-glucose
Sucrose synthase: !localizes to! plasma membrane and Golgi fraction
Sucrose synthase: !affects! distribution
Sucrose synthase: !interacts with! cell wall
Brefeldin A: !affects! distribution of Sus
Nutrition status: !affects! distribution of Sus
Two isoforms: !differ in! phosphorylation