['18344319', 'Understanding how nutrients affect gene expression will help us to understand the  mechanisms controlling plant growth and development as a function of nutrient  availability. Nitrate has been shown to serve as a signal for the control of gene  expression in Arabidopsis. There is also evidence, on a gene-by-gene basis, that  downstream products of nitrogen (N) assimilation such as glutamate (Glu) or  glutamine (Gln) might serve as signals of organic N status that in turn regulate  gene expression. To identify genome-wide responses to such organic N signals,  Arabidopsis seedlings were transiently treated with ammonium nitrate in the  presence or absence of MSX, an inhibitor of glutamine synthetase, resulting in a  block of Glu/Gln synthesis. Genes that responded to organic N were identified as  those whose response to ammonium nitrate treatment was blocked in the presence of  MSX. We showed that some genes previously identified to be regulated by nitrate  are under the control of an organic N-metabolite. Using an integrated network  model of molecular interactions, we uncovered a subnetwork regulated by organic N  that included CCA1 and target genes involved in N-assimilation. We validated some  of the predicted interactions and showed that regulation of the master clock  control gene CCA1 by Glu or a Glu-derived metabolite in turn regulates the  expression of key N-assimilatory genes. Phase response curve analysis shows that  distinct N-metabolites can advance or delay the CCA1 phase. Regulation of CCA1 by  organic N signals may represent a novel input mechanism for N-nutrients to affect  plant circadian clock function.', '2008 Mar 25', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0800211105', 'Coruzzi']

Nitrate: !affects! Gene expression 
MSX: !inhibits! Glu/Gln synthesis 
Organic N: !regulates! Gene expression 
CCA1: !controlled by! Organic N-metabolite 
Glu/Gln: !signals! Organic N status 
CCA1: !regulates! N-assimilatory genes 
Organic N: !inputs! Plant circadian clock function