['18346197', 'The cleavage of glucosinolates by myrosinase to produce toxic breakdown products  is a characteristic insect defense of cruciferous plants. Although green peach  aphids (Myzus persicae) are able to avoid most contact with myrosinase when  feeding from the phloem of Arabidopsis thaliana, indole glucosinolates are  nevertheless degraded during passage through the insects. A defensive role for  indole glucosinolates is suggested by the observation that atr1D mutant plants,  which overproduce indole glucosinolates, are more resistant to M. persicae,  whereas cyp79B2 cyp79B3 double mutants, which lack indole glucosinolates, succumb  to M. persicae more rapidly. Indole glucosinolate breakdown products, including  conjugates formed with ascorbate, glutathione and amino acids, are elevated in  the honeydew of M. persicae feeding from atr1D mutant plants, but are absent when  the aphids are feeding on cyp79B2 cyp79B3 double mutants. M. persicae feeding  from wild-type plants and myrosinase-deficient tgg1 tgg2 double mutants excrete a  similar profile of indole glucosinolate-derived metabolites, indicating that the  breakdown is independent of these foliar myrosinases. Artificial diet experiments  show that the reaction of indole-3-carbinol, a breakdown product of  indol-3-ylmethylglucosinolate, with ascorbate, glutathione and cysteine produces  diindolylmethylcysteines and other conjugates that have antifeedant effects on M.  persicae. Therefore, the post-ingestive breakdown of indole glucosinolates  provides a defense against herbivores such as aphids that can avoid glucosinolate  activation by plant myrosinases.', '2008 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03476.x', 'Jander']

Myrosinase: !cleaves! glucosinolates 
atr1D mutant plants: !overproduce! indole glucosinolates 
cyp79B2 cyp79B3 double mutants: !lack! indole glucosinolates 
M. persicae: !feeds from! atr1D mutant plants 
M. persicae: !feeds from! cyp79B2 cyp79B3 double mutants 
tgg1 tgg2 double mutants: !myrosinase-deficient! 
indole-3-carbinol: !reacts with! ascorbate, glutathione and cysteine 
diindolylmethylcysteines: !produced by! reaction of indole-3-carbinol 
diindolylmethylcysteines: !have antifeedant effects on! M. persicae