Microsomal membranes from etiolated wheat (Triticum aestivum) seedlings cooperatively incorporated xylose (Xyl), arabinose, and glucuronic acid residues from their corresponding uridine 5'-diphosphosugars into an ethanol-insoluble glucurono(arabino)xylan (GAX)-like product. A glucuronyltransferase activity that is enhanced by the presence of UDP-Xyl was also identified in these microsomes. Wheat glucuronyltransferase activity was optimal at pH 7 and required manganese ions, and several lines of evidence suggest its involvement in GAX-like biosynthesis. The GAX characteristics of the 14C-product were confirmed by digestion with a purified endo-xylanase from Aspergillus awamori (endo-xylanase III) and by total acid hydrolysis, resulting in a Xyl:arabinose:glucuronic acid molar ratio of approximately 105:34:1. Endo-xylanase III released only three types of oligosaccharides in addition to free Xyl. No radiolabel was released as xylobiose, xylotriose, or xylotetraose, indicating the absence of long stretches of unbranched Xyl residues in the nascent GAX-like product. High-pH anion exchange chromatography analysis of the resulting oligosaccharides along with known arabinoxylan oligosaccharide standards suggests that a portion of the nascent GAX-like product has a relatively regular structure. The other portion of the [14C]GAX-like polymer was resistant to proteinase K, endo-polygalacturonase, and endo-xylanase III (GH11 family) but was degraded by Driselase, supporting the hypothesis that the xylan backbone in this portion of the product is most likely highly substituted. Size exclusion chromatography indicated that the nascent GAX-like polymer had an apparent molecular mass of approximately 10 to 15 kD; however, mature GAXs from wheat cell walls had larger apparent molecular masses (>66 kD).

Gene: !enhances! Glucuronyltransferase activity 
Glucuronyltransferase: !synthesizes! GAX-like product 
GAX-like product: !resistant to! Proteinase K 
GAX-like product: !degraded by! Driselase 
GAX-like product: !has molecular mass of! 10-15 kD