['18363782', 'Gibberellic acid (GA) plays a key role in seed germination through coordinate  interactions with other growth hormones and external signals. However, the way in  which external signals are incorporated into the GA-signaling pathway is largely  unknown. Here, we demonstrate that a membrane-bound NAC transcription factor NTL8  mediates the salt regulation of seed germination via the GA pathway, primarily  independently of ABA. NTL8 is induced by high salinity. Its expression is also  elevated by a GA biosynthetic inhibitor paclabutrazol (PAC), but is repressed by  GA. Notably, high salinity greatly represses the GA3 oxidase 1 (GA3ox1) gene,  supporting the hypothesis that salt signals inhibit seed germination by  repressing GA biosynthesis. Induction of NTL8 and repression of GA3ox1 by high  salinity still occur in the ABA-deficient aba3-1 mutant. Accordingly, the  germination of a T-DNA insertional ntl8-1 mutant seed is resistant to high  salinity and PAC. Interestingly, NTL8 is significantly induced during cold  imbibition, but the induction declines quickly in germinating seeds, like RGL2.  NTL8 activity is also regulated by controlled proteolytic release of the  membrane-bound NTL8 form. Its release from the membranes is activated by PAC and  high salinity. Our data support that NTL8 modulates GA-mediated salt signaling in  regulating seed germination. This regulatory scheme may provide an adaptative  fitness, which delays seed germination under high salinity conditions.', '2008 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03493.x', 'Park']

GA: !plays key role in! seed germination 
NTL8: !mediates! salt regulation of seed germination 
NTL8: !induced by! high salinity 
NTL8: !elevated by! PAC 
NTL8: !repressed by! GA 
high salinity: !represses! GA3ox1 gene 
ABA-deficient aba3-1 mutant: !still affected by! high salinity 
ntl8-1 mutant seed: !resistant to! high salinity and PAC 
NTL8: !induced during! cold imbibition 
NTL8: !regulated by! controlled proteolytic release 
PAC and high salinity: !activate! release of NTL8