['18367672', 'At least four genes encoding plasma membrane inward K+ channels (K(in) channels)  are expressed in Arabidopsis guard cells. A double mutant plant was engineered by  disruption of a major K(in) channel gene and expression of a dominant negative  channel construct. Using the patch-clamp technique revealed that this mutant was  totally deprived of guard cell K(in) channel (GCK(in)) activity, providing a  model to investigate the roles of this activity in the plant. GCK(in) activity  was found to be an essential effector of stomatal opening triggered by membrane  hyperpolarization and thereby of blue light-induced stomatal opening at dawn. It  improved stomatal reactivity to external or internal signals (light, CO2  availability, and evaporative demand). It protected stomatal function against  detrimental effects of Na+ when plants were grown in the presence of  physiological concentrations of this cation, probably by enabling guard cells to  selectively and rapidly take up K+ instead of Na+ during stomatal opening,  thereby preventing deleterious effects of Na+ on stomatal closure. It was also  shown to be a key component of the mechanisms that underlie the circadian rhythm  of stomatal opening, which is known to gate stomatal responses to extracellular  and intracellular signals. Finally, in a meteorological scenario with higher  light intensity during the first hours of the photophase, GCK(in) activity was  found to allow a strong increase (35%) in plant biomass production. Thus, a large  diversity of approaches indicates that GCK(in) activity plays pleiotropic roles  that crucially contribute to plant adaptation to fluctuating and stressing  natural environments.', '2008 Apr 1', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0709732105', 'Sentenac']

GCK(in) activity: !affects! stomatal opening 
GCK(in) activity: !protects against! detrimental effects of Na+ 
GCK(in) activity: !underlies! circadian rhythm of stomatal opening 
GCK(in) activity: !allows! strong increase in plant biomass production