The plant membrane potential reports on the activity of electrogenic plasma membrane transport processes. The membrane potential is widely used to report for early events associated with changes in light regime, hormone action or pathogen attacks. The membrane potentials of guard cells can be precisely measured with microelectrodes, but this technique is not well suited for rapid screens with large sample numbers. To provide the basis for large-scale membrane potential recordings, we took advantage of voltage-sensitive dyes. Using the fluorescent dyes bis-(1,3-dibutylbarbituric acid)-trimethine oxonol (DiBAC(4)(3)) and the FLIPR Membrane Potential Assay Kit (FMP) dye we followed changes in the membrane potential in guard cells and vacuoles. Based on the fluorescence of DiBAC(4)(3) a method was established for quantification of the membrane potential in guard cell protoplasts which should be considered as an excellent system for high-throughput screening of plant cells. In the absence of abscisic acid (ABA), one-third of the guard cell protoplast population spontaneously oscillated for periods of 5-6 min. Upon application of ABA the hyperpolarized fraction ( approximately 50%) of the guard cell protoplast population depolarized within a few minutes. Membrane potential oscillations were terminated by ABA. Oscillations and ABA responses were found in cell populations with active anion channels. Thus time- and voltage-dependent anion channels likely represent the ABA-sensitive conductance and part of the membrane potential oscillator. The suitability of membrane potential dyes was tested on vacuoles, too. Dye-based vacuolar membrane polarization was monitored upon ATP exposure. We conclude that voltage-sensitive dyes provide an excellent tool for the study of changes in the membrane potential in vacuole as well as guard cell populations.

Membrane potential: !reports on! Electrogenic transport processes
Microelectrodes: !measure! Membrane potentials
Voltage-sensitive dyes: !follow! Changes in membrane potential
ABA: !terminates! Oscillations
Anion channels: !represent! ABA-sensitive conductance
ATP: !polarizes! Vacuolar membrane