['18397377', 'Plants display a number of biochemical and developmental responses to low iron  availability in order to increase iron uptake from the soil. The ferric-chelate  reductase FRO2 and the ferrous iron transporter IRT1 control iron entry from the  soil into the root epidermis. In Arabidopsis, expression of IRT1 and FRO2 is  tightly controlled to maintain iron homeostasis, and involves local and  long-distance signals, as well as transcriptional and post-transcriptional  events. FIT encodes a putative basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor  that regulates iron uptake responses in Arabidopsis. Here, we uncover a new  regulation of the root iron uptake genes. We show that IRT1, FRO2 and FIT are  repressed by the exogenous addition of cytokinins (CKs), and that this repression  acts at the level of transcript accumulation, and depends on the AHK3 and CRE1 CK  receptors. The CKs and iron-deficiency signals act through distinct pathways to  regulate the soil iron uptake genes, as (i) CK repression is independent of the  iron status, (ii) IRT1 and FRO2 downregulation is unchanged in a fit  loss-of-function mutant, indicating that FIT does not mediate CK repression, and  (iii) the iron-regulated genes AtNRAMP3 and AtNRAMP4 are not downregulated by  CKs. We show that root growth-inhibitory conditions, such as abiotic stresses  (mannitol, NaCl) and hormonal treatments (auxin, abscissic acid), repress the  iron starvation response genes. We propose that CKs control the root iron uptake  machinery through a root growth dependent pathway in order to adapt nutrient  uptake to the demand of the plant.', '2008 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03502.x', 'Curie']

FRO2: !controls! Iron entry 
IRT1: !controls! Iron entry 
FIT: !regulates! Iron uptake responses 
CKs: !repress! IRT1, FRO2, FIT 
AHK3: !mediates! CK repression 
CRE1: !mediates! CK repression 
AtNRAMP3: !unaffected by! CKs 
AtNRAMP4: !unaffected by! CKs 
Abiotic stresses: !repress! Iron starvation response genes 
Hormonal treatments: !repress! Iron starvation response genes