Among dicotyledon families, Chenopodiaceae has the most C(4) species and the greatest diversity in structural forms of C(4). In subfamily Salicornioideae, C(4) photosynthesis has, so far, only been found in the genus Halosarcia which is now included in the broadly circumscribed Tecticornia. Comparative anatomical, cytochemical, and physiological studies on these taxa, which have near-aphyllous photosynthetic shoots, show that T. pergranulata is C(3), and that two subspecies of T. indica (bidens and indica) are C(4) (Kranz-tecticornoid type). In T. pergranulata, the stems have two layers of chlorenchyma cells surrounding the centrally located water storage tissue. The two subspecies of T. indica have Kranz anatomy in reduced leaves and in the fleshy stem cortex. They are NAD-malic enzyme-type C(4) species, with mesophyll chloroplasts having reduced grana, characteristic of this subtype. The Kranz-tecticornoid-type anatomy is unique among C(4) types in the family in having groups of chlorenchymatous cells separated by a network of large colourless cells (which may provide mechanical support or optimize the distribution of radiation in the tissue), and in having peripheral vascular bundles with the phloem side facing the bundle sheath cells. Also, the bundle sheath cells have chloroplasts in a centrifugal position, which is atypical for C(4) dicots. Fluorescence analyses in fresh sections indicate that all non-lignified cell walls have ferulic acid, a cell wall cross-linker. Structural-functional relationships of C(4) photosynthesis in T. indica are discussed. Recent molecular studies show that the C(4) taxa in Tecticornia form a monophyletic group, with incorporation of the Australian endemic genera of Salicornioideae, including Halosarcia, Pachycornia, Sclerostegia, and Tegicornia, into Tecticornia.

Chenopodiaceae: !has most! C(4) species
Tecticornia: !includes! Halosarcia
T. pergranulata: !is! C(3)
T. indica: !has two subspecies! C(4)
Kranz-tecticornoid type: !unique among! C(4) types
cell walls: !have! ferulic acid
Tecticornia: !forms! monophyletic group