['18397373', 'Heterotrimeric G proteins composed of alpha, beta and gamma subunits regulate a  number of fundamental processes concerned with growth and development in plants.  In addition to the canonical heterotrimeric G proteins, plants also contain a  small family of extra large G proteins (XLGs) that show significant similarity to  the G-protein alpha subunit in their C-terminal regions. In this paper we show  that one of the three XLG genes, XLG3, and the Gbeta subunit (AGB1) of the  Arabidopsis G-protein heterotrimer are specifically involved in the regulation of  a subset of root morphological and growth responses. Based on analysis of T-DNA  insertional mutant phenotypes, XLG3 and AGB1 each positively regulate root waving  and root skewing. Since these responses are regulated by physical as well as  physiological cues, we assessed the roles of AGB1 and XLG3 in gravitropism,  thigmotropism and hormonal responses. Our data show that mutants lacking either  XLG3 or AGB1 genes are hypersensitive to ethylene and show growth responses  consistent with alterations in auxin transport, while maintaining an essentially  wild-type response to the physical cues of gravity and touch. These results  suggest that XLG3 and AGB1 proteins regulate the hormonal determinants of  root-waving and root-skewing responses in plants and possibly interact in a  tissue-specific or signal-specific manner. Because plants harboring knockout  mutations in the Galpha subunit gene, GPA1, exhibit wild-type root waving and  skewing, our results may indicate that the AGB1 subunit functions in these  processes without formation of a classic Galphabetagamma heterotrimer.', '2008 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03506.x', 'Assmann']

XLG3: !regulates! root morphological and growth responses
AGB1: !regulates! root morphological and growth responses
XLG3: !positively regulates! root waving and root skewing
AGB1: !positively regulates! root waving and root skewing
XLG3: !interacts with! AGB1
AGB1: !interacts with! XLG3
XLG3: !hypersensitive to! ethylene
AGB1: !hypersensitive to! ethylene
XLG3: !alters! auxin transport
AGB1: !alters! auxin transport