['18391211', 'The regulation of gene expression by the hormone auxin is a crucial mechanism in  plant development. We have shown that the Arabidopsis F-box protein TIR1 is a  receptor for auxin, and our recent structural work has revealed the molecular  mechanism of auxin perception. TIR1 is the substrate receptor of the  ubiquitin-ligase complex SCF(TIR1). Auxin binding enhances the interaction  between TIR1 and its substrates, the Aux/IAA repressors, thereby promoting the  ubiquitination and degradation of Aux/IAAs, altering the expression of hundreds  of genes. TIR1 is the prototype of a new class of hormone receptor and the first  example of an SCF ubiquitin-ligase modulated by a small molecule. Here, we  describe the design, synthesis, and characterization of a series of auxin  agonists and antagonists. We show these molecules are specific to TIR1-mediated  events in Arabidopsis, and their mode of action in binding to TIR1 is confirmed  by x-ray crystallographic analysis. Further, we demonstrate the utility of these  probes for the analysis of TIR1-mediated auxin signaling in the moss  Physcomitrella patens. Our work not only provides a useful tool for plant  chemical biology but also demonstrates an example of a specific small-molecule  inhibitor of F-box protein-substrate recruitment. Substrate recognition and  subsequent ubiquitination by SCF-type ubiquitin ligases are central to many  cellular processes in eukaryotes, and ubiquitin-ligase function is affected in  several human diseases. Our work supports the idea that it may be possible to  design small-molecule agents to modulate ubiquitin-ligase function  therapeutically.', '2008 Apr 8', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0711146105', 'Nozaki']

TIR1: !receives! auxin 
auxin: !enhances! interaction between TIR1 and Aux/IAA repressors 
SCF(TIR1): !ubiquitinates! Aux/IAAs 
auxin agonists/antagonists: !bind to! TIR1 
x-ray crystallography: !confirms! mode of action of auxin agonists/antagonists 
small-molecule agents: !modulate! ubiquitin-ligase function