This study investigated the respiratory properties and the role of the mitochondria isolated from one phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PCK)-CAM plant, Hoya carnosa, in malate metabolism during CAM phase III. The mitochondria showed high malate dehydrogenase (mMDH) and aspartate amino transferase (mAST), and a significant amount of malic enzyme (mME) activities. H. carnosa readily oxidized malate via mME and mMDH in the presence of some cofactors such as thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), coenzyme A (CoA) or NAD(+). A high respiration rate of malate oxidation was observed at pH 7.2 with NAD(+) and glutamate (Glu). Providing AST and Glu simultaneously into the respiratory medium strongly increased the rates of malate oxidation, and this oxidation was gradually inhibited by an inhibitor of alpha-ketoglutarate (alpha-KG) carrier, pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP). The mitochondria readily oxidized aspartate (Asp) or alpha-KG individually with low rates, while they oxidized Asp and alpha-KG simultaneously with high rates, and this simultaneous oxidation was also inhibited by PLP. By measuring the capacity of the mitochondrial shuttle, it was found that the OAA produced via mMDH seemed not to be transported outside the mitochondria, but mAST interconverted OAA and Glu to Asp and alpha-KG, respectively, and exported them out via a malate-aspartate (malate-Asp) shuttle. The data in this research suggest that during phase III of PCK-CAM, H. carnosa mitochondria oxidized malate via both mME and the mMDH systems depending on metabolic requirements. However, malate metabolism by the mMDH system did not operate via a malate-OAA shuttle similarly to Ananas comosus mitochondria, but it operated via a malate-Asp shuttle similarly to Kalanchoë daigremontiana mitochondria.

mMDH: !oxidizes! malate 
mAST: !interconverts! OAA and Glu 
mME: !oxidizes! malate 
TPP/CoA/NAD(+): !facilitates! malate oxidation 
Glu: !increases! malate oxidation rate 
PLP: !inhibits! malate oxidation 
Asp/alpha-KG: !oxidized! individually with low rates 
Asp/alpha-KG: !oxidized! simultaneously with high rates 
malate-OAA shuttle: !not used! by mMDH system 
malate-Asp shuttle: !used! by mMDH system