Persistent light quality gradients in dense plant populations induce imbalances in the distribution of excitation energy between the photosystems. Plants counteract such conditions by re-adjusting the stoichiometry of photosystems, which involves control of photosynthesis gene expression both in chloroplasts and in the nucleus. Decisive control parameters are redox signals from the photosynthetic electron transport chain, one prominent is the plastoquinone (PQ) pool. In a recent study, a plastocyanin (PC)-promoter::beta-glucuronidase reporter gene construct in tobacco demonstrated reversible redox regulation in response to varying light qualities. Here, northern and Western analyses demonstrate that this promoter regulation also accounts for the accumulation of the endogenous tobacco PetE gene transcripts and the protein amounts of the encoded PC. Hence, the reporter gene construct reflects the natural regulation of this nuclear gene in tobacco. In kinetic experiments, the response of the construct to either oxidation or reduction of the PQ pool was tested by defined light quality shifts. The construct displayed upregulation in response to a reduction signal and downregulation in response to an oxidation signal, both with a half-time of about 24 h. The response was finished after 48 h. DCMU application abolished the upregulation in response to the reduction signal, indicating the dependence on thylakoid membrane electron transport. To study the redox-responsive promoter region in more detail, several promoter deletion constructs were tested for their responsiveness. All constructs displayed a reversible response to light-induced oxidation and reduction signals; however, a minimal promoter region localised between -168 to -79 bp upstream of the transcription start site was sufficient to confer this redox regulation. This indicates that photosynthetic redox signals act on distinct regions in the PC promoter in a manner independent from photoreceptors and upstream cis elements conferring high basic expression in the light.

plastoquinone pool: !regulates! PetE gene expression 
PetE gene: !encodes! plastocyanin protein 
redox signals: !controls! PC promoter region 
PC promoter region: !localizes to! -168 to -79 bp upstream of transcription start site