['18424613', 'In darkness, shoot apex growth is repressed, but it becomes rapidly activated by  light. We show that phytochromes and cryptochromes play largely redundant roles  in this derepression in Arabidopsis thaliana. We examined the light activation of  transcriptional changes in a finely resolved time course, comparing the shoot  apex (meristem and leaf primordia) and the cotyledon and found >5700  differentially expressed genes. Early events specific to the shoot apices  included the repression of genes for Really Interesting New Gene finger proteins  and basic domain/leucine zipper and basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors.  The downregulation of auxin and ethylene and the upregulation of cytokinin and  gibberellin hormonal responses were also characteristic of shoot apices. In the  apex, genes involved in ribosome biogenesis and protein translation were rapidly  and synchronously induced, simultaneously with cell proliferation genes,  preceding visible organ growth. Subsequently, the activation of signaling genes  and transcriptional signatures of cell wall expansion, turgor generation, and  plastid biogenesis were apparent. Furthermore, light regulates the forms and  protein levels of two transcription factors with opposing functions in cell  proliferation, E2FB and E2FC, through the Constitutively Photomorphogenic1  (COP1), COP9-Signalosome5, and Deetiolated1 light signaling molecules. These data  provide the basis for reconstruction of the regulatory networks for  light-regulated meristem, leaf, and cotyledon development.', '2008 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.107.057075', 'Shanahan']

phytochromes: !play redundant roles in! derepression 
light: !activates! transcriptional changes 
RING finger proteins: !are repressed by! light 
basic domain/leucine zipper and basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors: !are repressed by! light 
auxin and ethylene: !are downregulated by! light 
cytokinin and gibberellin hormonal responses: !are upregulated by! light 
ribosome biogenesis and protein translation: !are rapidly induced by! light 
cell proliferation genes: !are synchronously induced by! light 
signaling genes: !are activated by! light 
transcriptional signatures of cell wall expansion, turgor generation, and plastid biogenesis: !are apparent with! light 
E2FB and E2FC: !are regulated by! light 
COP1, COP9-Signalosome5, and Deetiolated1 light signaling molecules: !regulate forms and protein levels of! E2FB and E2FC