The regulatory network for acclimation of the obligate photoautotrophic fresh water cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 to iron (Fe) limitation was studied by transcript profiling with an oligonucleotide whole genome DNA microarray. Six regions on the chromosome with several Fe-regulated genes each were identified. The irpAB and fut region encode putative Fe uptake systems, the suf region participates in [Fe-sulfur] cluster assembly under oxidative stress and Fe limitation, the isiAB region encodes CP43' and flavodoxin, the idiCB region encodes the NuoE-like electron transport associated protein IdiC and the transcriptional activator IdiB, and the ackA/pgam region encodes an acetate kinase and a phosphoglycerate mutase. We also investigated the response of two S. elongatus PCC 7942 mutants to Fe starvation. These were mutant K10, lacking IdiB but containing IdiC, and mutant MuD, representing a idiC-merodiploid mutant with a strongly reduced amount of IdiC as well as IdiB. The absence of IdiB in mutant K10 or the strongly reduced amount of IdiB in mutant MuD allowed for the identification of additional members of the Fe-responsive IdiB regulon. Besides idiA and the irpAB operon somB(1), somA(2), ftr1, ackA, pgam, and nat also seem to be regulated by IdiB. In addition to the reduced amount of IdiB in MuD, the low concentration of IdiC may be responsible for a number of additional changes in the abundance of mainly photosynthesis-related transcripts as compared to the wild type and mutant K10. This fact may explain why it has been impossible to obtain a fully segregated IdiC-free mutant, whereas it was possible to obtain a fully segregated IdiB-free mutant.

irpAB: !encodes! putative Fe uptake systems
suf: !participates in! [Fe-sulfur] cluster assembly
isiAB: !encodes! CP43' and flavodoxin
idiCB: !encodes! NuoE-like electron transport associated protein IdiC and transcriptional activator IdiB
ackA/pgam: !encodes! acetate kinase and phosphoglycerate mutase
K10: !lacks! IdiB
MuD: !represents! idiC-merodiploid mutant with reduced amount of IdiC and IdiB
IdiB: !regulates! idiA, irpAB operon, somB(1), somA(2), ftr1, ackA, pgam, nat
IdiC: !may be responsible for! changes in abundance of photosynthesis-related transcripts