['18433157', 'An estimated one-third of all proteins in higher eukaryotes are regulated by  phosphorylation by protein kinases (PKs). Although plant genomes encode more than  1000 PKs, the substrates of only a small fraction of these kinases are known. By  mass spectrometry of peptides from cytoplasmic- and nuclear-enriched fractions,  we determined 303 in vivo phosphorylation sites in Arabidopsis proteins. Among 21  different PKs, 12 were phosphorylated in their activation loops, suggesting that  they were in their active state. Immunoblotting and mutational analysis confirmed  a tyrosine phosphorylation site in the activation loop of a GSK3/shaggy-like  kinase. Analysis of phosphorylation motifs in the substrates suggested links  between several of these PKs and many target sites. To perform quantitative  phosphorylation analysis, peptide arrays were generated with peptides  corresponding to in vivo phosphorylation sites. These peptide chips were used for  kinome profiling of subcellular fractions as well as H 2O 2-treated Arabidopsis  cells. Different peptide phosphorylation profiles indicated the presence of  overlapping but distinct PK activities in cytosolic and nuclear compartments.  Among different H 2O 2-induced PK targets, a peptide of the serine/arginine-rich  (SR) splicing factor SCL30 was most strongly affected. SRPK4 (SR protein-specific  kinase 4) and MAPKs (mitogen-activated PKs) were found to phosphorylate this  peptide, as well as full-length SCL30. However, whereas SRPK4 was constitutively  active, MAPKs were activated by H 2O 2. These results suggest that SCL30 is  targeted by different PKs. Together, our data demonstrate that a combination of  mass spectrometry with peptide chip phosphorylation profiling has a great  potential to unravel phosphoproteome dynamics and to identify PK substrates.', '2008 Jun', 'J Proteome Res', '10.1021/pr8000173', 'Hirt']

PKs: !phosphorylate! Arabidopsis proteins 
GSK3/shaggy-like kinase: !phosphorylated at! tyrosine site 
PKs: !linked to! target sites 
Peptide chips: !used for! kinome profiling 
H2O2: !activates! MAPKs 
SRPK4: !phosphorylates! SCL30 
MAPKs: !phosphorylate! SCL30