In bacteria, such as Salmonella typhimurium, tryptophan is synthesized from indole-3-glycerole phosphate (IGP) by a tryptophan synthase alphabetabetaalpha heterotetramer. Plants have evolved multiple alpha (TSA) and beta (TSB) homologs, which have probably diverged in biological function and their ability of subunit interaction. There is some evidence for a tryptophan synthase (TS) complex in Arabidopsis. On the other hand maize (Zea mays) expresses the TSA-homologs BX1 and IGL that efficiently cleave IGP, independent of interaction with TSB. In order to clarify, how tryptophan is synthesized in maize, two TSA homologs, hitherto uncharacterized ZmTSA and ZmTSAlike, were functionally analyzed. ZmTSA is localized in plastids, the major site of tryptophan biosynthesis in plants. It catalyzes the tryptophan synthase alpha-reaction (cleavage of IGP), and forms a tryptophan synthase complex with ZmTSB1 in vitro. The catalytic efficiency of the alpha-reaction is strongly enhanced upon complex formation. A 160 kD tryptophan synthase complex was partially purified from maize leaves and ZmTSA was identified as native alpha-subunit of this complex by mass spectrometry. ZmTSAlike, for which no in vitro activity was detected, is localized in the cytosol. ZmTSAlike, BX1, and IGL were not detectable in the native tryptophan synthase complex in leaves. It was demonstrated in vivo and in vitro that maize forms a tryptophan synthase complex and ZmTSA functions as alpha-subunit in this complex.

Tryptophan synthase alpha-reaction: !catalyzed by! ZmTSA 
ZmTSA: !localized in! plastids 
ZmTSA: !forms complex with! ZmTSB1 
ZmTSA: !enhanced upon complex formation! alpha-reaction 
160 kD tryptophan synthase complex: !partially purified from! maize leaves 
ZmTSA: !identified as native alpha-subunit of! complex 
ZmTSAlike: !localized in! cytosol 
ZmTSAlike, BX1, IGL: !not detectable in! native tryptophan synthase complex 
Maize: !forms! tryptophan synthase complex 
ZmTSA: !functions as alpha-subunit in! complex