['18435826', 'Plant root systems display considerable plasticity in response to endogenous and  environmental signals. Auxin stimulates pericycle cells within elongating primary  roots to enter de novo organogenesis, leading to the establishment of new lateral  root meristems. Crosstalk between auxin and ethylene in root elongation has been  demonstrated, but interactions between these hormones in root branching are not  well characterized. We find that enhanced ethylene synthesis, resulting from the  application of low concentrations of the ethylene precursor  1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC), promotes the initiation of lateral  root primordia. Treatment with higher doses of ACC strongly inhibits the ability  of pericycle cells to initiate new lateral root primordia, but promotes the  emergence of existing lateral root primordia: behaviour that is also seen in the  eto1 mutation. These effects are correlated with decreased pericycle cell length  and increased lateral root primordia cell width. When auxin is applied  simultaneously with ACC, ACC is unable to prevent the auxin stimulation of  lateral root formation in the root tissues formed prior to ACC exposure. However,  in root tissues formed after transfer to ACC, in which elongation is reduced,  auxin does not rescue the ethylene inhibition of primordia initiation, but  instead increases it by several fold. Mutations that block auxin responses, slr1  and arf7 arf19, render initiation of lateral root primordia insensitive to the  promoting effect of low ethylene levels, and mutations that inhibit  ethylene-stimulated auxin biosynthesis, wei2 and wei7, reduce the inhibitory  effect of higher ethylene levels, consistent with ethylene regulating root  branching through interactions with auxin.', '2008 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03528.x', 'Dubrovsky']

Auxin: !stimulates! Pericycle cells 
Ethylene: !promotes! Initiation of lateral root primordia 
ACC: !inhibits! Ability of pericycle cells to initiate new lateral root primordia 
Auxin: !rescues! Ethylene inhibition of primordia initiation 
Slr1/Arf7/Arf19: !render! Insensitive to promoting effect of low ethylene levels 
Wei2/Wei7: !reduce! Inhibitory effect of higher ethylene levels