It is widely held that organelles inherit from the maternal lineage. However, the plastid genome in quite a few angiosperms appears to be biparentally transmitted. It is unclear how and why biparental inheritance of the genome became activated. Here, we detected widespread occurrence of plastids in the sperm cells (a cellular prerequisite for biparental inheritance) of traditional Caprifoliaceae. Of the 12 genera sampled, the sperm cells of Abelia, Dipelta, Heptacodium, Kolkwitzia, Leycesteria, Linnaea, Lonicera, Symphoricarpos, Triosteum and Weigela possessed inheritable plastids. The other genera, Sambucus and Viburnum, lacked plastids in sperm cells. Interestingly, such exclusion of plastids in the sperm cells of some Caprifoliaceae appeared to be associated with the divergence of Dipsacales phylogeny. Closer examination of Weigela florida revealed that both plastids and plastid DNA were highly duplicated in the generative cells. This implies that the appearance of plastids in sperm cells involved cellular mechanisms. Because such mechanisms must enhance the strength of plastid transmission through the paternal lineage and appear ubiquitous in species exhibiting biparental or potential biparental plastid inheritance, we presume that biparental plastid genetics may be a derived trait in angiosperms. This is consistent with our extended phylogenetic analysis using species with recently discovered modes of potential plastid inheritance. The results show that basal and early angiosperms have maternal plastid transmission, whereas all potential biparental transmission occurs at terminal branches of the tree. Thus, unlike previous studies, we suggest that biparental plastid inheritance in angiosperms was unilaterally converted from the maternal transmission mode during late angiosperm evolution.

Plastids: !inherited from! maternal lineage
Plastids: !transmitted biparentally in! some angiosperms
Plastids: !occur in! sperm cells of Caprifoliaceae
Plastids: !excluded from! sperm cells of some Caprifoliaceae
Plastids: !duplicated in! generative cells of Weigela florida
Plastids: !enhance transmission through! paternal lineage
Plastids: !converted from! maternal transmission mode