['18441224', 'Plant cells contain different O-acetylserine(thiol)lyase (OASTL) enzymes involved  in cysteine (Cys) biosynthesis and located in different subcellular compartments.  These enzymes are made up of a complex variety of isoforms resulting in different  subcellular Cys pools. To unravel the contribution of cytosolic Cys to plant  metabolism, we characterized the knockout oas-a1.1 and osa-a1.2 mutants,  deficient in the most abundant cytosolic OASTL isoform in Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Total intracellular Cys and glutathione concentrations  were reduced, and the glutathione redox state was shifted in favor of its  oxidized form. Interestingly, the capability of the mutants to chelate heavy  metals did not differ from that of the wild type, but the mutants have an  enhanced sensitivity to cadmium. With the aim of establishing the metabolic  network most influenced by the cytosolic Cys pool, we used the ATH1 GeneChip for  evaluation of differentially expressed genes in the oas-a1.1 mutant grown under  nonstress conditions. The transcriptomic footprints of mutant plants had  predicted functions associated with various physiological responses that are  dependent on reactive oxygen species and suggested that the mutant was  oxidatively stressed. Evidences that the mutation caused a perturbation in H2O2  homeostasis are that, in the knockout, H2O2 production was localized in shoots  and roots; spontaneous cell death lesions occurred in the leaves; and  lignification and guaiacol peroxidase activity were significantly increased. All  these findings indicate that a deficiency of OAS-A1 in the cytosol promotes a  perturbation in H2O2 homeostasis and that Cys is an important determinant of the  antioxidative capacity of the cytosol in Arabidopsis.', '2008 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.117408', 'Gotor']

OASTL: !synthesizes! Cys 
oas-a1.1/osa-a1.2 mutants: !deficient in! OASTL 
Total intracellular Cys/glutathione: !reduced in! mutants 
Glutathione redox state: !shifted in favor of! oxidized form 
Mutants: !enhanced sensitivity to! cadmium 
ATH1 GeneChip: !used to evaluate! differentially expressed genes 
Mutant plants: !predicted functions associated with! physiological responses 
Mutant: !perturbation in! H2O2 homeostasis 
H2O2 production: !localized in! shoots/roots 
Spontaneous cell death lesions: !occurred in! leaves 
Lignification/guaiacol peroxidase activity: !increased in! mutant