Culture of Citrus sinensis embryogenic callus on the embryo-inducing medium (EIM) containing glycerol gave rise to a large number of embryos, whereas very few embryos were observed on the callus growth medium (CGM). In the current paper, attempts were made to investigate whether polyamine biosynthesis was involved in glycerol-mediated somatic embryogenesis. Quantification of free polyamines by high-performance liquid chromatography showed that the cultures on EIM had less putrescine than those on CGM. However, increase in spermidine and spermine was detected in cultures on EIM during the first 20d of culture, coincident with abundant somatic embryogenesis. The globular embryos contained more polyamines than embryos at other stages. Semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay showed that expression levels of all of the five key genes involved in polyamine biosynthesis, with the exception of S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase, were induced in cultures on EIM, and that their transcriptional levels were increased with maturation of the embryos. Addition of alpha-difluoromethylornithine, a polyamine biosynthesis inhibitor, to EIM resulted in remarkable inhibition of somatic embryogenesis, concurrent with notable reduction of endogenous putrescine and spermidine, particularly at higher concentrations. Exogenous application of 1mM putrescine to EIM together with 5mM alpha-difluoromethylornithine led to dramatic enhancement of endogenous polyamines, which successfully restored somatic embryogenesis. All of these, collectively, demonstrated that free polyamines, at least spermidine and spermine herein, were involved in glycerol-mediated promotion of somatic embryogenesis, which will open a new avenue for establishing a sophisticated system for somatic embryogenesis based on the modulation of endogenous polyamines.

Culture of Citrus sinensis embryogenic callus: !gives rise to! embryos 
EIM: !contains! glycerol 
Polyamine biosynthesis: !involved in! somatic embryogenesis 
Free polyamines: !quantified by! high-performance liquid chromatography 
Cultures on EIM: !have less! putrescine 
Cultures on EIM: !increase in! spermidine and spermine 
Globular embryos: !contain more! polyamines 
Key genes involved in polyamine biosynthesis: !expressed in! cultures on EIM 
Alpha-difluoromethylornithine: !inhibits! somatic embryogenesis 
Putrescine: !exogenously applied to! EIM 
Endogenous polyamines: !restore! somatic embryogenesis