Plastid genes are expressed at high levels in photosynthetically active chloroplasts but are generally believed to be drastically downregulated in nongreen plastids. The genome-wide changes in the expression patterns of plastid genes during the development of nongreen plastid types as well as the contributions of transcriptional versus translational regulation are largely unknown. We report here a systematic transcriptomics and translatomics analysis of the tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) plastid genome during fruit development and chloroplast-to-chromoplast conversion. At the level of RNA accumulation, most but not all plastid genes are strongly downregulated in fruits compared with leaves. By contrast, chloroplast-to-chromoplast differentiation during fruit ripening is surprisingly not accompanied by large changes in plastid RNA accumulation. However, most plastid genes are translationally downregulated during chromoplast development. Both transcriptional and translational downregulation are more pronounced for photosynthesis-related genes than for genes involved in gene expression, indicating that some low-level plastid gene expression must be sustained in chromoplasts. High-level expression during chromoplast development identifies accD, the only plastid-encoded gene involved in fatty acid biosynthesis, as the target gene for which gene expression activity in chromoplasts is maintained. In addition, we have determined the developmental patterns of plastid RNA polymerase activities, intron splicing, and RNA editing and report specific developmental changes in the splicing and editing patterns of plastid transcripts.

Plastid genes: !are expressed at high levels in! photosynthetically active chloroplasts 
Plastid genes: !are downregulated in! nongreen plastids 
Plastid genes: !are strongly downregulated in! fruits 
Chloroplast-to-chromoplast conversion: !is not accompanied by large changes in! plastid RNA accumulation 
Most plastid genes: !are translationally downregulated during! chromoplast development 
Photosynthesis-related genes: !are more transcriptionally and translationally downregulated than! genes involved in gene expression 
accD: !has high-level expression during! chromoplast development 
Plastid RNA polymerase activities, intron splicing, and RNA editing: !have specific developmental changes in! splicing and editing patterns of plastid transcripts