Heterotrimeric G proteins are signaling molecules ubiquitous among all eukaryotes. The Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome contains one Galpha (GPA1), one Gbeta (AGB1), and two Ggamma subunit (AGG1 and AGG2) genes. The Gbeta requirement of a functional Ggamma subunit for active signaling predicts that a mutant lacking both AGG1 and AGG2 proteins should phenotypically resemble mutants lacking AGB1 in all respects. We previously reported that Gbeta- and Ggamma-deficient mutants coincide during plant pathogen interaction, lateral root development, gravitropic response, and some aspects of seed germination. Here, we report a number of phenotypic discrepancies between Gbeta- and Ggamma-deficient mutants, including the double mutant lacking both Ggamma subunits. While Gbeta-deficient mutants are hypersensitive to abscisic acid inhibition of seed germination and are hyposensitive to abscisic acid inhibition of stomatal opening and guard cell inward K+ currents, none of the available Ggamma-deficient mutants shows any deviation from the wild type in these responses, nor do they show the hypocotyl elongation and hook development defects that are characteristic of Gbeta-deficient mutants. In addition, striking discrepancies were observed in the aerial organs of Gbeta- versus Ggamma-deficient mutants. In fact, none of the distinctive traits observed in Gbeta-deficient mutants (such as reduced size of cotyledons, leaves, flowers, and siliques) is present in any of the Ggamma single and double mutants. Despite the considerable amount of phenotypic overlap between Gbeta- and Ggamma-deficient mutants, confirming the tight relationship between Gbeta and Ggamma subunits in plants, considering the significant differences reported here, we hypothesize the existence of new and as yet unknown elements in the heterotrimeric G protein signaling complex.

Gbeta: !requires! Ggamma
Gbeta: !coincides with! Ggamma
Gbeta: !hypersensitive to! abscisic acid inhibition of seed germination
Gbeta: !hyposensitive to! abscisic acid inhibition of stomatal opening
Gbeta: !hypocotyl elongation and hook development defects! absent in Ggamma-deficient mutants
Gbeta: !reduced size of cotyledons, leaves, flowers, and siliques! absent in Ggamma-deficient mutants