Vitamin E is a generic term for a group of lipid-soluble antioxidant compounds, the tocopherols and tocotrienols. While tocotrienols are considered as important vitamin E components in humans, with functions in health and disease, the protective functions of tocotrienols have never been investigated in plants, contrary to tocopherols. We took advantage of the strong accumulation of tocotrienols in leaves of double transgenic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) plants that coexpressed the yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) prephenate dehydrogenase gene (PDH) and the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase gene (HPPD) to study the antioxidant function of those compounds in vivo. In young leaves of wild-type and transgenic tobacco plants, the majority of vitamin E was stored in thylakoid membranes, while plastoglobules contained mainly delta-tocopherol, a very minor component of vitamin E in tobacco. However, the vitamin E composition of plastoglobules was observed to change substantially during leaf aging, with alpha-tocopherol becoming the major form. Tocotrienol accumulation in young transgenic HPPD-PDH leaves occurred without any significant perturbation of photosynthetic electron transport. Tocotrienols noticeably reinforced the tolerance of HPPD-PDH leaves to high light stress at chilling temperature, with photosystem II photoinhibition and lipid peroxidation being maintained at low levels relative to wild-type leaves. Very young leaves of wild-type tobacco plants turned yellow during chilling stress, because of the strongly reduced levels of chlorophylls and carotenoids, and this phenomenon was attenuated in transgenic HPPD-PDH plants. While sugars accumulated similarly in young wild-type and HPPD-PDH leaves exposed to chilling stress in high light, a substantial decrease in tocotrienols was observed in the transgenic leaves only, suggesting vitamin E consumption during oxygen radical scavenging. Our results demonstrate that tocotrienols can function in vivo as efficient antioxidants protecting membrane lipids from peroxidation.

Vitamin E: !consists of! tocopherols and tocotrienols 
tocotrienols: !accumulate in! transgenic tobacco plants 
tocotrienols: !protect! leaves from high light stress 
tocotrienols: !scavenge! oxygen radicals 
alpha-tocopherol: !becomes major form! in plastoglobules 
delta-tocopherol: !minor form! in plastoglobules 
chlorophylls/carotenoids: !reduced levels! in wild-type leaves