['18467490', 'Plant steroid hormones, brassinosteroids (BRs), are of great importance for plant  growth and development. BRs signal through a cell surface receptor kinase, BRI1,  and a GSK3-like kinase, BIN2, to regulate the BES1/BZR1 family of transcription  factors, which directly bind to target gene promoters to activate or repress gene  expression and mediate BR responses. To understand how BES1 regulates target gene  expression, we identified two BES1-interacting proteins, ELF6 (early flowering 6)  and its homolog REF6 (relative of early flowering 6), both of which are Jumonji  N/C (JmjN/C) domain-containing proteins and were previously found to regulate  flowering time. The interactions between BES1 and ELF6/REF6 were confirmed by GST  pull-down and BiFC (bimolecular fluorescence complementation) experiments.  Mutations in ELF6 or REF6 genes in Arabidopsis lead to BR-related phenotypes,  including impaired cell elongation and reduced expression of BR target genes.  Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments indicated that histone 3 lysine  9 (H3K9) methylation status was changed in elf6 and ref6 mutants, consistent with  recent findings that many Jmj proteins are histone demethylases. Our results  demonstrate that BES1 recruits other transcriptional regulators such as ELF6 and  REF6 to regulate target gene expression and coordinate BR responses with other  developmental processes such as control of flowering time. Jmj domain-containing  histone demethylases are involved in gene expression in many developmental  processes and diseases, but how these proteins affect specific pathways is not  well understood. Thus, our study establishes an important mechanism by which Jmj  domain proteins modulate specific gene expression by interacting with  pathway-specific transcription factors such as BES1.', '2008 May 27', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0802254105', 'Yin']

BRI1: !signals through! BIN2 
BIN2: !regulates! BES1/BZR1 
ELF6/REF6: !interact with! BES1 
ELF6/REF6: !regulate! BR target genes 
ELF6/REF6: !affect! flowering time 
ELF6/REF6: !change! H3K9 methylation status 
BES1: !recruits! ELF6/REF6 
Jmj domain proteins: !modulate! gene expression