The stomata of the fern Adiantum capillus-veneris lack a blue light-specific opening response but open in response to red light. We investigated this light response of Adiantum stomata and found that the light wavelength dependence of stomatal opening matched that of photosynthesis. The simultaneous application of red (2 micromol m(-2) s(-1)) and far-red (50 micromol m(-2) s(-1)) light synergistically induced stomatal opening, but application of only one of these wavelengths was ineffective. Adiantum stomata did not respond to CO2 in the dark; the stomata neither opened under a low intercellular CO2 concentration nor closed under high intercellular CO2 concentration. Stomata in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), which were used as a control, showed clear sensitivity to CO2. In Adiantum, stomatal conductance showed much higher light sensitivity when the light was applied to the lower leaf surface, where stomata exist, than when it was applied to the upper surface. This suggests that guard cells likely sensed the light required for stomatal opening. In the epidermal fragments, red light induced both stomatal opening and K+ accumulation in guard cells, and both of these responses were inhibited by a photosynthetic inhibitor, 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea. The stomatal opening was completely inhibited by CsCl, a K+ channel blocker. In intact fern leaves, red light-induced stomatal opening was also suppressed by 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea. These results indicate that Adiantum stomata lack sensitivity to CO2 in the dark and that stomatal opening is driven by photosynthetic electron transport in guard cell chloroplasts, probably via K+ uptake.

Red Light: !induces! Stomatal Opening 
Far-Red Light: !synergistically induces! Stomatal Opening 
CO2: !ineffective in inducing! Stomatal Opening 
Lower Leaf Surface: !more sensitive to! Light 
Photosynthetic Inhibitor: !inhibits! Stomatal Opening 
K+ Channel Blocker: !inhibits! Stomatal Opening 
Photosynthetic Electron Transport: !drives! Stomatal Opening 
Guard Cell Chloroplasts: !likely senses! Light