Super-growing roots (superroots; SR), which have been established in the legume species Lotus corniculatus, are a fast-growing root culture that allows continuous root cloning, direct somatic embryogenesis and mass regeneration of plants under entirely growth regulator-free culture conditions. These features are unique for non-hairy root cultures, and they are now stably expressed since the culture was isolated more than 10 years ago (1997). Attempts to achieve direct and stable transformation of SR turned out to be unsuccessful. Making use of the supple regeneration plasticity of SR, we are reporting here an indirect transformation protocol. Leaf explants, derived from plants regenerated from SR, were inoculated with Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain LBA4404 harboring the binary vector pBI121, which contains the neomycin phosphotransferase II (NPTII) and beta-glucuronidase (GUS) genes as selectable and visual markers, respectively. After co-cultivation, the explants were selected on solidified MS medium with 0.5 mg/L benzylamino purine (BAP), 100 mg/L kanamycin and 250 mg/L cefotaxime. Kanamycin-resistant calli were transferred to liquid rooting medium. The newly regenerated, kanamycin-resistant roots were harvested and SR cultures re-established, which exhibited all the characteristics of the original SR. Furthermore, kanamycin-resistant roots cultured onto solidified MS medium supplemented with 0.5 mg/L BAP produced plants at the same rate as control SR. Six months after gene transfer, PCR analysis and histochemical locating indicated that the NPTII gene was integrated into the genome and that the GUS gene was regularly expressed in leaves, roots and nodules, respectively. The protocol makes it now possible to produce transformed SR and nodules as well as transgenic plants from transformed SR.

SR: !allows! continuous root cloning
SR: !expresses! stably
Leaf explants: !inoculated with! Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Binary vector: !contains! NPTII and GUS genes
Kanamycin-resistant calli: !transferred to! liquid rooting medium
Kanamycin-resistant roots: !cultured onto! solidified MS medium
NPTII gene: !integrated into! genome
GUS gene: !expressed in! leaves, roots and nodules