['18479511', 'BACKGROUND: The polyadenylation of mRNA is one of the critical processing steps  during expression of almost all eukaryotic genes. It is tightly integrated with  transcription, particularly its termination, as well as other RNA processing  events, i.e. capping and splicing. The poly(A) tail protects the mRNA from  unregulated degradation, and it is required for nuclear export and translation  initiation. In recent years, it has been demonstrated that the polyadenylation  process is also involved in the regulation of gene expression. The  polyadenylation process requires two components, the cis-elements on the mRNA and  a group of protein factors that recognize the cis-elements and produce the  poly(A) tail. Here we report a comprehensive pairwise protein-protein interaction  mapping and gene expression profiling of the mRNA polyadenylation protein  machinery in Arabidopsis. RESULTS: By protein sequence homology search using  human and yeast polyadenylation factors, we identified 28 proteins that may be  components of Arabidopsis polyadenylation machinery. To elucidate the protein  network and their functions, we first tested their protein-protein interaction  profiles. Out of 320 pair-wise protein-protein interaction assays done using the  yeast two-hybrid system, 56 (approximately 17%) showed positive interactions. 15  of these interactions were further tested, and all were confirmed by  co-immunoprecipitation and/or in vitro co-purification. These interactions  organize into three distinct hubs involving the Arabidopsis polyadenylation  factors. These hubs are centered around AtCPSF100, AtCLPS, and AtFIPS. The first  two are similar to complexes seen in mammals, while the third one stands out as  unique to plants. When comparing the gene expression profiles extracted from  publicly available microarray datasets, some of the polyadenylation related genes  showed tissue-specific expression, suggestive of potential different  polyadenylation complex configurations. CONCLUSION: An extensive protein network  was revealed for plant polyadenylation machinery, in which all predicted proteins  were found to be connecting to the complex. The gene expression profiles are  indicative that specialized sub-complexes may be formed to carry out targeted  processing of mRNA in different developmental stages and tissue types. These  results offer a roadmap for further functional characterizations of the protein  factors, and for building models when testing the genetic contributions of these  genes in plant growth and development.', '2008 May 14', 'BMC Genomics', '10.1186/1471-2164-9-220', 'Li']

AtCPSF100: !interacts with! AtCLPS 
AtCLPS: !interacts with! AtFIPS 
AtFIPS: !interacts with! AtCPSF100 
AtCPSF100: !enhances! mRNA polyadenylation 
AtCLPS: !enhances! mRNA polyadenylation 
AtFIPS: !enhances! mRNA polyadenylation 
mRNA polyadenylation: !protects from! unregulated degradation 
mRNA polyadenylation: !required for! nuclear export 
mRNA polyadenylation: !required for! translation initiation