Plant growth, photosynthesis and leaf constituents were examined in the wild-type (WT) and mutant nar1 of barley (Hordeum vulgare L. cv. Steptoe) that contains a defective structural gene encoding NADH-dependent nitrate reductase (NADH-NAR). In controlled environment experiments, total biomass, rates of photosynthesis, stomatal conductance, intercellular CO(2) concentrations and foliar non-structural carbohydrate levels were unchanged or differed slightly in the mutant compared with the WT. Both genotypes displayed accelerated plant growth rates when the CO(2) partial pressure was increased from 36 to 98 Pa. Total NADH-NAR activity was 90% lower in the mutant than in the WT, and this was further decreased by CO(2) enrichment in both genotypes. Inorganic nitrate was greater in the mutant than in the WT, whereas in situ nitrate assimilation by excised leaves was two-fold greater for the WT than for the mutant. Foliar ammonia was 50% lower in the mutant than in the WT under ambient CO(2). Ammonia levels in the WT were decreased by about one-half by CO(2) enrichment, whereas ammonia was unaffected by elevated CO(2) in mutant leaves. Total soluble amino acid concentrations in WT and mutant plants grown in the ambient CO(2) treatment were 30.1 and 28.4 micromol g(-1) FW, respectively, when measured at the onset of the light period. Seven of the twelve individual amino acids reported here increased during the first 12 h of light in the ambient CO(2) treatment, leading to a doubling of total soluble amino acids in the WT. The most striking effect of the mutation was to eliminate increases of glutamine, aspartate and alanine during the latter half of the photoperiod in the ambient CO(2) treatment. Growth in elevated CO(2) decreased levels of total soluble amino acids on a diurnal basis in the WT but not in mutant barley leaves. The above results indicated that a defect in NADH-NAR primarily affected nitrogenous leaf constituents in barley. Also, we did not observe synergistic effects of CO(2) enrichment and decreased foliar NADH-NAR activity on most N-containing compounds.

NADH-NAR: !affects! Plant growth 
NADH-NAR: !decreases! Total NADH-NAR activity 
CO2: !increases! Plant growth rate 
CO2: !decreases! Ammonia levels in WT 
CO2: !decreases! Total soluble amino acids in WT 
Mutation: !eliminates! Increases of glutamine, aspartate and alanine 
Mutation: !decreases! Inorganic nitrate 
Mutation: !decreases! Foliar ammonia