['18494498', 'Transient increases in the cytoplasmic Ca(2+) concentration are key events that  initiate many cellular signaling pathways in response to developmental and  environmental cues in plants; however, only a few extracellular mediators  regulating cytoplasmic Ca(2+) singling are known to date. To identify endogenous  cell signaling peptides regulating cytoplasmic Ca(2+) signaling, Arabidopsis  seedlings expressing aequorin were used for an in vivo luminescence assay for  Ca(2+) changes. These seedlings were challenged with fractions derived from plant  extracts. Multiple heat-stable, protease-sensitive peaks of calcium elevating  activity were observed after fractionation of these extracts by high-performance  liquid chromatography. Tandem mass spectrometry identified the predominant active  molecule isolated by a series of such chromatographic separations as a 49-amino  acid polypeptide, AtRALF1 (the rapid alkalinization factor protein family).  Within 40 s of treatment with nanomolar concentrations of the natural or  synthetic version of the peptides, the cytoplasmic Ca(2+) level increased and  reached its maximum. Prior treatment with a Ca(2+) chelator or inhibitor of IP  3-dependent signaling partially suppressed the AtRALF1-induced Ca(2+)  concentration increase, indicating the likely involvement of Ca(2+) influx across  the plasma membrane as well as release of Ca(2+) from intracellular reserves.  Ca(2+) imaging using seedlings expressing the FRET-based Ca(2+) sensor yellow  cameleon (YC) 3.6 showed that AtRALF1 could induce an elevation in Ca(2+)  concentration in the surface cells of the root consistent with the very rapid  effects of addition of AtRALF1 on Ca(2+) levels as reported by aequorin. Our data  support a model in which the RALF peptide mediates Ca(2+)-dependent signaling  events through a cell surface receptor, where it may play a role in eliciting  events linked to stress responses or the modulation of growth.', '2008 Jun 17', 'Biochemistry', '10.1021/bi8001488', 'Sussman']

AtRALF1: !induces! cytoplasmic Ca(2+) concentration 
Ca(2+): !released from! intracellular reserves 
Ca(2+): !influx across! plasma membrane 
AtRALF1: !mediates! Ca(2+)-dependent signaling events 
AtRALF1: !plays role in! eliciting events linked to stress responses or growth modulation