['18494733', 'Ferredoxins are the major distributors for electrons to the various acceptor  systems in plastids. In green tissues, ferredoxins are reduced by photosynthetic  electron flow in the light, while in heterotrophic tissues, nicotinamide adenine  dinucleotide (reduced) (NADPH) generated in the oxidative pentose-phosphate  pathway (OPP) is the reductant. We have used a Ds-T-DNA insertion line of  Arabidopsis thaliana for the gene encoding the major leaf ferredoxin (Fd2,  At1g60950) to create a situation of high electron pressure in the thylakoids.  Although these plants (Fd2-KO) possess only the minor fraction of leaf Fd1  (At1g10960), they grow photoautotrophically on soil, but with a lower growth rate  and less chlorophyll. The more oxidized conditions in the stroma due to the  formation of reactive oxygen species are causing a re-adjustment of the redox  state in these plants that helps them to survive even under high light. Redox  homeostasis is achieved by regulation at both, the post-translational and the  transcriptional level. Over-reduction of the electron transport chain leads to  increased transcription of the malate-valve enzyme NADP-malate dehydrogenase  (MDH), and the oxidized stroma leads to an increased transcription of the OPP  enzyme glucose-6-P dehydrogenase. In isolated spinach chloroplasts, oxidized  conditions give rise to a decreased activation state of NADP-MDH and an  activation of glucose-6-P dehydrogenase even in the light. In Fd2-KO plants,  NADPH-requiring antioxidant systems are upregulated. These adjustments must be  caused by plastid signals, and they prevent oxidative damage under rather severe  conditions.', '2008 Jul', 'Physiol Plant', '10.1111/j.1399-3054.2008.01112.x', 'Scheibe']

Ferredoxins: !distribute! electrons 
Photosynthetic electron flow: !reduces! ferredoxins 
NADPH: !generated by! OPP 
Fd2-KO plants: !possess! Fd1 
Reactive oxygen species: !causes! re-adjustment of redox state 
Post-translational and transcriptional level: !regulated by! redox homeostasis 
Oxidized conditions: !give rise to! decreased activation of NADP-MDH 
Plastid signals: !prevent! oxidative damage