Developmental changes of photochemical and non-photochemical processes and the antioxidant system in the shaded peel vs the sun-exposed peel of 'Gala' apple and their responses to sudden exposure of high light were determined to understand the susceptibility of the shaded peel to high light damage with fruit development. As fruit developed, actual PSII efficiency of the shaded peel decreased, whereas non-photochemical quenching (mainly the slow component) increased at any given PFD. Photochemical quenching coefficient of the shaded peel decreased at any given PFD with fruit development. As fruit developed, the activity of superoxide dismutase, ascorbate peroxidase and dehydroascorbate reductase and the level of reduced ascorbate and total ascorbate decreased; the activity of monodehydroascorbate reductase and glutathione reductase remained low, whereas catalase activity and the level of reduced glutathione and total glutathione increased in the shaded peel. Exposure to high light (1500 micromol m(-2) s(-1)) for 2 h significantly decreased the maximum quantum efficiency of PSII (F(V)/F(M)) in the shaded peel at each developmental stage, with the decrease being larger with fruit development. The F(V)/F(M) of the sun-exposed peel was also decreased by the high light treatment, but the decrease was much smaller than that in the shaded peel at each developmental stage. We conclude that the shaded peel of apple fruit becomes more sensitive to photoinhibition with fruit development, and this increased sensitivity is apparently related to the decease in the overall capacity for photosynthesis and photoprotection of the shaded peel with fruit development.

Gene: !affects! Photochemical and non-photochemical processes
Gene: !affects! Antioxidant system
Gene: !enhances! Superoxide dismutase activity
Gene: !enhances! Ascorbate peroxidase activity
Gene: !enhances! Dehydroascorbate reductase activity
Gene: !enhances! Monodehydroascorbate reductase activity
Gene: !enhances! Glutathione reductase activity
Gene: !enhances! Catalase activity
Gene: !increases! Reduced ascorbate level
Gene: !increases! Total ascorbate level
Gene: !increases! Reduced glutathione level
Gene: !increases! Total glutathione level
Gene: !decreases! Actual PSII efficiency
Gene: !decreases! Photochemical quenching coefficient
Gene: !decreases! Maximum quantum efficiency of PSII