The cellular myo-inositol (Ins) pool is important to many metabolic and signaling pathways in plants. Ins monophosphatase (IMPase; EC 3.1.3.25) activity is essential for the de novo synthesis of myo-Inositol (Ins), and for recycling of Ins in Ins(1,4,5)P3. However, proteins encoded by at least one family of IMP genes also have L-galactose-1-P phosphatase activity important to ascorbic acid synthesis, indicating a bifunctionality that links these two branches of carbon metabolism. As part of research into the regulation of Ins synthesis and supply during seed development, the barley IMP-1 gene and gene products were studied. The 1.4 kb barley IMP-1 promoter contains one low temperature response element (RE), two heat shock REs, one gibberellin and two auxin REs, and five sugar REs. Barley IMP-1 is expressed in all tissues assayed, and expression levels were not greatly altered by abiotic stress treatments. Reduced use of Ins for Ins P6 synthesis in developing seed of barley low phytic acid (lpa) mutants results in Ins accumulation, and IMP-1 expression is reduced in proportion to the increase in Ins level. The barley recombinant enzyme had a lower Km, indicating higher affinity, for D/L-Ins(3)P1 (Km = 9.7 microM) as compared with reported Km (Ins P1) values for other eukaryotic IMPases (43-330 microM) or with a reported Km (L-Gal-1P) of 150 microM for a kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa) enzyme. These and other data indicate that the barley IMP-1 gene is regulated at least in part in response to Ins metabolic needs, and that the enzyme it encodes displays catalytic properties well suited for a role in Ins synthesis, in addition to other roles as an L-gal-1-P phosphatase important to ascorbate synthesis, or as an IMPase important to Ins(1,4,5)P3 signal recycling.

Barley IMP-1: !regulates! Ins synthesis 
Barley IMP-1: !encodes! enzyme 
Enzyme: !has lower Km! D/L-Ins(3)P1 
Enzyme: !has higher affinity! for D/L-Ins(3)P1 
Enzyme: !has L-galactose-1-P phosphatase activity! important to ascorbic acid synthesis 
Enzyme: !has IMPase activity! important to Ins(1,4,5)P3 signal recycling