['18502977', 'The signal transduction of the phytohormone cytokinin is mediated by a multistep  histidine-to-aspartate phosphorelay system. One component of this system are  B-type response regulators, transcription factors mediating at least part of the  response to cytokinin. In planta functional analysis of this family is hampered  by the high level of functional redundancy of its 11 members. We generated a  dominant repressor version of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) response  regulator ARR1 (ARR1-SRDX) using chimeric repressor silencing technology in order  to study the extent of the contribution of B-type response regulators to  cytokinin activities. In a protoplast test system, ARR1-SRDX suppressed  ARR6:beta-glucuronidase reporter gene activation by different B-type ARRs.  35S:ARR1-SRDX transgenic Arabidopsis plants showed phenotypic changes reminiscent  of plants with a reduced cytokinin status, such as a strongly reduced leaf size,  an enhanced root system, and larger seeds. Several bioassays showed that  35S:ARR1-SRDX plants have an increased resistance toward cytokinin. The rapid  induction of a large part of the cytokinin response genes was dampened. The  transcript levels of more than 500 genes were more than 2.5-fold reduced in  35S:ARR1-SRDX transgenic seedlings, suggesting a broad function of B-type ARRs.  Collectively, the suppression of pleiotropic cytokinin activities by a dominant  repressor version of a B-type ARR indicates that this protein family is involved  in mediating most, if not all, of the cytokinin activities in Arabidopsis. In  addition, a role for B-type ARRs in mediating cross talk with other pathways is  supported by the resistance of 35S:ARR1-SRDX seeds to phytochrome B-mediated  inhibition of germination by far-red light. This study demonstrates the  usefulness of chimeric repressor silencing technology to overcome redundancy in  transcription factor families for functional studies.', '2008 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.107.115436', 'Schmulling']

B-type response regulators: !mediate! signal transduction of cytokinin 
ARR1-SRDX: !suppresses! ARR6:beta-glucuronidase reporter gene activation 
35S:ARR1-SRDX plants: !show! phenotypic changes reminiscent of reduced cytokinin status 
35S:ARR1-SRDX plants: !have increased resistance! to cytokinin 
35S:ARR1-SRDX plants: !dampen! rapid induction of cytokinin response genes 
35S:ARR1-SRDX plants: !reduce transcript levels! of more than 500 genes 
B-type ARRs: !involved in mediating! most, if not all, of the cytokinin activities in Arabidopsis 
B-type ARRs: !mediate! cross talk with other pathways 
35S:ARR1-SRDX seeds: !resistant to! phytochrome B-mediated inhibition of germination by far-red light