Cactus spines reduce herbivory, direct water toward roots and reduce the impacts of high- and low-temperature extremes. Yet, shading of stems by spines reduces incident photosynthetic photon flux density (PFD), photosynthesis and growth. This study compared spinescence, PFD interception, stem temperature, Photosystem II (PSII) photochemistry and xanthophyll pigment composition for three species of cacti from the Mojave Desert, CA. The species vary in spinescence: Opuntia basilaris, which has no central or radial spines; Opuntia erinacea, which is densely covered with spines; and Opuntia phaeacantha, which has an intermediate coverage of spines. The role of spines was tested by removing spines from stems of O. erinacea. PFD interception was similar for both O. basilaris and O. phaeacantha, and about three times that for densely spined O. erinacea; removal of spines increased incident PFD three-fold. There were no effects of spines on stem temperatures. Steady-state light-response curves of chlorophyll a fluorescence from PSII indicated that PhiPSII, photochemical quenching (qP) and electron flux within PSII were lower, and non-photochemical quenching was higher, for O. erinacea in comparison to the other two species with less spines. After 2 months, qP was higher and electron flux lower, and xanthophyll pigment pool size was higher, for stems from which spines had been removed compared with intact stems. These three species allocate different amounts of biomass to spines, resulting in species-specific PFD interception, PSII photochemistry and xanthophyll pigment pool size, which may help maintain rates of photosynthesis during the hot, dry Mojave Desert summer.

Opuntia basilaris: !intercepts! PFD
Opuntia erinacea: !intercepts! PFD
Opuntia phaeacantha: !intercepts! PFD
spines: !reduce! herbivory
spines: !direct! water
spines: !reduce! temperature extremes
spines: !intercept! PFD
spines: !lower! PhiPSII
spines: !increase! non-photochemical quenching
spines: !lower! electron flux
spines: !increase! xanthophyll pigment pool size