Sequencing of the Laccaria bicolor and Phanerochaete chrysosporium genomes, together with the availability of many fungal genomes, allow careful comparison to be made of these two basidiomycetes, which possess a different way of life (either symbiotic or saprophytic), with other fungi. Central to the antioxidant systems are superoxide dismutases, catalases and thiol-dependent peroxidases (Tpx). The two reducing systems (thioredoxin (Trx) and glutathione/glutaredoxin (Grx)) are of particular importance against oxidative insults, both for detoxification, through the regeneration of thiol-peroxidases, and for developmental, physiological and signalling processes. Among those thiol-dependent antioxidant systems, special emphasis is given to the redoxin and methionine sulfoxide reductase (Msr) multigenic families. The genes coding for these enzymes were identified in the L. bicolor and P. chrysosporium genomes, were correctly annotated, and the gene content, organization and distribution were compared with other fungi. Expression of the Laccaria genes was also compiled from microarray data. A complete classification, based essentially on gene structure, on phylogenetic and sequence analysis, and on existing experimental data, was proposed. Comparison of the gene content of fungi from all phyla did not show huge differences for multigenic families in the reactive oxygen species (ROS) detoxification network, although some protein subgroups were absent in some fungi.

Superoxide dismutases: !affects! ROS detoxification
Catalases: !affects! ROS detoxification
Thiol-dependent peroxidases: !affects! ROS detoxification
Thioredoxin: !affects! ROS detoxification
Glutathione/glutaredoxin: !affects! ROS detoxification
Redoxin: !affects! ROS detoxification
Methionine sulfoxide reductase: !affects! ROS detoxification
Laccaria bicolor: !contains! Superoxide dismutases
Laccaria bicolor: !contains! Catalases
Laccaria bicolor: !contains! Thiol-dependent peroxidases
Laccaria bicolor: !contains! Thioredoxin
Laccaria bicolor: !contains! Glutathione/glutaredoxin
Laccaria bicolor: !contains! Redoxin
Laccaria bicolor: !contains! Methionine sulfoxide reductase
Phanerochaete chrysosporium: !contains! Superoxide dismutases
Phanerocha