['18539749', 'The phytochrome (phy) family of photoreceptors regulates changes in gene  expression in response to red/far-red light signals in part by physically  interacting with constitutively nucleus-localized phy-interacting basic  helix-loop-helix transcription factors (PIFs). Here, we show that PIF1, the  member with the highest affinity for phys, is strongly sensitive to the quality  and quantity of light. phyA plays a dominant role in regulating the degradation  of PIF1 following initial light exposure, while phyB and phyD and possibly other  phys also influence PIF1 degradation after prolonged illumination. PIF1 is  rapidly phosphorylated and ubiquitinated under red and far-red light before being  degraded with a half-life of approximately 1 to 2 min under red light. Although  PIF1 interacts with phyB through a conserved active phyB binding motif, it  interacts with phyA through a novel active phyA binding motif. phy interaction is  necessary but not sufficient for the light-induced phosphorylation and  degradation of PIF1. Domain-mapping studies reveal that the phy interaction,  light-induced degradation, and transcriptional activation domains are located at  the N-terminal 150-amino acid region of PIF1. Unlike PIF3, PIF1 does not interact  with the two halves of either phyA or phyB separately. Moreover, overexpression  of a light-stable truncated form of PIF1 causes constitutively photomorphogenic  phenotypes in the dark. Taken together, these data suggest that removal of the  negative regulators (e.g., PIFs) by light-induced proteolytic degradation might  be sufficient to promote photomorphogenesis.', '2008 Jun', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.108.060020', 'Huq']

phyA: !regulates degradation of! PIF1 
phyB: !interacts with! PIF1 
phyD: !influences degradation of! PIF1 
PIF1: !interacts with! phyA 
PIF1: !interacts with! phyB 
PIF1: !is phosphorylated and ubiquitinated by! light 
PIF1: !degrades with a half-life of! 1-2 min 
PIF3: !does not interact with! phyA or phyB