The regulation of ACC synthase (ACS) genes was studied in early ('Early Golden') and late ('Shiro') Japanese plum cultivars (Prunus salicina L.) in order to determine the role of this gene family in fruit ripening. Of the four Ps-ACS cDNAs isolated, two (Ps-ACS1 and -3) showed differential expression between the two cultivars. Ps-ACS1 accumulated during fruit ripening of 'Early Golden' ('EG') and 'Shiro' ('SH') in ethylene-dependent and -independent manners, respectively. Ps-ACS3a transcripts accumulated throughout fruit development and during 'EG' fruit ripening. Ps-ACS3b was detected only during ripening of 'SH' fruit. Furthermore, Ps-ACS3a transcript accumulation was negatively regulated by ethylene, whereas Ps-ACS3b was positively induced by the hormone. In both cultivars, the expression of Ps-ACS4 and -5 is under positive and negative feedback control by ethylene, respectively. Genetic analyses of 'EG' and 'SH' cultivars demonstrated that 'EG' is homozygous for Ps-ACS3a whereas 'SH' is heterozygous for Ps-ACS3 (a/b). The role of ethylene-overproducer 1-like in delaying fruit ripening by interacting with Ps-ACS proteins was also studied. The effect of the plant hormones, auxin, gibberellin, and cytokinin, in regulating ethylene production by promoting the induction of the different Ps-ACS mRNAs in plum was investigated. A model is presented in which differences in Ps-ACS alleles and gene expression between early and late plums are critical in determining the ripening behaviour of the cultivars.

Ps-ACS1: !accumulates! during fruit ripening 
Ps-ACS3a: !accumulates! throughout fruit development 
Ps-ACS3b: !accumulates! during ripening of 'SH' fruit 
Ps-ACS3a: !negatively regulated by! ethylene 
Ps-ACS3b: !positively induced by! ethylene 
Ps-ACS4: !positive feedback control by! ethylene 
Ps-ACS5: !negative feedback control by! ethylene 
'EG': !homozygous for! Ps-ACS3a 
'SH': !heterozygous for! Ps-ACS3 (a/b) 
ethylene-overproducer 1-like: !interacts with! Ps-ACS proteins 
auxin, gibberellin, cytokinin: !promote induction of! Ps-ACS mRNAs