Transpiration-driven 'mass-flow' of soil-water can increase nutrient flow to the root surface. Here it was investigated whether transpiration could be partially regulated by nutrient status. Seeds of Ehrharta calycina from nine sites across a rainfall gradient were supplied with slow-release fertilizer dibbled into the sand surrounding the roots and directly available through interception, mass-flow and diffusion (dubbed 'interception'), or sequestered behind a 40-microm mesh and not directly accessible by the roots, but from which nutrients could move by diffusion or mass-flow (dubbed 'mass-flow'). Although mass-flow plants were significantly smaller than interception plants as a consequence of nutrient limitation, they transpired 60% faster, had 90% higher photosynthesis relative to transpiration (A/E), and 40% higher tissue P, Ca and Na concentrations than plants allowed to intercept nutrients directly. Tissue N and K concentrations were similar for interception and mass-flow plants. Transpiration was thus higher in the nutrient-constrained 'mass-flow' plants, increasing the transport of nutrients to the roots by mass-flow. Transpiration may have been regulated by N availability, resulting in similar tissue concentration between treatments. It is concluded that, although transpiration is a necessary consequence of photosynthetic CO(2) uptake in C(3) plants, plants can respond to nutrient limitation by varying transpiration-driven mass-flow of nutrients.

Transpiration: !increases! Nutrient flow
Nutrient status: !regulates! Transpiration
Fertilizer: !supplies! Seeds
Mass-flow plants: !are smaller than! Interception plants
Mass-flow plants: !transpire faster than! Interception plants
Mass-flow plants: !have higher A/E than! Interception plants
Mass-flow plants: !have higher tissue P, Ca and Na concentrations than! Interception plants
Tissue N and K concentrations: !are similar for! Interception and mass-flow plants
N availability: !regulates! Transpiration
Transpiration: !increases! Transport of nutrients to roots by mass-flow