['18539132', 'CRINKLY4 (CR4) is a plant serine-threonine receptor kinase. In Zea mays, CR4  functions in the differentiation of the leaf epidermis and the aleurone cell  layer and, in Arabidopsis thaliana, the ortholog ACR4 is involved in the  development of the integument and seed coat. The Arabidopsis genome also encodes  four CR4-related proteins (CRR) whose functions are not known. Based on studies  of animal receptor kinase proteins it is likely that the molecular basis of  function of CR4 and related proteins is mediated by receptor dimerization. The  importance of the transmembrane (TM) domain in the dimerization of several  receptor kinases has been demonstrated by the TOXCAT system, a genetic assay that  measures helix interactions in a natural membrane environment. In this study, we  have used the TOXCAT assay to investigate the potential of the CR4 and  CR4-related TM domains to homo-dimerize. Our investigation indicates that the CR4  TM domain and the CRR TM domains have higher propensities for homo-dimerization  than the ACR4 TM domain. Interestingly, the dimerization potential of the ACR4 TM  domain is significantly weaker even though 13 of 24 amino acids are identical to  that of the CR4 TM domain. In order to determine the contributions of specific  amino acids to the higher dimerization potential of CR4 compared to ACR4,  mutations were made at specific sites in ACR4 TM domain and the strength of the  dimer assessed by the TOXCAT assay. One mutation restored the activity to the CR4  level, while other mutations produced either no change or significantly increased  the dimerization potential of the ACR4 TM domain. Our results indicate that the  TM domains of CR4, ACR4 and the CRR receptor family of proteins have the  intrinsic capacity to homo-dimerize, albeit with varying degrees of affinity.', '2008 Sep 15', 'Arch Biochem Biophys', '10.1016/j.abb.2008.05.010', 'Gururaj']

CR4: !functions in! leaf epidermis differentiation 
CR4: !involved in! Arabidopsis thaliana development 
CRR: !related to! CR4 
CR4 TM domain: !dimerizes with! CRR TM domains 
ACR4 TM domain: !dimerizes with! CR4 TM domain 
Mutations: !restore activity of! ACR4 TM domain