Understanding post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) phenomena in plants has provided breakthroughs in advancing plant functional genomics. A recently developed approach based on one of the strategies adopted by plants to defend against viruses, called virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS), is being widely used to enumerate the function of plant genes. Since its discovery, VIGS has been widely used to characterize plant genes involved in metabolic pathways, homeostasis, basic cellular functions, plant-microbe, plant-nematode and plant-herbivore interaction. Recently, the application of this technique has been extended to characterize the genes and cellular processes involved in abiotic-stress tolerance, and in particular drought and oxidative stress. Because abiotic-stress tolerance is multigenic, identification and characterization of genes involved in this process is challenging. VIGS could become one among the several potential tools in understanding the relevance of these stress-responsive genes. Development of VIGS protocols for the use of heterologous gene sequences as VIGS-inducers has extended its applicability to analyze genes of VIGS recalcitrant plant species. This article describes the methodology of VIGS for characterizing the water-deficit-stress-responsive genes, precautions to be taken during the experimentation, and future application of this technology as a fast forwarded as well as a reverse genetics tool to identify and characterize plant genes involved in drought tolerance. We also describe the importance of accurate water-deficit-stress imposition and quantification of stress-induced changes in the silenced plants during the process of screening to identify genes responsible for tolerance. Further, limitations of VIGS in characterizing the abiotic-stress-responsive genes are noted, with suggestions to overcome these limitations.

VIGS: !characterizes! plant genes 
VIGS: !used to! analyze abiotic-stress tolerance 
VIGS: !extended to! heterologous gene sequences 
VIGS: !identifies! genes responsible for drought tolerance 
VIGS: !quantifies! stress-induced changes in silenced plants