['18547396', 'Coronatine is an important virulence factor produced by several pathovars of the  bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae. The structure of coronatine is similar  to that of a class of plant hormones called jasmonates (JAs). An important step  in JA signaling is the SCF(COI1) E3 ubiquitin ligase-dependent degradation of JAZ  repressor proteins. We have recently shown that jasmonoyl isoleucine (JA-Ile)  promotes physical interaction between Arabidopsis JAZ1 and COI1 (the F-box  component of SCF(COI1)) proteins, and that the JA-Ile-dependent COI1-JAZ1  interaction could be reconstituted in yeast cells (i.e. in the absence of other  plant proteins). Here we show that coronatine, but not its two biosynthetic  precursors, also promotes interaction between Arabidopsis COI1 and multiple JAZ  proteins. The C-terminal Jas motif, but not the N-terminal (NT) domain or central  ZIM domain of JAZ proteins, is critical for JA-Ile/coronatine-dependent  interaction with COI1. Two positively charged amino acid residues in the Jas  domain were identified as essential for coronatine-dependent COI1-JAZ  interactions. Mutations of these two residues did not affect the ability of JAZ1  and JAZ9 to interact with the transcription factor AtMYC2. Importantly,  transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing JAZ1 carrying these two mutations  exhibited JA-insensitive phenotypes, including male sterility and enhanced  resistance to P. syringae infection. These results not only suggest that  coronatine and JA-Ile target the physical interaction between COI1 and the Jas  domain of JAZ repressors, but also illustrate the critical role of positively  charged amino acids in the Jas domain in mediating the  JA-Ile/coronatine-dependent JAZ interaction with COI1.', '2008 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03566.x', 'He']

Coronatine: !promotes interaction with! COI1 
JA-Ile: !promotes interaction with! COI1 
JAZ proteins: !interact with! COI1 
Jas motif: !critical for! JA-Ile/coronatine-dependent interaction 
2 positively charged amino acids: !essential for! coronatine-dependent COI1-JAZ interactions 
JAZ1 mutations: !affect! JA-insensitive phenotypes