One of the most important functions of blue light (BL) is to induce chloroplast movements in order to reduce the damage to the photosynthetic machinery under excess light. Hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), which is commonly generated under various environmental stimuli, can act as a signalling molecule that regulates a number of developmental processes and stress responses. To investigate whether H(2)O(2) is involved in high-fluence BL-induced chloroplast avoidance movements, a laser scanning confocal microscope and a luminescence spectrometer were used to observe H(2)O(2) generation in situ with the assistance of the fluorescence probe dichlorofluorescein diacetate (H(2)DCF-DA). After treatment with high-fluence BL, an enhanced accumulation of H(2)O(2), indicated by the fluorescence intensity of DCF, can be observed in leaf cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. Exogenously applied H(2)O(2) promotes the high-fluence BL-induced chloroplast movements in a concentration-dependent manner within the range of 0-10(-4) M, not only increasing the degree of movements but also accelerating the start of migrations. Moreover, the high-fluence BL-induced H(2)O(2) generation and the subsequent chloroplast movements can be largely abolished by the administration of the H(2)O(2)-specific scavenger catalase and other antioxidants. In addition, in-depth subcellular experiments indicated that high-fluence BL-induced H(2)O(2) generation can be partly abolished by the addition of diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), which is an NADPH oxidase inhibitor, and the blocker of electron transport chain dichlorophenyl dimethylurea (DCMU), respectively. The results presented here suggest that high-fluence BL can induce H(2)O(2) generation at both the plasma membrane and the chloroplast, and that the production of H(2)O(2) is involved in high-fluence BL-induced chloroplast avoidance movements.

Blue Light: !induces! chloroplast movements
Hydrogen Peroxide: !acts as! signalling molecule
High-fluence BL: !induces! H2O2 generation
H2O2: !promotes! high-fluence BL-induced chloroplast movements
Catalase: !abolishes! high-fluence BL-induced H2O2 generation
DPI: !partly abolishes! high-fluence BL-induced H2O2 generation
DCMU: !partly abolishes! high-fluence BL-induced H2O2 generation