The effects of synchronous photo (16 h daylength) and thermo (2 degrees C daily fluctuation) cycles on flowering time were compared with constant light and temperature treatments using two barley mapping populations derived from the facultative cultivar 'Dicktoo'. The 'Dicktoo'x'Morex' (spring) population (DM) segregates for functional differences in alleles of candidate genes for VRN-H1, VRN-H3, PPD-H1, and PPD-H2. The first two loci are associated with the vernalization response and the latter two with photoperiod sensitivity. The 'Dicktoo'x'Kompolti korai' (winter) population (DK) has a known functional polymorphism only at VRN-H2, a locus associated with vernalization sensitivity. Flowering time in both populations was accelerated when there was no fluctuating factor in the environment and was delayed to the greatest extent with the application of synchronous photo and thermo cycles. Alleles at VRN-H1, VRN-H2, PPD-H1, and PPD-H2--and their interactions--were found to be significant determinants of the increase/decrease in days to flower. Under synchronous photo and thermo cycles, plants with the Dicktoo (recessive) VRN-H1 allele flowered significantly later than those with the Kompolti korai (recessive) or Morex (dominant) VRN-H1 alleles. The Dicktoo VRN-H1 allele, together with the late-flowering allele at PPD-H1 and PPD-H2, led to the greatest delay. The application of synchronous photo and thermo cycles changed the epistatic interaction between VRN-H2 and VRN-H1: plants with Dicktoo type VRN-H1 flowered late, regardless of the allele phase at VRN-H2. Our results are novel in demonstrating the large effects of minor variations in environmental signals on flowering time: for example, a 2 degrees C thermo cycle caused a delay in flowering time of 70 d as compared to a constant temperature.

VRN-H1: !affects! Flowering Time 
VRN-H2: !affects! Flowering Time 
PPD-H1: !affects! Flowering Time 
PPD-H2: !affects! Flowering Time 
VRN-H1: !interacts with! VRN-H2 
VRN-H1: !enhances! Delay in Flowering Time 
Thermo Cycle: !enhances! Delay in Flowering Time