Glycosyltransferases are involved in the biosynthesis of lipid-linked N-glycans. Here, we identify and characterize a mannosyltransferase gene from Arabidopsis thaliana, which is the functional homolog of the ALG3 (Dol-P-Man:Man5GlcNAc2-PP-Dol alpha1,3-mannosyl transferase) gene in yeast. The At ALG3 protein can complement a Deltaalg3 yeast mutant and is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum in yeast and in plants. A homozygous T-DNA insertion mutant, alg3-2, was identified in Arabidopsis with residual levels of wild-type ALG3, derived from incidental splicing of the 11th intron carrying the T-DNAs. N-glycan analysis of alg3-2 and alg3-2 in the complex-glycan-less mutant background, which lacks N-acetylglucosaminyl-transferase I activity, reveals that when ALG3 activity is strongly reduced, almost all N-glycans transferred to proteins are aberrant, indicating that the Arabidopsis oligosaccharide transferase complex is remarkably substrate tolerant. In alg3-2 plants, the aberrant glycans on glycoproteins are recognized by endogenous mannosidase I and N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I and efficiently processed into complex-type glycans. Although no high-mannose-type glycoproteins are detected in alg3-2 plants, these plants do not show a growth phenotype under normal growth conditions. However, the glycosylation abnormalities result in activation of marker genes diagnostic of the unfolded protein response.

Glycosyltransferases: !synthesize! Lipid-linked N-glycans
At ALG3 protein: !complements! Deltaalg3 yeast mutant
At ALG3 protein: !localizes to! Endoplasmic reticulum
T-DNA insertion mutant alg3-2: !has residual levels of! Wild-type ALG3
N-acetylglucosaminyl-transferase I activity: !lacks in! Complex-glycan-less mutant background
ALG3 activity: !strongly reduced in! Alg3-2 plants
Aberrant glycans: !recognized by! Endogenous mannosidase I and N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I
High-mannose-type glycoproteins: !not detected in! Alg3-2 plants
Glycosylation abnormalities: !result in activation of! Marker genes diagnostic of the unfolded protein response