['18564386', 'The replacement of phospholipids by galacto- and sulfolipids in plant membranes  represents an important adaptive process for growth on phosphate-limiting soils.  Gene expression and lipid analyses revealed that the MYB transcription factor  PHR1 that has been previously shown to regulate phosphate responses is not a  major factor controlling membrane lipid changes. Candidate genes for phospholipid  degradation were selected based on induction of expression during phosphate  deprivation. Lipid measurements in the corresponding Arabidopsis mutants revealed  that the non-specific phospholipase C5 (NPC5) is required for normal accumulation  of digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG) during phosphate limitation in leaves. The  growth and DGDG content of a double mutant npc5 pho1 (between npc5 and the  phosphate-deficient pho1 mutant) are reduced compared to parental lines. The  amount of DGDG increases from approximately 15 mol% to 22 mol% in npc5, compared  to 28 mol% in wild-type, indicating that NPC5 is responsible for approximately  50% of the DGDG synthesized during phosphate limitation in leaves. Expression in  Escherichia coli revealed that NPC5 shows phospholipase C activity on  phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine. A double mutant of npc5 and  pldzeta2 (carrying a mutation in the phospholipase Dzeta2 gene) was generated.  Lipid measurements in npc5 pldzeta2 indicated that the contribution of PLDzeta2  to DGDG production in leaves is negligible. In contrast to the chloroplast  envelope localization of galactolipid synthesis enzymes, NPC5 localizes to the  cytosol, suggesting that, during phosphate limitation, soluble NPC5 associates  with membranes where it contributes to the conversion of phospholipids to  diacylglycerol, the substrate for galactolipid synthesis.', '2008 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03582.x', 'Dormann']

PHR1: !not major factor controlling! Membrane lipid changes
NPC5: !required for! Normal accumulation of DGDG
NPC5: !shows phospholipase C activity on! Phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine
NPC5: !localizes to! Cytosol