Variations in the inulin contents have been detected in rhizophores of Vernonia herbacea during the phenological cycle. These variations indicate the occurrence of active inulin synthesis and depolymerization throughout the cycle and a role for this carbohydrate as a reserve compound. 1-Fructan exohydrolase (1-FEH) is the enzyme responsible for inulin depolymerization, and its activity has been detected in rhizophores of sprouting plants. Defoliation and low temperature are enhancer conditions of this 1-FEH activity. The aim of the present work was the cloning of this enzyme. Rhizophores were collected from plants induced to sprout, followed by storage at 5 degrees C. A full length 1-FEH cDNA sequence was obtained by PCR and inverse PCR techniques, and expressed in Pichia pastoris. Cold storage enhances FEH gene expression. Vh1-FEH was shown to be a functional 1-FEH, hydrolyzing predominantly beta-2,1 linkages, sharing high identity with chicory FEH sequences, and its activity was inhibited by 81% in the presence of 10 mM sucrose. In V. herbacea, low temperature and sucrose play a role in the control of fructan degradation. This is the first study concerning the cloning and functional analysis of a 1-FEH cDNA of a native species from the Brazilian Cerrado. Results will contribute to understanding the role of fructans in the establishment of a very successful fructan flora of the Brazilian Cerrado, subjected to water limitation and low temperature during winter.

1-Fructan exohydrolase: !synthesizes! Inulin 
Variations in Inulin contents: !detected in! Rhizophores of Vernonia herbacea 
1-FEH: !responsible for! Inulin depolymerization 
Defoliation and Low Temperature: !enhance! 1-FEH activity 
PCR and inverse PCR techniques: !used to! Obtain full length 1-FEH cDNA sequence 
Pichia pastoris: !expresses! 1-FEH cDNA 
Cold storage: !enhances! FEH gene expression 
Vh1-FEH: !hydrolyzes! Beta-2,1 linkages 
Vh1-FEH: !shares high identity with! Chicory FEH sequences 
10 mM Sucrose: !inhibits! Vh1-FEH activity