['18577522', 'The gaseous hormone ethylene is perceived in Arabidopsis by a five member  receptor family that consists of the subfamily 1 receptors ETR1 and ERS1 and the  subfamily 2 receptors ETR2, ERS2, and EIN4. Previous work has demonstrated that  the basic functional unit for the ethylene receptor, ETR1, is a disulfide-linked  homodimer. We demonstrate here that ethylene receptors isolated from Arabidopsis  also interact with each other through noncovalent interactions. Evidence that  ETR1 associates with other ethylene receptors was obtained by co-purification of  ETR1 with tagged versions of ERS1, ETR2, ERS2, and EIN4 from Arabidopsis membrane  extracts. ETR1 preferentially associated with the subfamily 2 receptors compared  with the subfamily 1 receptor ERS1, but ethylene treatment affected the  interactions and relative composition of the receptor complexes. When  transgenically expressed in yeast, ETR1 and ERS2 can form disulfide-linked  heterodimers. In plant extracts, however, the association of ETR1 and ERS2 can be  largely disrupted by treatment with SDS, supporting a higher order noncovalent  interaction between the receptors. Yeast two-hybrid analysis demonstrated that  the receptor GAF domains are capable of mediating heteromeric receptor  interactions. Kinetic analysis of ethylene-insensitive mutants of ETR1 is  consistent with their dominance being due in part to an ability to associate with  other ethylene receptors. These data suggest that the ethylene receptors exist in  plants as clusters in a manner potentially analogous to that found with the  histidine kinase-linked chemoreceptors of bacteria and that interactions among  receptors contribute to ethylene signal output.', '2008 Aug 29', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M800641200', 'Schaller']

ETR1: !interacts with! ERS1 
ETR1: !interacts with! ETR2 
ETR1: !interacts with! ERS2 
ETR1: !interacts with! EIN4 
ETR1: !forms disulfide-linked heterodimers with! ERS2 
ETR1: !mediates heteromeric receptor interactions with! GAF domains 
ETR1: !associates preferentially with! subfamily 2 receptors 
ETR1: !affects! relative composition of receptor complexes 
ETR1: !dominance due to! ability to associate with other ethylene receptors