['18573193', 'Establishing the mechanisms regulating the autolysis of xylem tracheary elements  (TEs) is important for understanding this programmed cell death process. These  data demonstrate that two paralogous Arabidopsis thaliana proteases, XYLEM  CYSTEINE PROTEASE1 (XCP1) and XCP2, participated in micro-autolysis within the  intact central vacuole before mega-autolysis was initiated by tonoplast  implosion. The data acquisition was aided by the predictable pattern of seedling  root xylogenesis, the availability of single and double total knock-out T-DNA  lines, anti-sera that recognized XCP1 and XCP2, and the microwave-assisted  processing of whole seedlings prior to immunolabeling and observation in the  transmission electron microscope. During secondary wall thickening, XCP1 and XCP2  (in wild type), XCP1 (in xcp2 seedlings) or XCP2 (in xcp1 seedlings) were  imported into the TE central vacuole. Both XCP1 and XCP2 heavily labeled dense  aggregates of material within the vacuole. However, because of XCP1 deficiency in  xcp1 and xcp1 xcp2 TEs, non-degraded cellular remnants first accumulated in the  vacuole and then persisted in the TE lumen (longer than in the wild type) after  the final mega-autolysis was otherwise complete. This delayed TE clearing  phenotype in xcp1 was rescued by complementation with wild-type XCP1. Although  TEs in the xcp2 single knock-out cleared comparably with wild type, the  non-degraded remnants in xcp1 xcp2 TEs were more densely packed than in xcp1 TEs.  Therefore, XCP2 has a minor but distinct role in micro-autolysis. After tonoplast  implosion, XCP1 and XCP2 remained associated with disintegrating cellular  material as mega-autolysis, aided by additional lytic enzymes, destroyed the bulk  of the cellular contents.', '2008 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03592.x', 'Haigler']

XCP1: !participates in! micro-autolysis 
XCP2: !participates in! micro-autolysis 
XCP1: !imported into! TE central vacuole 
XCP2: !imported into! TE central vacuole 
XCP1: !labels! dense aggregates 
XCP2: !labels! dense aggregates 
XCP1: !deficient in! xcp1 and xcp1 xcp2 TEs 
XCP2: !rescues! delayed TE clearing phenotype 
XCP1: !remains associated with! disintegrating material 
XCP2: !remains associated with! disintegrating material