['18614705', 'Over one-quarter of all plant genes encode proteins of unknown function that can  be further classified as proteins with obscure features (POFs), which lack  currently defined motifs or domains, or proteins with defined features, which  contain at least one previously defined domain or motif. Although empirical data  in the form of transcriptome and proteome profiling suggest that many of these  proteins play important roles in plants, their functional characterization  remains one of the main challenges in modern biology. To begin the functional  annotation of proteins with unknown function, which are involved in the oxidative  stress response of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), we generated transgenic  Arabidopsis plants that constitutively expressed 23 different POFs (four of which  were specific to Arabidopsis) and 18 different proteins with defined features.  All were previously found to be expressed in response to oxidative stress in  Arabidopsis. Transgenic plants were tested for their tolerance to oxidative  stress imposed by paraquat or t-butyl hydroperoxide, or were subjected to  osmotic, salinity, cold, and heat stresses. More than 70% of all expressed  proteins conferred tolerance to oxidative stress. In contrast, >90% of the  expressed proteins did not confer enhanced tolerance to the other abiotic  stresses tested, and approximately 50% rendered plants more susceptible to  osmotic or salinity stress. Two Arabidopsis-specific POFs, and an Arabidopsis and  Brassica-specific protein of unknown function, conferred enhanced tolerance to  oxidative stress. Our findings suggest that tolerance to oxidative stress  involves mechanisms and pathways that are unknown at present, including some that  are specific to Arabidopsis or the Brassicaceae.', '2008 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.124875', 'Mittler']

Gene: !encodes! Protein 
Protein: !confers tolerance to! Oxidative Stress 
Protein: !confers enhanced tolerance to! Oxidative Stress 
Protein: !does not confer enhanced tolerance to! Other Abiotic Stresses 
Protein: !renders plants more susceptible to! Osmotic or Salinity Stress