['18621979', 'Small 10-kD acyl-coenzyme A-binding proteins (ACBPs) are highly conserved  proteins that are prevalent in eukaryotes. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana),  other than the 10-kD ACBP homolog (designated Arabidopsis ACBP6), there are five  larger forms of ACBPs ranging from 37.5 to 73.1 kD. In this study, the cytosolic  subcellular localization of Arabidopsis ACBP6 was confirmed by analyses of  transgenic Arabidopsis expressing autofluorescence-tagged ACBP6 and western-blot  analysis of subcellular fractions using ACBP6-specific antibodies. The expression  of Arabidopsis ACBP6 was noticeably induced at 48 h after 4 degrees C treatment  by northern-blot analysis and western-blot analysis. Furthermore, an acbp6 T-DNA  insertional mutant that lacked ACBP6 mRNA and protein displayed increased  sensitivity to freezing temperature (-8 degrees C), while ACBP6-overexpressing  transgenic Arabidopsis plants were conferred enhanced freezing tolerance.  Northern-blot analysis indicated that ACBP6-associated freezing tolerance was not  dependent on the induction of cold-regulated COLD-RESPONSIVE gene expression.  Instead, ACBP6 overexpressors showed increased expression of mRNA encoding  phospholipase Ddelta. Lipid profiling analyses of rosettes from cold-acclimated,  freezing-treated (-8 degrees C) transgenic Arabidopsis plants overexpressing  ACBP6 showed a decline in phosphatidylcholine (-36% and -46%) and an elevation of  phosphatidic acid (73% and 67%) in comparison with wild-type plants. From our  comparison, the gain in freezing tolerance in ACBP6 overexpressors that was  accompanied by decreases in phosphatidylcholine and an accumulation of  phosphatidic acid is consistent with previous findings on phospholipase  Ddelta-overexpressing transgenic Arabidopsis. In vitro filter-binding assays  indicating that histidine-tagged ACBP6 binds phosphatidylcholine, but not  phosphatidic acid or lysophosphatidylcholine, further imply a role for ACBP6 in  phospholipid metabolism in Arabidopsis, including the possibility of ACBP6 in the  cytosolic trafficking of phosphatidylcholine.', '2008 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.123331', 'Chye']

Arabidopsis ACBP6: !localizes to! cytosol 
Arabidopsis ACBP6: !enhances! freezing tolerance 
Arabidopsis ACBP6: !represses! cold-regulated COLD-RESPONSIVE gene expression 
Arabidopsis ACBP6: !synthesizes! phospholipase Ddelta 
Arabidopsis ACBP6: !affects! phosphatidylcholine levels 
Arabidopsis ACBP6: !interacts with! phosphatidic acid and lysophosphatidylcholine