['18621975', 'Coenzyme A (CoA) is an essential cofactor in the metabolism of both prokaryotic  and eukaryotic organisms and a universal five-step pathway is utilized to  synthesize CoA from pantothenate. Null mutations in two of the five steps of this  pathway led to embryo lethality and therefore viable reduction-of-function  mutations are required to further study its role in plant biology. In this  article, we have characterized a viable Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) T-DNA  mutant affected in the penultimate step of the CoA biosynthesis pathway, which is  catalyzed by the enzyme phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT). This  ppat-1 knockdown mutation showed an approximately 90% reduction in PPAT  transcript levels and was severely impaired in plant growth and seed production.  The sum of CoA and acetyl-CoA levels was severely reduced (60%-80%) in ppat-1  seedlings compared to wild type, and catabolism of storage lipids during seedling  establishment was delayed. Conversely, PPAT overexpressing lines showed, on  average, approximately 1.6-fold higher levels of CoA + acetyl-CoA levels, as well  as enhanced vegetative and reproductive growth and salt/osmotic stress  resistance. Interestingly, dry seeds of overexpressing lines contained between  35% to 50% more fatty acids than wild type, which suggests that CoA biosynthesis  plays a crucial role in storage oil accumulation. Finally, biochemical analysis  of the recombinant PPAT enzyme revealed an inhibitory effect of CoA on PPAT  activity. Taken together, these results suggest that the reaction catalyzed by  PPAT is a regulatory step in the CoA biosynthetic pathway that plays a key role  for plant growth, stress resistance, and seed lipid storage.', '2008 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.124057', 'Rodriguez']

Coenzyme A: !synthesizes! via five-step pathway 
Null mutations: !lead to! embryo lethality 
ppat-1 knockdown mutation: !reduces! PPAT transcript levels 
ppat-1 knockdown mutation: !impairs! plant growth and seed production 
ppat-1 knockdown mutation: !reduces! CoA and acetyl-CoA levels 
PPAT overexpressing lines: !increases! CoA + acetyl-CoA levels 
PPAT overexpressing lines: !enhances! vegetative and reproductive growth 
PPAT overexpressing lines: !enhances! salt/osmotic stress resistance 
PPAT overexpressing lines: !increases! fatty acid storage 
Recombinant PPAT enzyme: !inhibited by! CoA