['18624640', 'White blister rust in the Brassicaceae is emerging as a superb model for  exploring how plant biodiversity has channeled speciation of biotrophic  parasites. The causal agents of white rust across a wide breadth of cruciferous  hosts currently are named as variants of a single oomycete species, Albugo  candida. The most notable examples include a major group of physiological races  that each are economically destructive in a different vegetable or oilseed crop  of Brassica juncea (A. candida race 2), B. rapa (race 7), or B. oleracea (race  9); or parasitic on wild crucifers such as Capsella bursa-pastoris (race 4).  Arabidopsis thaliana is innately immune to these races of A. candida under  natural conditions; however, it commonly hosts its own molecularly distinct  subspecies of A. candida (A. candida subsp. arabidopsis). In the laboratory, we  have identified several accessions of Arabidopsis thaliana (e.g.,. Ws-3) that can  permit varying degrees of rust development following inoculation with A. candida  races 2, 4, and 7, whereas race 9 is universally incompatible in Arabidopsis  thaliana and nonrusting resistance is the most prevalent outcome of interactions  with the other races. Subtle variation in resistance phenotypes is evident,  observed initially with an isolate of A. candida race 4, indicating additional  genetic variation. Therefore, we used the race 4 isolate for map-based cloning of  the first of many expected white rust resistance (WRR) genes. This gene was  designated WRR4 and encodes a cytoplasmic toll-interleukin receptor-like  nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat receptor-like protein that confers a  dominant, broad-spectrum white rust resistance in the Arabidopsis thaliana  accession Columbia to representative isolates of A. candida races 2, 4, 7, and 9,  as verified by transgenic expression of the Columbia allele in Ws-3. The WRR4  protein requires functional expression of the lipase-like protein EDS1 but not  the paralogous protein PAD4, and confers full immunity that masks an underlying  nonhypersensitive incompatibility in Columbia to A. candida race 4. This residual  incompatibility is independent of functional EDS1.', '2008 Jun', 'Mol Plant Microbe Interact', '10.1094/MPMI-21-6-0757', 'Holub']

Albugo candida: !causes! White Blister Rust 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !innately immune to! Albugo candida 
WRR4 gene: !confers! Broad-spectrum white rust resistance 
WRR4 protein: !requires! Functional expression of EDS1 
EDS1: !enhances! WRR4 protein 
PAD4: !not required for! WRR4 protein 
Columbia: !masks! Nonhypersensitive incompatibility