A biotrophic parasite often depends on an intrinsic ability to suppress host defenses in a manner that will enable it to infect and successfully colonize a susceptible host. If the suppressed defenses otherwise would have been effective against alternative pathogens, it follows that primary infection by the "suppressive" biotroph potentially could enhance susceptibility of the host to secondary infection by avirulent pathogens. This phenomenon previously has been attributed to true fungi such as rust (basidiomycete) and powdery mildew (ascomycete) pathogens. In our study, we observed broad-spectrum suppression of host defense by the oomycete Albugo candida (white blister rust) in the wild crucifer Arabidopsis thaliana and a domesticated relative, Brassica juncea. A. candida subsp. arabidopsis suppressed the "runaway cell death" phenotype of the lesion mimic mutant lsd1 in Arabidopsis thaliana in a sustained manner even after subsequent inoculation with avirulent Hyaloperonospora arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana downy mildew). In sequential inoculation experiments, we show that preinfection by virulent Albugo candida can suppress disease resistance in cotyledons to several downy mildew pathogens, including contrasting examples of genotype resistance to H. arabidopsis in Arabidopsis thaliana that differ in the R protein and modes of defense signaling used to confer the resistance; genotype specific resistance in B. juncea to H. parasitica (Brassica downy mildew; isolates derived from B. juncea); species level (nonhost) resistance in both crucifers to Bremia lactucae (lettuce downy mildew) and an isolate of the H. parasitica race derived from Brassica oleracea; and nonhost resistance in B. juncea to H. arabidopsis. Broad-spectrum powdery mildew resistance conferred by RPW8 also was suppressed in Arabidopsis thaliana to two morphotypes of Erysiphe spp. following pre-infection with A. candida subsp. arabidopsis.

Albugo candida: !suppresses! host defense
Albugo candida: !enhances! susceptibility to secondary infection
R protein: !confers! genotype resistance
H. arabidopsis: !causes! Arabidopsis thaliana downy mildew
H. parasitica: !causes! Brassica downy mildew
Bremia lactucae: !causes! lettuce downy mildew
RPW8: !conveys! broad-spectrum powdery mildew resistance
Erysiphe spp.: !causes! two morphotypes of powdery mildew