Olive leaves are known to mature slowly, reaching their maximum photosynthetic activity only after full leaf expansion. Poor assimilation rates, typical to young olive leaves, were previously associated with low stomata conductance. Yet, very little is known about chloroplast biogenesis throughout olive leaf development. Here, the photosynthetic activity and plastids development throughout leaf maturation is characterized by biochemical and ultrastructural analyses. Although demonstrated only low photosynthetic activity, the plastids found in young leaves accumulated both photosynthetic pigments and proteins required for photophosphorylation and carbon fixation. However, Rubisco (ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase), which catalyzes the first major step of carbon fixation and one of the most abundant proteins in plants, could not be detected in the young leaves and only slowly accumulated throughout development. In fact, Rubisco levels seemed tightly correlated with the observed photosynthetic activities. Unlike Rubisco, numerous proteins accumulated in the young olive leaves. These included the early light induced proteins, which may be required to reduce the risk of photodamage, because of light absorption by photosynthetic pigments. Also, high levels of ribosomal L11 subunit, transcription factor elF-5A, Histones H2B and H4 were observed in the apical leaves, and in particular a plastidic-like aldolase, which accounted for approximately 30% of the total proteins. These proteins may upregulate in their levels to accommodate the high demand for metabolic energy in the young developing plant tissue, further demonstrating the complex sink-to-source relationship between young and photosynthetically active mature leaves.

Rubisco: !correlated with! photosynthetic activity
Early light induced proteins: !accumulate in! young leaves
Ribosomal L11 subunit: !accumulate in! apical leaves
Transcription factor elF-5A: !accumulate in! apical leaves
Histones H2B: !accumulate in! apical leaves
Histones H4: !accumulate in! apical leaves
Plastidic-like aldolase: !accumulate in! young leaves