['18643994', "Salicylic acid-binding protein 2 (SABP2) is essential for the establishment of  systemic acquired resistance (SAR) in tobacco; SABP2's methyl salicylate (MeSA)  esterase activity is required in healthy systemic tissues of infected plants to  release the active defense phytohormone SA from MeSA, which serves as a  long-distance signal for SAR. In the current study, we characterize a new gene  family from Arabidopsis thaliana encoding 18 potentially active alpha/beta fold  hydrolases that share 32-57% identity with SABP2. Of 14 recombinant AtMES (MES  for methyl esterase) proteins tested, five showed preference for MeSA as a  substrate and displayed SA inhibition of MeSA esterase activity in vitro (AtMES1,  -2, -4, -7, and -9). The two genes encoding MeSA esterases with the greatest  activity, AtMES1 and -9, as well as AtMES7 were transcriptionally upregulated  during infection of Arabidopsis with avirulent Pseudomonas syringae. In addition,  conditional expression of AtMES1, -7, or -9 complemented SAR deficiency in  SABP2-silenced tobacco, suggesting that these three members of the AtMES family  are SABP2 functional homologs (orthologs). Underexpression by knockout mutation  and/or RNAi-mediated silencing of multiple AtMES genes, including AtMES1, -2, -7,  and -9, compromised SAR in Arabidopsis and correlated with enhanced accumulation  of MeSA in the systemic tissue of SAR-induced plants. Together, the data show  that several members of the AtMES gene family are functionally homologous to  SABP2 and redundant for MeSA hydrolysis and probably SAR. These data suggest that  MeSA is a conserved SAR signal in Arabidopsis and tobacco.", '2008 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03618.x', 'Klessig']

SABP2: !essential for! SAR 
MeSA: !serves as! long-distance signal 
AtMES: !shares identity with! SABP2 
AtMES: !prefers! MeSA 
AtMES: !upregulated during! Pseudomonas syringae infection 
AtMES: !complemented SAR deficiency in! SABP2-silenced tobacco 
AtMES: !compromised SAR in! Arabidopsis 
AtMES: !correlated with enhanced accumulation of! MeSA 
MeSA: !conserved SAR signal in! Arabidopsis and tobacco