['18643989', 'In a number of land plants, Golden2-like (GLK) genes encode a pair of partially  redundant nuclear transcription factors that are required for the expression of  nuclear photosynthetic genes and for chloroplast development. As chloroplast  biogenesis depends on close co-operation between the nuclear and plastid  compartments, GLK gene function must be dependent on tight intracellular control.  However, the extent to which GLK-mediated chloroplast development depends on  intercellular communication is not known. Here we used sector analysis to show  that GLK proteins operate cell-autonomously in leaf mesophyll cells. To establish  whether GLK proteins are able to influence adjacent cell layers, we used  tissue-specific promoters to restrict GLK gene expression to the epidermis and to  the phloem. GLK genes driven by the Arabidopsis epidermal FIDDLEHEAD (FDH) and  MERISTEM LAYER1 (AtML1) promoters failed to rescue the pale-green Atglk1 Atglk2  mutant phenotype, confirming the suggestion that GLK proteins can only influence  chloroplast development intracellularly. An exception to this rule was seen in  lines in which GLK genes were expressed in the phloem. However, we believe that  the partial complementation of the mutant phenotype that was observed resulted  from phloem unloading, as opposed to inherent properties of GLK proteins. We  conclude that GLK proteins act in a cell-autonomous manner to coordinate and  maintain the photosynthetic apparatus within individual cells. Significantly,  this suggests that GLK proteins provide a means to fine-tune photosynthesis  according to the differential requirements of cells within the leaf.', '2008 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03616.x', 'Langdale']

GLK: !encodes! transcription factors 
transcription factors: !required for! expression of nuclear photosynthetic genes 
GLK: !operates cell-autonomously in! leaf mesophyll cells 
GLK: !influence chloroplast development! intracellularly 
GLK: !provide means to! fine-tune photosynthesis 
GLK: !coordinate and maintain! photosynthetic apparatus