['18642024', 'Cellulose synthase-like proteins in the D family share high levels of sequence  identity with the cellulose synthase proteins and also contain the processive  beta-glycosyltransferase motifs conserved among all members of the cellulose  synthase superfamily. Consequently, it has been hypothesized that members of the  D family function as either cellulose synthases or glycan synthases involved in  the formation of matrix polysaccharides. As a prelude to understanding the  function of proteins in the D family, we sought to determine where they are  located in the cell. A polyclonal antibody against a peptide located at the  N-terminus of the Arabidopsis D2 cellulose synthase-like protein was generated  and purified. After resolving Golgi vesicles from plasma membranes using  endomembrane purification techniques including two-phase partitioning and sucrose  density gradient centrifugation, we used antibodies against known proteins and  marker enzyme assays to characterize the various membrane preparations. The  Arabidopsis cellulose synthase-like D2 protein was found mostly in a fraction  that was enriched with Golgi membranes. In addition, versions of the Arabidopsis  cellulose synthase-like D2 proteins tagged with a green fluorescent protein was  observed to co-localize with a DsRed-tagged Golgi marker protein, the rat  alpha-2,6-sialyltransferase. Therefore, we postulate that the majority of  Arabidopsis cellulose synthase-like D proteins, under our experimental  conditions, are likely located at the Golgi membranes. Furthermore, protease  digestion of Golgi-rich vesicles revealed almost complete loss of reaction with  the antibodies, even without detergent treatment of the Golgi vesicles.  Therefore, the N-terminus of the Arabidopsis cellulose synthase-like D2 protein  likely faces the cytosol. Combining this observation with the transmembrane  domain predictions, we postulate that the large hydrophilic domain of this  protein also faces the cytosol.', '2008 Oct', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-008-0785-2', 'Keegstra']

Cellulose synthase-like proteins: !share sequence identity with! cellulose synthase proteins 
Arabidopsis D2 cellulose synthase-like protein: !localizes to! Golgi membranes 
Arabidopsis cellulose synthase-like D2 protein: !co-localizes with! rat alpha-2,6-sialyltransferase 
N-terminus of Arabidopsis cellulose synthase-like D2 protein: !faces! cytosol 
Large hydrophilic domain of Arabidopsis cellulose synthase-like D2 protein: !faces! cytosol