['18641086', 'Prenylation is a posttranslational protein modification essential for  developmental processes and response to abscisic acid. Following prenylation, the  three C-terminal residues are proteoliticaly removed and in turn the free  carboxyl group of the isoprenyl cysteine is methylated. The proteolysis and  methylation, collectively referred to as CaaX processing, are catalyzed by Ste24  endoprotease or Rce1 endoprotease and by an isoprenyl cysteine methyltransferase  (ICMT). Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) contains single STE24 and RCE1 and two  ICMT homologs. Here we show that in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) AtRCE1  promoted a-mating factor secretion and membrane localization of a ROP GTPase.  Furthermore, green fluorescent protein fusion proteins of AtSTE24, AtRCE1,  AtICMTA, and AtICMTB are colocalized in the endoplasmic reticulum, indicating  that prenylated proteins reach this compartment and that CaaX processing is  likely required for subcellular targeting. AtICMTB can process yeast a-factor  more efficiently than AtICMTA. Sequence and mutational analyses revealed that the  higher activity AtICMTB is conferred by five residues, which are conserved  between yeast Ste14p, human ICMT, and AtICMTB but not in AtICMTA. Quantitative  real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and microarray data  show that AtICMTA expression is significantly lower compared to AtICMTB. AtICMTA  null mutants have a wild-type phenotype, indicating that its function is  redundant. However, AtICMT RNAi lines had fasciated inflorescence stems, altered  phylotaxis, and developed multiple buds without stem elongation. The phenotype of  the ICMT RNAi lines is similar to farnesyltransferase beta-subunit mutant  enhanced response to abscisic acid2 but is more subtle. Collectively, the data  suggest that AtICMTB is likely the major ICMT and that methylation modulates  activity of prenylated proteins.', '2008 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.120477', 'Yalovsky']

Prenylation: !catalyzed by! Ste24 endoprotease or Rce1 endoprotease 
Ste24 endoprotease: !promotes! a-mating factor secretion 
Rce1 endoprotease: !promotes! membrane localization of a ROP GTPase 
AtICMTA: !colocalized with! AtSTE24, AtRCE1, AtICMTA, and AtICMTB 
AtICMTB: !processes! yeast a-factor more efficiently than AtICMTA 
AtICMTB: !conferred by! five residues 
AtICMTA: !expressed at lower levels than! AtICMTB 
AtICMTA: !function is! redundant 
AtICMT RNAi lines: !exhibit! fasciated inflorescence stems, altered phylotaxis, and multiple buds without stem elongation 
AtICMTB: !likely major ICMT! 
Methylation: !modulates activity of! prenylated proteins