['18643983', 'Phytic acid (myo-inositol hexakisphosphate, InsP6) is an important phosphate  store and signal molecule in plants. However, low-phytate plants are being  developed to minimize the negative health effects of dietary InsP6 and pollution  caused by undigested InsP6 in animal waste. InsP6 levels were diminished in  transgenic potato plants constitutively expressing an antisense gene sequence for  myo-inositol 3-phosphate synthase (IPS, catalysing the first step in InsP6  biosynthesis) or Escherichia coli polyphosphate kinase. These plants were less  resistant to the avirulent pathogen potato virus Y and the virulent pathogen  tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). In Arabidopsis thaliana, mutation of the gene for the  enzyme catalysing the final step of InsP6 biosynthesis (InsP5 2-kinase) also  diminished InsP6 levels and enhanced susceptibility to TMV and to virulent and  avirulent strains of the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae. Arabidopsis  thaliana has three IPS genes (AtIPS1-3). Mutant atips2 plants were depleted in  InsP6 and were hypersusceptible to TMV, turnip mosaic virus, cucumber mosaic  virus and cauliflower mosaic virus as well as to the fungus Botrytis cinerea and  to P. syringae. Mutant atips2 and atipk1 plants were as hypersusceptible to  infection as plants unable to accumulate salicylic acid (SA) but their increased  susceptibility was not due to reduced levels of SA. In contrast, mutant atips1  plants, which were also depleted in InsP6, were not compromised in resistance to  pathogens, suggesting that a specific pool of InsP6 regulates defence against  phytopathogens.', '2008 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03629.x', 'Hanke']

IPS: !synthesizes! InsP6 
InsP5 2-kinase: !synthesizes! InsP6 
AtIPS1-3: !synthesizes! InsP6 
transgenic potato plants: !express! antisense gene sequence for IPS 
atips2 plants: !depleted in! InsP6 
atipk1 plants: !depleted in! InsP6 
atips2 plants: !hypersusceptible to! TMV 
atips2 plants: !hypersusceptible to! turnip mosaic virus 
atips2 plants: !hypersusceptible to! cucumber mosaic virus 
atips2 plants: !hypersusceptible to! cauliflower mosaic virus 
atips2 plants: !hypersusceptible to! Botrytis cinerea 
atips2 plants: !hypersusceptible to! Pseudomonas syringae 
atips1 plants: !depleted in! InsP6 
atips1 plants: !not compromised in! resistance to pathogens