['18642946', 'Among the signal transduction pathways in higher eukaryotes, the two-component  system (TCS) is unique to plants. In the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, it  consists of more than 30 proteins, including eight receptors, five  phosphotransmitters and 23 response regulators. One of its important functions is  to perceive and transduce the signal of the plant hormone cytokinin. The basic  signal flow within the TCS is well-understood, but it is unclear how this pathway  is integrated with the remainder of the proteome. Thus, knowledge about the  interactions of TCS proteins should contribute to the understanding of their mode  of action. Therefore, we conducted medium-scale yeast two-hybrid screens focusing  on those members of the TCS, which are thought to be involved in cytokinin  signaling. In total, more than 6.3 x 10 (7) transformants were screened resulting  in the identification of 160 different interactions, of which 136 were novel.  Most of the interacting proteins belong to the functional categories of signal  transduction and protein metabolism. TCS proteins and their interactors localized  to the same subcellular compartment in many cases, a prerequisite to being of  biological relevance. The resulting interaction network map revealed large  differences in the connectivity. Cytokinin receptors (AHK2, CRE1/AHK4) showed the  highest numbers of different interaction partners. This study is the first  systematic protein-protein interaction experiment for a plant signal system and  provides numerous starting points for further analysis of the molecular  mechanisms used to convert the signal carried by the TCS into biological  processes.', '2008 Sep', 'J Proteome Res', '10.1021/pr0703831', 'Heyl']

TCS: !consists of! 30 proteins 
TCS: !perceives and transduces! signal of cytokinin 
TCS: !integrated with! proteome 
TCS: !revealed by! yeast two-hybrid screens 
TCS: !interacts with! 160 proteins 
TCS: !localized to! same subcellular compartment 
TCS: !highest number of interactors! Cytokinin receptors