['18657237', 'A screen was established for mutants in which the plant defence response is  de-repressed. The pathogen-inducible isochorismate synthase (ICS1) promoter was  fused to firefly luciferase (luc) and a homozygous transgenic line generated in  which the ICS1:luc fusion is co-regulated with ICS1. This line was mutagenized  and M(2) seedlings screened for constitutive ICS1:luc expression (cie). The cie  mutants fall into distinct phenotypic classes based on tissue-specific  localization of luciferase activity. One mutant, cie1, that shows constitutive  luciferase activity specifically in petioles, was chosen for further analysis. In  addition to ICS1, PR and other defence-related genes are constitutively expressed  in cie1 plants. The cie1 mutant is also characterized by an increased production  of conjugated salicylic acid and reactive oxygen intermediates, as well as  spontaneous lesion formation, all confined to petiole tissue. Significantly,  defences activated in cie1 are sufficient to prevent infection by a virulent  isolate of Hyaloperonospora parasitica, and this enhanced resistance response  protects petiole tissue alone. Furthermore, cie1-mediated resistance, along with  PR gene expression, is abolished in a sid2-1 mutant background, consistent with a  requirement for salicylic acid. A positional cloning approach was used to  identify cie1, which carries two point mutations in a gene required for cell wall  biosynthesis and actin organization, MUR3. A mur3 knockout mutant also resists  infection by H. parasitica in its petioles and this phenotype is complemented by  transformation with wild-type MUR3. We propose that perturbed cell wall  biosynthesis may activate plant defence and provide a rationale for the cie1 and  the mur3 knockout phenotypes.', '2008 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03636.x', 'Jones']

ICS1: !co-regulates with! luc 
cie1: !constitutes! luciferase activity 
cie1: !induces! PR gene expression 
cie1: !activates! defences 
cie1: !protects! petiole tissue 
sid2-1: !abolishes! cie1-mediated resistance 
cie1: !identifies! MUR3 
MUR3: !requires for! cell wall biosynthesis 
MUR3: !organizes! actin 
mur3 knockout: !resists! infection by H. parasitica