Grass lignins are differentiated from other lignin types by containing relatively large amounts of p-coumaric acid (pCA) acylating the C-9 position of lignin subunits. In the case of a mature corn (Zea mays L.) stems, pCA constitutes 15-18% of a dioxane soluble enzyme lignin. The major portion of the pCA is specifically attached to syringyl residues. Studies with isolated corn wall peroxidases show that pCA readily undergoes radical coupling in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, whereas sinapyl alcohol radical coupling proceeds more slowly. Analysis of corn wall peroxidases did not reveal specific enzymes that would lead to the preferred incorporation of sinapyl alcohol as seen in other plants. The addition of ethyl ferulate, methyl p-coumarate, or sinapyl p-coumarate conjugates to a reaction mixture containing peroxidase, sinapyl alcohol, and hydrogen peroxide stimulated the rate of sinapyl alcohol radical coupling by 10-20-fold. Based on spectral analysis it appears that pCA and ferulate radicals form rapidly, but the radical is readily transferred to sinapyl alcohol. The newly formed sinapyl alcohol radicals undergo coupling and cross-coupling reactions. However, sinapyl alcohol radicals do not cross-couple with pCA radicals. As long as hydrogen peroxide is limiting pCA remains uncoupled. Ferulates have similar reaction patterns in terms of radical transfer though they appear to cross-couple in the reaction mixture more readily then pCA. The role of pCA may be to internally provide a radical transfer mechanism for optimizing radical coupling of sinapyl alcohol into the growing lignin polymer. Attachment of some pCA to sinapyl alcohol ensures localization of the radical transfer mechanism in areas where sinapyl alcohol is being incorporated into lignin.

pCA: !attaches to! syringyl residues
peroxidase: !catalyzes! radical coupling of pCA
ethyl ferulate/methyl p-coumarate/sinapyl p-coumarate conjugates: !stimulates! rate of sinapyl alcohol radical coupling
pCA: !transfers radicals to! sinapyl alcohol
sinapyl alcohol radicals: !undergo! coupling and cross-coupling reactions
sinapyl alcohol radicals: !do not cross-couple with! pCA radicals
pCA: !provides! radical transfer mechanism for optimizing radical coupling of sinapyl alcohol into lignin polymer
pCA: !ensures localization of! radical transfer mechanism