AtSUC2 (At1g22710) encodes a phloem-localized sucrose (Suc)/H(+) symporter necessary for efficient Suc transport from source tissues to sink tissues in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). AtSUC2 is highly expressed in the collection phloem of mature leaves, and its function in phloem loading is well established. AtSUC2, however, is also expressed strongly in the transport phloem, where its role is more ambiguous, and it has been implicated in mediating both efflux and retrieval to and from flanking tissues via the apoplast. To characterize the role of AtSUC2 in controlling carbon partitioning along the phloem path, AtSUC2 cDNA was expressed from tissue-specific promoters in an Atsuc2 mutant background. Suc transport in this mutant is highly compromised, as indicated by stunted growth and the accumulation of large quantities of sugar and starch in vegetative tissues. Expression of AtSUC2 cDNA from the 2-kb AtSUC2 promoter was sufficient to restore growth and carbon partitioning to nearly wild-type levels. The GALACTINOL SYNTHASE promoter of Cucumis melo (CmGAS1p) confers expression only in the minor veins of mature leaves, not in the transport phloem of larger leaf veins and stems. Mutant plants expressing AtSUC2 cDNA from CmGAS1p had intermediate growth and accumulated sugar and starch, but otherwise they had normal morphology. These characteristics support a role for AtSUC2 in retrieval but not efflux along the transport phloem and show that the only vital function of AtSUC2 in photoassimilate distribution is phloem loading. In addition, Atsuc2 mutant plants, although debilitated, do grow, and AtSUC2-independent modes of phloem transport are discussed, including an entirely symplastic pathway from mesophyll cells to sink tissues.

AtSUC2: !encodes! Suc/H(+) symporter 
AtSUC2: !localizes to! collection phloem 
AtSUC2: !implicated in! mediating efflux and retrieval 
AtSUC2 cDNA: !restores! growth and carbon partitioning 
CmGAS1p: !confers expression! only in minor veins 
Atsuc2 mutant plants: !express! AtSUC2 cDNA 
Atsuc2 mutant plants: !accumulate! sugar and starch 
AtSUC2: !vital function! phloem loading 
AtSUC2-independent modes: !discussed! symplastic pathway