['18663471', 'There are at least two photosynthetic cyclic electron transport (CET) pathways in  most C(3) plants: the NAD(P)H dehydrogenase (NDH)-dependent pathway and a pathway  dependent upon putative ferredoxin:plastoquinone oxidoreductase (FQR) activity.  While the NDH complex has been identified, and shown to play a role in  photosynthesis, especially under stress conditions, less is known about the  machinery of FQR-dependent CET. Recent studies indicate that FQR-dependent CET is  dependent upon PGR5, a small protein of unknown function. In a previous study we  found that overexpression of PGR5 causes alterations in growth and development  associated with decreased chloroplast development and a transient increase in  nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ) after the shift from dark to light. In the  current study we examine the spatiotemporal expression pattern of PGR5, and the  effects of overexpression of PGR5 in Arabidopsis under a host of light and stress  conditions. To investigate the conserved function of PGR5, we cloned PGR5 from a  species which apparently lacks NDH, loblolly pine, and overexpressed it in  Arabidopsis. Although greening of cotyledons was severely delayed in  overexpressing lines under low light, mature plants survived exposure to high  light and drought stress better than wild-type. In addition, PSI was more  resistant to high light in the PGR5 overexpressors than in wild-type plants,  while PSII was more sensitive to this stress. These complex responses  corresponded to alterations in linear and cyclic electron transfer, suggesting  that over-accumulation of PGR5 induces pleiotropic effects, probably via elevated  CET. We conclude that PGR5 has a developmentally-regulated, conserved role in  mediating CET.', '2008 Nov', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-008-0789-y', 'Covert']

PGR5: !affects! CET 
PGR5: !localizes to! Arabidopsis 
PGR5: !interacts with! NDH complex 
PGR5: !enhances! NPQ 
PGR5: !represses! chloroplast development 
PGR5: !synthesizes! PSI and PSII