['18667727', 'In addition to pathways that regulate flowering in response to environmental  signals such as photoperiod or cold temperatures (vernalization), flowering time  is also regulated by light quality. In many species, far-red (FR) light is known  to accelerate flowering. This is environmentally significant because leaves  absorb more red light than FR light; thus, plants growing under a canopy  experience light that is enriched in FR light. In this article, we have explored  the promotion of flowering by FR-enriched light (FREL) in Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Previous work has shown that the floral promoter CONSTANS  (CO) plays a critical role in day-length perception and exhibits complex  regulation; CO mRNA is regulated by the circadian clock and CO protein is  stabilized by light and degraded in darkness. We find that plants grown under  FREL contain higher levels of CO mRNA in the early part of the day than plants  under white light. Furthermore, transgenic plants expressing CO under the control  of a constitutive promoter accumulate higher levels of CO protein under FREL,  indicating that FREL can increase CO protein levels independently of  transcription. Consistent with the model that FREL promotes flowering through CO,  mutants for co or gigantea, which are required for CO transcript accumulation,  are relatively insensitive to FREL. Because the red:FR ratios used in these  experiments are in the range of what plants would experience under a canopy,  these results indicate that the regulation of CO by light quality likely plays a  key role in the regulation of flowering time in natural environments.', '2008 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.122606', 'Michaels']

FREL: !promotes! flowering 
CO: !regulated by! circadian clock 
CO: !stabilized by! light 
CO: !degraded in! darkness 
FREL: !increases! CO mRNA 
FREL: !increases! CO protein 
co/gigantea: !required for! CO transcript accumulation 
mutants for co/gigantea: !relatively insensitive to! FREL