Initiation of leaves at the flanks of the shoot apical meristem occurs at sites of auxin accumulation and pronounced expression of auxin-inducible PIN-FORMED1 (PIN) genes, suggesting a feedback loop to progressively focus auxin in concrete spots. Because PIN expression is regulated by auxin response factor activity, including MONOPTEROS (MP), it appeared possible that MP affects leaf formation as a positive regulator of PIN genes and auxin transport. Here, we analyze a novel, completely leafless phenotype arising from simultaneous interference with both auxin signaling and auxin transport. We show that mp pin1 double mutants, as well as mp mutants treated with auxin-efflux inhibitors, display synergistic abnormalities not seen in wild type regardless of how strongly auxin transport was reduced. The synergism of abnormalities indicates that the role of MP in shoot meristem organization is not limited to auxin transport regulation. In the mp mutant background, auxin transport inhibition completely abolishes leaf formation. Instead of forming leaves, the abnormal shoot meristems dramatically increase in size, harboring correspondingly enlarged expression domains of CLAVATA3 and SHOOTMERISTEMLESS, molecular markers for the central stem cell zone and the complete meristem, respectively. The observed synergism under conditions of auxin efflux inhibition was further supported by an unrestricted PIN1 expression in mp meristems, as compared to a partial restriction in wild-type meristems. Auxin transport-inhibited mp meristems also lacked detectable auxin maxima. We conclude that MP promotes the focusing of auxin and leaf initiation in part through pathways not affected by auxin efflux inhibitors.

MP: !regulates! PIN genes
MP: !promotes! Focusing of auxin
PIN genes: !induce! Leaf formation
Auxin: !induces! PIN expression
Auxin: !accumulates at! Sites of leaf initiation
MP: !affects! Shoot meristem organization
MP: !enhances! Expression of CLAVATA3 and SHOOTMERISTEMLESS
Auxin transport inhibition: !abolishes! Leaf formation in mp mutants