['18685043', 'Peroxisomes are important for recycling carbon and nitrogen that would otherwise  be lost during photorespiration. The reduction of hydroxypyruvate to glycerate  catalyzed by hydroxypyruvate reductase (HPR) in the peroxisomes is thought to be  facilitated by the production of NADH by peroxisomal malate dehydrogenase (PMDH).  PMDH, which is encoded by two genes in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana),  reduces NAD(+) to NADH via the oxidation of malate supplied from the cytoplasm to  oxaloacetate. A double mutant lacking the expression of both PMDH genes was  viable in air and had rates of photosynthesis only slightly lower than in the  wild type. This is in contrast to other photorespiratory mutants, which have  severely reduced rates of photosynthesis and require high CO(2) to grow. The pmdh  mutant had a higher O(2)-dependent CO(2) compensation point than the wild type,  implying that either Rubisco specificity had changed or that the rate of CO(2)  released per Rubisco oxygenation was increased in the pmdh plants. Rates of gross  O(2) evolution and uptake were similar in the pmdh and wild-type plants,  indicating that chloroplast linear electron transport and photorespiratory O(2)  uptake were similar between genotypes. The CO(2) postillumination burst and the  rate of CO(2) released during photorespiration were both greater in the pmdh  mutant compared with the wild type, suggesting that the ratio of photorespiratory  CO(2) release to Rubisco oxygenation was altered in the pmdh mutant. Without PMDH  in the peroxisome, the CO(2) released per Rubisco oxygenation reaction can be  increased by over 50%. In summary, PMDH is essential for maintaining optimal  rates of photorespiration in air; however, in its absence, significant rates of  photorespiration are still possible, indicating that there are additional  mechanisms for supplying reductant to the peroxisomal HPR reaction or that the  HPR reaction is altogether circumvented.', '2008 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.122622', 'Badger']

PMDH: !encodes! Arabidopsis 
PMDH: !reduces! NAD(+) 
HPR: !facilitates! NADH production 
Rubisco: !changes! specificity 
Rubisco: !increases! CO2 release 
PMDH: !essential for! photorespiration 
PMDH: !increases! CO2 release 
HPR: !circumvented! in absence of PMDH