['18697928', 'The contention that quantitative profiles of biomolecules contain information  about the physiological state of the organism has motivated a variety of  high-throughput molecular profiling experiments. However, unbiased discovery and  validation of biomolecular signatures from these experiments remains a challenge.  Here we show that the Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) leaf ionome, or  elemental composition, contains such signatures, and we establish statistical  models that connect these multivariable signatures to defined physiological  responses, such as iron (Fe) and phosphorus (P) homeostasis. Iron is essential  for plant growth and development, but potentially toxic at elevated levels.  Because of this, shoot Fe concentrations are tightly regulated and show little  variation over a range of Fe concentrations in the environment, making them a  poor probe of a plant\'s Fe status. By evaluating the shoot ionome in plants grown  under different Fe nutritional conditions, we have established a multivariable  ionomic signature for the Fe response status of Arabidopsis. This signature has  been validated against known Fe-response proteins and allows the high-throughput  detection of the Fe status of plants with a false negative/positive rate of  18%/16%. A "metascreen" of previously collected ionomic data from 880 Arabidopsis  mutants and natural accessions for this Fe response signature successfully  identified the known Fe mutants frd1 and frd3. A similar approach has also been  taken to identify and use a shoot ionomic signature associated with P  homeostasis. This study establishes that multivariable ionomic signatures of  physiological states associated with mineral nutrient homeostasis do exist in  Arabidopsis and are in principle robust enough to detect specific physiological  responses to environmental or genetic perturbations.', '2008 Aug 19', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0804175105', 'Salt']

Gene: !affects! Process 
Process: !detects! Fe response status 
Fe response status: !validated against! known Fe-response proteins 
Fe response status: !identified! known Fe mutants frd1 and frd3 
P homeostasis: !associated with! shoot ionomic signature 
Multivariable ionomic signature: !exists in! Arabidopsis