['18701674', 'Copper (Cu) is an essential element in plant nutrition, but it inhibits the  growth of roots at low concentrations. Accessions of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) vary in their tolerance to Cu. To understand the molecular mechanism of  Cu tolerance in Arabidopsis, we performed quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis  and accession studies. One major QTL on chromosome 1 (QTL1) explained 52% of the  phenotypic variation in Cu tolerance in roots in a Landsberg erecta/Cape Verde  Islands (Ler/Cvi) recombinant inbred population. This QTL regulates Cu  translocation capacity and involves a Cu-transporting P(1B-1)-type ATPase, HMA5.  The Cvi allele carries two amino acid substitutions in comparison with the Ler  allele and is less functional than the Ler allele in Cu tolerance when judged by  complementation assays using a T-DNA insertion mutant. Complementation assays of  the ccc2 mutant of yeast using chimeric HMA5 proteins revealed that N923T of the  Cvi allele, which was identified in the tightly conserved domain N(x)(6)YN(x)(4)P  (where the former asparagine was substituted by threonine), is a cause of  dysfunction of the Cvi HMA5 allele. Another dysfunctional HMA5 allele was  identified in Chisdra-2, which showed Cu sensitivity and low capacity of Cu  translocation from roots to shoots. A unique amino acid substitution of Chisdra-2  was identified in another strictly conserved domain, CPC(x)(6)P, where the latter  proline was replaced with leucine. These results indicate that a portion of the  variation in Cu tolerance of Arabidopsis is regulated by the functional integrity  of the Cu-translocating ATPase, HMA5, and in particular the amino acid sequence  in several strictly conserved motifs.', '2008 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.119933', 'Koyama']

QTL1: !regulates! Cu translocation capacity 
HMA5: !affects! Cu tolerance 
Ler/Cvi allele: !differs in! amino acid substitutions 
N923T: !causes dysfunction of! Cvi HMA5 allele 
Chisdra-2 allele: !contains unique! amino acid substitution 
HMA5: !regulates! variation in Cu tolerance