['18704160', "Methylcytosine-binding proteins decipher the epigenetic information encoded by  DNA methylation and provide a link between DNA methylation, modification of  chromatin structure, and gene silencing. VARIANT IN METHYLATION 1 (VIM1) encodes  an SRA (SET- and RING-associated) domain methylcytosine-binding protein in  Arabidopsis thaliana, and loss of VIM1 function causes centromere DNA  hypomethylation and centromeric heterochromatin decondensation in interphase. In  the Arabidopsis genome, there are five VIM genes that share very high sequence  similarity and encode proteins containing a PHD domain, two RING domains, and an  SRA domain. To gain further insight into the function and potential redundancy  among the VIM proteins, we investigated strains combining different vim mutations  and transgenic vim knock-down lines that down-regulate multiple VIM family genes.  The vim1 vim3 double mutant and the transgenic vim knock-down lines showed  decreased DNA methylation primarily at CpG sites in genic regions, as well as  repeated sequences in heterochromatic regions. In addition, transcriptional  silencing was released in these plants at most heterochromatin regions examined.  Interestingly, the vim1 vim3 mutant and vim knock-down lines gained ectopic CpHpH  methylation in the 5S rRNA genes against a background of CpG hypomethylation. The  vim1 vim2 vim3 triple mutant displayed abnormal morphological phenotypes  including late flowering, which is associated with DNA hypomethylation of the 5'  region of FWA and release of FWA gene silencing. Our findings demonstrate that  VIM1, VIM2, and VIM3 have overlapping functions in maintenance of global CpG  methylation and epigenetic transcriptional silencing.", '2008 Aug 15', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1000156', 'Richards']

VIM1: !encodes! SRA domain methylcytosine-binding protein 
VIM1: !causes! centromere DNA hypomethylation 
VIM1, VIM2, VIM3: !share! high sequence similarity 
VIM1, VIM3: !decrease! DNA methylation 
VIM1, VIM2, VIM3: !release! transcriptional silencing 
VIM1, VIM2, VIM3: !gain! ectopic CpHpH methylation 
VIM1, VIM2, VIM3: !cause! late flowering