Chloroplasts are among the main targets of cytokinin action in the plant cell. We report here on the activation of transcription by cytokinin as detected by run-on assays with chloroplasts isolated from apical parts of first leaves detached from 9-d-old barley (Hordeum vulgare) seedlings and incubated for 3 h on a 2.2 x 10(-5) m solution of benzyladenine (BA). Northern-blot analysis also detected a BA-induced increase in the accumulation of chloroplast mRNAs. A prerequisite for BA activation of chloroplast transcription was preincubation of leaves for 24 h on water in the light, resulting in a decreased chloroplast transcription and a drastic accumulation of abscisic acid. Cytokinin enhanced the transcription of several chloroplast genes above the initial level measured before BA treatment, and in the case of rrn16 and petD even before preincubation. Cytokinin effects on basal (youngest), middle, and apical (oldest) segments of primary leaves detached from plants of different ages revealed an age dependence of chloroplast gene response to BA. BA-induced stimulation of transcription of rrn16, rrn23, rps4, rps16, rbcL, atpB, and ndhC required light during the period of preincubation and was further enhanced by light during the incubation on BA, whereas activation of transcription of trnEY, rps14, rpl16, matK, petD, and petLG depended on light during both periods. Our data reveal positive and differential effects of cytokinin on the transcription of chloroplast genes that were dependent on light and on the age (developmental stage) of cells and leaves.

Cytokinin: !enhances! rrn16
Cytokinin: !enhances! petD
Cytokinin: !enhances! rrn23
Cytokinin: !enhances! rps4
Cytokinin: !enhances! rps16
Cytokinin: !enhances! rbcL
Cytokinin: !enhances! atpB
Cytokinin: !enhances! ndhC
Cytokinin: !enhances! trnEY
Cytokinin: !enhances! rps14
Cytokinin: !enhances! rpl16
Cytokinin: !enhances! matK
Cytokinin: !enhances! petLG
Light: !enhances! rrn16
Light: !enhances! rps4
Light: !enhances! rps16
Light: !enhances! rbcL
Light: !enhances! atpB
Light: !enhances! ndhC
Light: !enhances! trnEY
Light: !enhances! rps14
Light: !enhances! rpl16
