['18713732', 'FAD synthetases (EC 2.7.7.2) catalyze biosynthesis of FAD from FMN and ATP.  Monofunctional FAD synthetases are known to exist in mammals and yeast;  bifunctional enzymes also catalyzing phosphorylation of riboflavin to FMN are  known to exist in bacteria. Previously known eukaryotic enzymes with FAD  synthetase activity have no sequence similarity to prokaryotic enzymes with  riboflavin kinase and FAD synthetase activities. Proteins homologous to bacterial  bifunctional FAD synthetases, yet shorter and lacking amino acid motifs at the C  terminus, were found by bioinformatic analyses in vascular plant genomes,  suggesting that plants contain a type of FAD synthetase previously known to exist  only in prokaryotes. The Arabidopsis thaliana genome encodes two of such  proteins. Both proteins, which we named AtRibF1 and AtRibF2, carry N-terminal  extensions with characteristics of organellar targeting peptides. AtRibF1 and  AtRibF2 cDNAs were cloned by reverse transcription-PCR. Only FAD synthetase  activity was detected in the recombinant enzymes produced in Escherichia coli.  FMN and ATP inhibited both enzymes. Kinetic parameters of AtRibF1 and AtRibF2 for  the two substrates were similar. Confocal microscopy of protoplasts transformed  with enhanced green fluorescence protein-fused proteins showed that AtRibF1 and  AtRibF2 are targeted to plastids. In agreement with subcellular localization to  plastids, Percoll-isolated chloroplasts from pea (Pisum sativum) synthesized FAD  from imported riboflavin. Riboflavin kinase, FMN hydrolase, and FAD  pyrophosphatase activities were detected in Percoll-isolated chloroplasts and  mitochondria from pea. We propose from these new findings a model for subcellular  distribution of enzymes that synthesize and hydrolyze flavin nucleotides in  plants.', '2008 Nov 7', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M803416200', 'Roje']

FAD synthetases: !catalyze! biosynthesis of FAD 
Monofunctional FAD synthetases: !exist in! mammals and yeast 
Bifunctional enzymes: !catalyze! phosphorylation of riboflavin to FMN 
Eukaryotic enzymes: !have no sequence similarity to! prokaryotic enzymes 
Proteins homologous to bacterial bifunctional FAD synthetases: !found in! vascular plant genomes 
AtRibF1 and AtRibF2: !targeted to! plastids 
Percoll-isolated chloroplasts: !synthesize! FAD from imported riboflavin 
Riboflavin kinase, FMN hydrolase, and FAD pyrophosphatase activities: !detected in! Percoll-isolated chloroplasts and mitochondria