['18759246', 'The eyes absent (Eya) genes encode a family of proteins that combine the  functions of transcriptional cofactors, signal transducers and enzymes, namely  protein tyrosine phosphatases. The latter activity resides in the highly  conserved C-terminal Eya domain (ED). Here, we investigated the substrate  specificity of the Arabidopsis thaliana homologue (AtEya) by using  low-molecular-weight compounds and synthetic phosphotyrosine (pY)-containing  peptides that correspond either to phosphorylation sites in proteins or to  peptides that were selected through the screening of a combinatorial peptide  library. AtEya displayed modest peptide substrate specificity and was sensitive  to charges adjacent to pY. In general, the presence of acidic residues on the  N-terminal side of the phosphorylation site was critical for catalysis, whereas  basic amino acids seemed to be preferred with respect to high-affinity binding.  We also detected significant acyl phosphatase activity of AtEya; this suggests  that Eya proteins might have further substrates in vivo. In addition, we analysed  the phosphatase activity of a number of variants of the mouse Eya1 protein that  harbours single point mutations that were associated with branchio-oto-renal  syndrome (BOR), branchio-oto syndrome (BO) and ocular defects, respectively, in  humans. While BOR mutations led to a significantly reduced phosphatase activity,  BO mutants as well as those that are associated with ocular defects only  displayed activity that was similar to wild-type levels.', '2008 Sep 22', 'Chembiochem', '10.1002/cbic.200800224', 'Imhof']

Eyes absent (Eya) genes: !encode! proteins 
Proteins: !combine functions of! transcriptional cofactors, signal transducers and enzymes 
AtEya: !displays! peptide substrate specificity 
AtEya: !detects! acyl phosphatase activity 
Mouse Eya1 protein: !harbours! single point mutations 
BOR mutations: !reduce! phosphatase activity 
BO mutants: !display! activity similar to wild-type levels