['18753283', 'Cysteine (Cys) synthesis in plants is carried out by two sequential reactions  catalyzed by the rate-limiting enzyme serine acetyltransferase (SAT) and excess  amounts of O-acetylserine(thiol)lyase. Why these reactions occur in plastids,  mitochondria, and cytosol of plants remained unclear. Expression of artificial  microRNA (amiRNA) against Sat3 encoding mitochondrial SAT3 in transgenic  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants demonstrates that mitochondria are the  most important compartment for the synthesis of O-acetylserine (OAS), the  precursor of Cys. Reduction of RNA levels, protein contents, SAT enzymatic  activity, and phenotype strongly correlate in independent amiSAT3 lines and cause  significantly retarded growth. The expression of the other four Sat genes in the  Arabidopsis genome are not affected by amiRNA-SAT3 according to quantitative  real-time polymerase chain reaction and microarray analyses. Application of  radiolabeled serine to leaf pieces revealed severely reduced incorporation rates  into Cys and even more so into glutathione. Accordingly, steady-state levels of  OAS are 4-fold reduced. Decrease of sulfate reduction-related genes is  accompanied by an accumulation of sulfate in amiSAT3 lines. These results  unequivocally show that mitochondria provide the bulk of OAS in the plant cell  and are the likely site of flux regulation. Together with recent data, the  cytosol appears to be a major site of Cys synthesis, while plastids contribute  reduced sulfur as sulfide. Thus, Cys synthesis in plants is significantly  different from that in nonphotosynthetic eukaryotes at the cellular level.', '2008 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.125237', 'Hell']

SAT3: !catalyzes! Cys synthesis 
amiRNA-SAT3: !reduces! RNA levels 
amiRNA-SAT3: !decreases! protein contents 
amiRNA-SAT3: !inhibits! SAT enzymatic activity 
amiRNA-SAT3: !causes! retarded growth 
amiRNA-SAT3: !reduces! incorporation rates of serine 
amiRNA-SAT3: !decreases! OAS levels 
amiRNA-SAT3: !accumulates! sulfate 
mitochondria: !provide! bulk of OAS 
cytosol: !appears to be! major site of Cys synthesis 
plastids: !contribute! reduced sulfur