The Arabidopsis PAP1 gene (At1g56650) encodes the MYB75 transcription factor, which has been demonstrated to essentially regulate the biosynthesis of anthocyanins. Our previous study showed that ectopic expression of the PAP1 gene led to high pigmentation of anthocyanins in all tissues of transgenic tobacco plants. In order to understand the mechanisms of how PAP1 regulates anthocyanin biosynthesis and what can regulate the function of PAP1, we have established PAP1 transgenic tobacco callus cultures. Phenotypically different calli including anthocyanin-producing red and anthocyanin-free white calli lines were differentially induced from the same genotype of PAP1 transgenic plants. RT-PCR analysis showed that the expression of the PAP1 transgene was similar in the two types of calli, indicating that the transgenic red and white calli had differential responses to the regulation of PAP1. The growth of transgenic red calli followed a "sigmoid-like" curve in a 25-day callus culture period, during which the time course obviously impacted the profiles and the average levels of anthocyanins even though the expression of the PAP1 transgene was constitutive. A HPLC-UV-ESI-mass spectrum-based profiling characterized nine anthocyanin molecules (e.g., 595, 579 and 609 m/z) in the transgenic red calli over the course of the culture period. Cyanidin, pelargonidin, and peonidin were the major anthocyanidins identified by HPLC-mass spectrum analysis. We have demonstrated that dark, nitrogen nutrients, and auxin apparently affect the anthocyanin profiles in PAP1 transgenic callus cultures; and suggest that these cell cultures are an appropriate system to study the regulatory function of PAP1 on the anthocyanin biosynthesis at post-transcriptional level in vivo.

PAP1: !regulates! anthocyanin biosynthesis 
PAP1: !induces! red and white calli lines 
PAP1: !constitutively expressed! in both calli lines 
dark: !affects! anthocyanin profiles 
nitrogen nutrients: !affects! anthocyanin profiles 
auxin: !affects! anthocyanin profiles