['18779216', 'Exine, the outermost architecture of pollen walls, protects male gametes from the  environment by virtue of its chemical and physical stability. Although much  effort has been devoted to revealing the mechanism of exine construction, still  little is known about it. To identify the genes involved in exine formation, we  screened for Arabidopsis mutants with pollen grains exhibiting abnormal exine  structure using scanning electron microscopy. We isolated 12 mutants, kaonashi1  (kns1) to kns12, and classified them into four types. The type 1 mutants showed a  collapsed exine structure resembling a mutant of the callose synthase gene,  suggesting that the type 1 genes are involved in callose wall synthesis. The type  2 mutant showed remarkably thin exine structure, presumably due to defective  primexine thickening. The type 3 mutants showed defective tectum formation, and  thus type 3 genes are required for primordial tectum formation or biosynthesis  and deposition of sporopollenin. The type 4 mutants showed densely distributed  baculae, suggesting type 4 genes determine the position of probacula formation.  All identified kns mutants were recessive, suggesting that these KNS genes are  expressed in sporophytic cells. Unlike previously known exine-defective mutants,  most of the kns mutants showed normal fertility. Map-based cloning revealed that  KNS2, one of the type 4 genes, encodes sucrose phosphate synthase. This enzyme  might be required for synthesis of primexine or callose wall, which are both  important for probacula positioning. Analysis of kns mutants will provide new  knowledge to help understand the mechanism of biosynthesis of exine components  and the construction of exine architecture.', '2008 Oct', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcn131', 'Ishiguro']

Exine: !protects! male gametes 
mutants: !exhibit! abnormal exine structure 
type 1 mutants: !involve! callose wall synthesis 
type 2 mutants: !show! thin exine structure 
type 3 mutants: !require! primordial tectum formation 
type 4 mutants: !determine! probacula formation 
KNS genes: !expressed in! sporophytic cells 
KNS2: !encodes! sucrose phosphate synthase 
KNS mutants: !provide! new knowledge