Grape is considered as a non-climacteric fruit, the maturation of which is independent of ethylene. However, previous work had shown that ethylene is capable of affecting the physiological processes during maturation of grape berries. Experiments were designed to screen the gene pool affected by ethylene at the ripening inception in Cabernet Sauvignon berries. The results showed that only 73 of 14 562 genes of microarray slides were significantly modulated by a 24-h ethylene treatment (4 microl l(-1)), performed 8 weeks after flowering. The study then focused on accumulation of several mRNAs affected by ethylene in relation to the berry size. Indeed, we observed that ethylene application at véraison led to a berry diameter increase. This increase is mainly because of sap intake and cell wall modifications, enabling cell elongation. This was related to changes in the expression pattern of many genes, classified in two groups: (1) 'water exchange' genes: various aquaporins (AQUA) and (2) 'cell wall structure' genes: polygalacturonases, xyloglucan endotransglucosylases (XTH), pectin methyl esterases, cellulose synthases and expansins. The expression patterns were followed either along berry development or in three berry tissues (peel, pulp and seeds). Ethylene stimulates the accumulation of most gene transcripts in 1 h, and in several parts of the berry, this stimulation may last for 24 h in some cases. One XTH and one AQUA seem to be good candidates to explain the ethylene-induced berry expansion. This work brings more clues about the ethylene involvement in the development and ripening of grape berries.

ethylene: !affects! physiological processes
ethylene: !stimulates! gene transcripts
ethylene: !increases! berry diameter
aquaporins: !localizes to! berry tissues
polygalacturonases: !synthesizes! cell wall structure
xyloglucan endotransglucosylases: !enhances! water exchange
pectin methyl esterases: !interacts with! cell wall modifications
cellulose synthases: !represses! sap intake