Plants employ sophisticated mechanisms to recycle intracellular constituents needed for growth, development, and survival under nutrient-limiting conditions. Autophagy is one important route in which cytoplasm and organelles are sequestered in bulk into vesicles and subsequently delivered to the vacuole for breakdown by resident hydrolases. The formation and trafficking of autophagic vesicles are directed in part by associated conjugation cascades that couple the AUTOPHAGY-RELATED8 (ATG8) and ATG12 proteins to their respective targets, phosphatidylethanolamine and the ATG5 protein. To help understand the importance of autophagy to nutrient remobilization in cereals, we describe here the ATG8/12 conjugation cascades in maize (Zea mays) and examine their dynamics during development, leaf senescence, and nitrogen and fixed-carbon starvation. From searches of the maize genomic sequence using Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and rice (Oryza sativa) counterparts as queries, we identified orthologous loci encoding all components necessary for ATG8/12 conjugation, including a five-member gene family expressing ATG8. Alternative splicing was evident for almost all Atg transcripts, which could have important regulatory consequences. In addition to free ATG8, its membrane-associated, lipidated form was detected in many maize tissues, suggesting that its conjugation cascade is active throughout the plant at most, if not all, developmental stages. Levels of Atg transcripts and/or the ATG8-phosphatidylethanolamine adduct increase during leaf senescence and nitrogen and fixed-carbon limitations, indicating that autophagy plays a key role in nutrient remobilization. The description of the maize ATG system now provides a battery of molecular and biochemical tools to study autophagy in this crop under field conditions.

ATG8: !conjugates to! phosphatidylethanolamine 
ATG12: !conjugates to! ATG5 protein 
ATG8: !alternatively spliced! 
ATG8: !lipidated form! detected in maize tissues 
Atg transcripts: !increase during! leaf senescence 
Atg transcripts: !increase during! nitrogen and fixed-carbon limitations