Increasing demands for productivity together with environmental concerns about fertilizer use dictate that the future sustainability of agricultural systems will depend on improving fertilizer use efficiency. Characterization of the biological processes responsible for efficient fertilizer use will provide tools for crop improvement under reduced inputs. Transcriptomic and metabolomic approaches were used to study the impact of nitrogen (N) and sulphur (S) deficiency on N and S remobilization from senescing canopy tissues during grain filling in winter wheat (Triticum aestivum). Canopy tissue N was remobilized effectively to the grain after anthesis. S was less readily remobilized. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) metabolite profiling revealed significant effects of suboptimal N or S supply in leaves but not in developing grain. Analysis of amino acid pools in the grain and leaves revealed a strategy whereby amino acid biosynthesis switches to the production of glutamine during grain filling. Glutamine accumulated in the first 7 d of grain development, prior to conversion to other amino acids and protein in the subsequent 21 d. Transcriptome analysis indicated that a down-regulation of the terminal steps in many amino acid biosynthetic pathways occurs to control pools of amino acids during leaf senescence. Grain N and S contents increased in parallel after anthesis and were not significantly affected by S deficiency, despite a suboptimal N:S ratio at final harvest. N deficiency resulted in much slower accumulation of grain N and S and lower final concentrations, indicating that vegetative tissue N has a greater control of the timing and extent of nutrient remobilization than S.

N: !remobilized to! grain
S: !remobilized to! grain
N: !controls timing and extent of! nutrient remobilization
S: !controls timing and extent of! nutrient remobilization
NMR metabolite profiling: !revealed effects of! suboptimal N or S supply
Amino acid pools: !strategy of! producing glutamine
Transcriptome analysis: !down-regulation of! terminal steps in amino acid biosynthetic pathways