Significant inter- and intra-specific variation for salt tolerance exists within the family Brassicaceae, which may be explored for dissecting genetic determinants of the salinity response in crops belonging to this family. Availability of contrasting cultivars for salinity response in crop species, such as Brassica, is highly advantageous for obvious reasons. Our analysis has indicated usefulness of available local germplasm (diploid and amphidiploid) in this endeavor. Assessments carried out employing suitable morphological, physiological and biochemical parameters in these cultivars reconfirm established fact related to 'in-general' better adaptability of amphidiploid species over diploid ones. In our study, the salinity-tolerant amphidiploid Brassica juncea cv CS52 (AB genome) exhibited sharp contrast in salinity response as compared to the sensitive diploid species Brassica nigra (B genome). The differences included effects of salinity on overall growth, electrolyte leakage, proline accumulation and the K(+)/Na(+) ratio (P0.01). Correlating well with relative stress tolerance of these Brassica cultivars, our studies on relative transcript abundance for salt overly sensitive (SOS) pathway orthologues also exhibited contrasting patterns of transcript accumulation. Transcript accumulation pattern for various SOS members after 24h of salinity stress in various cultivars showed strong positive correlation with these parameters (r0.4). Clearly, there is a need to carry out in-depth analysis to explore the suitability of these contrasting cultivars to search for genetic determinant(s) of salt tolerance among Brassica species. We propose that these contrasting Brassica cultivars can serve as suitable dicot crop models for elucidating stress-relevant genetic determinants in genome-level analysis.

Brassica juncea cv CS52: !exhibits better adaptability! than diploid Brassica nigra
SOS pathway orthologues: !correlate with! relative stress tolerance of Brassica cultivars
Contrasting Brassica cultivars: !can serve as! suitable dicot crop models