The annotation of novel plant genes is frequently based on sequence and structural similarity to known protein motifs. Understanding the biological function of these genes is dependent on identifying conditions under which they are activated, however. The resurrection plant, Xerophyta humilis is a good model system for identifying and characterizing genes which are important for desiccation tolerance. Desiccation induced-1 (dsi-1(VOC)), a previously uncharacterized plant gene, is up-regulated during desiccation in leaves, roots, and seeds in X. humilis. The X. humilis desiccation induced-1 gene, Xhdsi-1(VOC), shares structural homology with the vicinal oxygen chelate (VOC) metalloenzyme superfamily. Proteins in this superfamily share little sequence similarity, but are characterized by a common betaalphabetabetabeta structural fold. A number of plant orthologues of XhDsi-1(VOC) have been identified, including Arabidopsis thaliana At1g07645, which is currently annotated as a glyoxalase I-like gene, and many ESTs derived from seed cDNA libraries. Xhdsi-1(VOC) and its orthologues do not, however, contain the glutathione and zinc binding sites conserved in glyoxalase I genes. Furthermore, expression of Xhdsi-1(VOC) in yeast failed to rescue a yeast glyoxalase I mutant. Messenger RNA transcripts for At1g07645 accumulate during seed maturation, but are not induced by water loss, salt or mannitol stress in vegetative tissue in Arabidopsis. It is concluded that dsi-1(VOC) is a seed-specific gene in desiccation-sensitive plants that is activated by water loss in vegetative tissues in the resurrection plant X. humilis and plays an important role in allowing plant tissues to survive loss of 95% of their relative water content.

Xhdsi-1(VOC): !shares structural homology with! VOC metalloenzyme superfamily
Xhdsi-1(VOC): !has orthologues in! Arabidopsis thaliana
At1g07645: !is annotated as! glyoxalase I-like gene
At1g07645: !accumulates during! seed maturation
Xhdsi-1(VOC): !is activated by! water loss in vegetative tissues
Xhdsi-1(VOC): !plays an important role in! allowing plant tissues to survive desiccation