Neutral invertases (NIs, EC 3.2.1.26) cleave sucrose to glucose and fructose. They are encoded by a small gene family of 9 members in the Arabidopsis genome, 8 in rice, 16 in poplar and 9 in Vitis vinifera (L.). The grapevine NIs were identified in the 8.4X genome assembly of the quasi-homozygous line PN40024. In addition, alleles of three NIs were sequenced in the heterozygous cultivar 'Cabernet Sauvignon'. Analyses of sequence variation between alleles, homoeologous and paralogous copies in grapevine and their orthologues in Arabidopsis, poplar and rice are provided. In grapevine, NIs were classified into four alpha NIs and five beta NIs and subsequently grouped into hierarchical clades using a combination of evidence including amino acid identity, exon/intron structure, rate of synonymous substitutions (K (s)) and chromosomal distribution. Estimation of K (s) proved the ancient origin of all NIs and the lack of expansion by gene duplication past the event of polyploidisation. We then focused on transcription analysis of five NIs for which evidence of expression was available from expressed sequence tag databases. Among these, four NIs consisted of pairs of homoeologous copies, each pair lying on a pair of chromosomes duplicated by polyploidy. Unequal expression of homoeologous genes was observed by quantitative RT-PCR in leaf, flower, seed and root tissues. Since NIs might play significant roles in fruit and wine quality, NIs expression was monitored in flesh and skin of 'Merlot' berries and shown in parallel with the suite of changes that accompany fruit ripening, including glucose and fructose accumulation.

Neutral invertases: !encode! small gene family 
Neutral invertases: !classified into! four alpha NIs and five beta NIs 
Neutral invertases: !grouped into! hierarchical clades 
Neutral invertases: !estimated! ancient origin 
Neutral invertases: !unequal expression of! homoeologous genes 
Neutral invertases: !monitored in! flesh and skin of 'Merlot' berries 
Neutral invertases: !accompany! suite of changes that accompany fruit ripening