['18805951', 'Leaf hairs (trichomes) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) have been  extensively used as a model to address general questions in cell and  developmental biology. Here, we lay the foundation for a systems-level  understanding of the biology of this model cell type by performing genome-wide  gene expression analyses. We have identified 3,231 genes that are up-regulated in  mature trichomes relative to leaves without trichomes, and we compared wild-type  trichomes with two mutants, glabra3 and triptychon, that affect trichome  morphology and physiology in contrasting ways. We found that cell wall-related  transcripts were particularly overrepresented in trichomes, consistent with their  highly elaborated structure. In addition, trichome expression maps revealed high  activities of anthocyanin, flavonoid, and glucosinolate pathways, indicative of  the roles of trichomes in the biosynthesis of secondary compounds and defense.  Interspecies comparisons revealed that Arabidopsis trichomes share many expressed  genes with cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) fibers, making them an attractive model to  study industrially important fibers. In addition to identifying physiological  processes involved in the development of a specific cell type, we also  demonstrated the utility of transcript profiling for identifying and analyzing  regulatory gene function. One of the genes that are differentially expressed in  fibers is the MYB transcription factor GhMYB25. A combination of transcript  profiling and map-based cloning revealed that the NOECK gene of Arabidopsis  encodes AtMYB106, a MIXTA-like transcription factor and homolog of cotton  GhMYB25. However, in contrast to Antirrhinum, in which MIXTA promotes epidermal  cell outgrowth, AtMYB106 appears to function as a repressor of cell outgrowth in  Arabidopsis.', '2008 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.126979', 'Schnittger']

Gene: !affects! Process 
Gene: !synthesizes! Secondary Compounds 
Gene: !localizes to! Trichomes 
Gene: !interacts with! Mutants 
Gene: !enhances! Cell Wall-Related Transcripts 
Gene: !represses! Cell Outgrowth 
Gene: !synthesizes! Flavonoids 
Gene: !synthesizes! Glucosinolates