Chloroplast biogenesis involves careful coordination of both plastid and nuclear gene expression, which is achieved in part by retrograde signaling from the chloroplast to the nucleus. This can be demonstrated by the fact that the herbicide, Norflurazon (NF), which causes bleaching of chloroplasts, prevents the light induction of photosynthesis-related genes in the nucleus. It has been proposed that the tetrapyrrole pathway intermediate Mg-protoporphyrin IX acts as the signaling molecule in this pathway and accumulates in the chloroplasts and cytosol of the cell after NF treatment. Here we present data that demonstrate that this model is too simplistic. We have developed a sensitive liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS) method to measure tetrapyrrole intermediates and have shown that no Mg-protoporphyrin IX, nor indeed any other chlorophyll-biosynthesis intermediate, can be detected in NF-treated plants under conditions in which nuclear gene expression is repressed. Conversely when endogenous Mg-protoporphyrin IX levels are artificially increased by supplementation with the tetrapyrrole precursor, 5-aminolevulinic acid, the expression of nuclear-encoded photosynthetic genes is induced, not repressed. We also demonstrate that NF-treatment leads to a strong down-regulation of tetrapyrrole biosynthesis genes, consistent with the absence of an accumulation of tetrapyrrole intermediates. Finally, there is no correlation between nuclear-gene expression and any of the chlorophyll biosynthetic intermediates over a range of growth conditions and treatments. Instead, it is possible that a perturbation of tetrapyrrole synthesis may lead to localized ROS production or an altered redox state of the plastid, which could mediate retrograde signaling.

Norflurazon: !prevents! Light induction of photosynthesis-related genes
Mg-protoporphyrin IX: !accumulates in! Chloroplasts and cytosol
5-aminolevulinic acid: !induces! Nuclear-encoded photosynthetic genes
NF-treatment: !down-regulates! Tetrapyrrole biosynthesis genes
Tetrapyrrole synthesis: !leads to! Localized ROS production