Ultraviolet (UV) radiation has recently been demonstrated to drive an aerobic production of methane (CH(4)) from plant tissues and pectins, as do agents that generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) in vivo independently of UV. As the major building-blocks of pectin do not absorb solar UV found at the earth's surface (i.e. >280 nm), we explored the hypothesis that UV radiation affects pectin indirectly via generation of ROS which themselves release CH(4) from pectin. Decreasing the UV absorbance of commercial pectin by ethanol washing diminished UV-dependent CH(4) production, and this was restored by the addition of the UV photosensitizer tryptophan. Certain ROS scavengers [mannitol, a hydroxyl radical ((*)OH) scavenger; 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2] octane; and iodide] strongly inhibited UV-induced CH(4) production from dry pectin. Furthermore, pectin solutions emitted CH(4) in darkness upon the addition of (*)OH, but not superoxide or H(2)O(2). Model carbohydrates reacted similarly if they possessed -CH(3) groups [e.g. methyl esters or (more weakly) acetyl esters but not rhamnose]. We conclude that UV evokes CH(4) production from pectic methyl groups by interacting with UV photosensitizers to generate (*)OH. We suggest that diverse processes generating (*)OH could contribute to CH(4) emissions independently of UV irradiation, and that environmental stresses and constitutive physiological processes generating ROS require careful evaluation in studies of CH(4) formation from foliage.

UV: !generates! ROS 
ROS: !releases! CH(4) 
Ethanol washing: !decreases! UV-dependent CH(4) production 
Tryptophan: !restores! UV-dependent CH(4) production 
Mannitol: !inhibits! UV-induced CH(4) production 
1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2] octane: !inhibits! UV-induced CH(4) production 
Iodide: !inhibits! UV-induced CH(4) production 
(*OH): !emits! CH(4) 
Methyl esters: !react! similarly to pectin 
Acetyl esters: !react! weakly to pectin 
Rhamnose: !does not react! to pectin 
UV: !interacts with! UV photosensitizers 
UV photosensitizers: !generate! (*OH) 
(*OH): !evokes! CH(4) production from pectic methyl groups