['18811962', "BACKGROUND: The biochemical mechanisms that determine the molecular architecture  of amylopectin are central in plant biology because they allow long-term storage  of reduced carbon. Amylopectin structure imparts the ability to form  semi-crystalline starch granules, which in turn provides its glucose storage  function. The enzymatic steps of amylopectin biosynthesis resemble those of the  soluble polymer glycogen, however, the reasons for amylopectin's architectural  distinctions are not clearly understood. The multiplicity of starch biosynthetic  enzymes conserved in plants likely is involved. For example, amylopectin chain  elongation in plants involves five conserved classes of starch synthase (SS),  whereas glycogen biosynthesis typically requires only one class of glycogen  synthase. RESULTS: Null mutations were characterized in AtSS2, which codes for  SSII, and mutant lines were compared to lines lacking SSIII and to an Atss2,  Atss3 double mutant. Loss of SSII did not affect growth rate or starch quantity,  but caused increased amylose/amylopectin ratio, increased total amylose, and  deficiency in amylopectin chains with degree of polymerization (DP) 12 to DP28.  In contrast, loss of both SSII and SSIII caused slower plant growth and  dramatically reduced starch content. Extreme deficiency in DP12 to DP28 chains  occurred in the double mutant, far more severe than the summed changes in SSII-  or SSIII-deficient plants lacking only one of the two enzymes. CONCLUSION: SSII  and SSIII have partially redundant functions in determination of amylopectin  structure, and these roles cannot be substituted by any other conserved SS,  specifically SSI, GBSSI, or SSIV. Even though SSIII is not required for the  normal abundance of glucan chains of DP12 to DP18, the enzyme clearly is capable  of functioning in production such chains. The role of SSIII in producing these  chains cannot be detected simply by analysis of an individual mutation.  Competition between different SSs for binding to substrate could in part explain  the specific distribution of glucan chains within amylopectin.", '2008 Sep 23', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-8-96', 'Myers']

SSII: !affects! amylose/amylopectin ratio 
SSII: !affects! total amylose 
SSII: !affects! degree of polymerization (DP) 12 to DP28 
SSIII: !affects! growth rate 
SSIII: !affects! starch content 
SSIII: !affects! degree of polymerization (DP) 12 to DP28 
SSII: !competes with! SSIII 
SSI: !cannot substitute for! SSII and SSIII