['18820081', 'Phosphorylating glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase (GAPC-1) is a highly conserved  cytosolic enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of glyceraldehyde-3-P to  1,3-bis-phosphoglycerate; besides its participation in glycolysis, it is thought  to be involved in additional cellular functions. To reach an integrative view on  the many roles played by this enzyme, we characterized a homozygous gapc-1 null  mutant and an as-GAPC1 line of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Both mutant  plant lines show a delay in growth, morphological alterations in siliques, and  low seed number. Embryo development was altered, showing abortions and empty  embryonic sacs in basal and apical siliques, respectively. The gapc-1 line shows  a decrease in ATP levels and reduced respiratory rate. Furthermore, both lines  exhibit a decrease in the expression and activity of aconitase and succinate  dehydrogenase and reduced levels of pyruvate and several Krebs cycle  intermediates, as well as increased reactive oxygen species levels. Transcriptome  analysis of the gapc-1 mutants unveils a differential accumulation of transcripts  encoding for enzymes involved in carbon partitioning. According to these studies,  some enzymes involved in carbon flux decreased (phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase,  NAD-malic enzyme, glucose-6-P dehydrogenase) or increased (NAD-malate  dehydrogenase) their activities compared to the wild-type line. Taken together,  our data indicate that a deficiency in the cytosolic GAPC activity results in  modifications of carbon flux and mitochondrial dysfunction, leading to an  alteration of plant and embryo development with decreased number of seeds,  indicating that GAPC-1 is essential for normal fertility in Arabidopsis plants.', '2008 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.128769', 'Gomez-Casati']

GAPC-1: !catalyzes! conversion of glyceraldehyde-3-P 
GAPC-1: !affects! growth 
GAPC-1: !alters! embryo development 
GAPC-1: !decreases! ATP levels 
GAPC-1: !reduces! respiratory rate 
GAPC-1: !modifies! carbon flux 
GAPC-1: !causes! mitochondrial dysfunction 
GAPC-1: !leads to! alteration of plant and embryo development 
GAPC-1: !decreases! number of seeds