Young poplar trees (Populus tremula Michx. x Populus alba L. clone INRA 717-1B4) were subjected to 120 ppb of ozone for 35 days in phytotronic chambers. Treated trees displayed precocious leaf senescence and visible symptoms of injury (dark brown/black upper surface stippling) exclusively observed on fully expanded leaves. In these leaves, ozone reduced parameters related to photochemistry (Chl content and maximum rate of photosynthetic electron transport) and photosynthetic CO(2) fixation [net CO(2) assimilation, Rubisco (ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase oxygenase) activity and maximum velocity of Rubisco for carboxylation]. In fully expanded leaves, the rate of photorespiration as estimated from Chl fluorescence was markedly impaired by the ozone treatment together with the activity of photorespiratory enzymes (Rubisco and glycolate oxidase). Immunoblot analysis revealed a decrease in the content of serine hydroxymethyltransferase in treated mature leaves, while the content of the H subunit of the glycine decarboxylase complex was not modified. Leaves in the early period of expansion were exempt from visible symptoms of injury and remained unaffected as regards all measured parameters. Leaves reaching full expansion under ozone exposure showed potential responses of protection (stimulation of mitochondrial respiration and transitory stomatal closure). Our data underline the major role of leaf phenology in ozone sensitivity of photosynthetic processes and reveal a marked ozone-induced inhibition of photorespiration.

Ozone: !reduces! Chl content 
Ozone: !reduces! Photosynthetic electron transport 
Ozone: !reduces! Net CO2 assimilation 
Ozone: !reduces! Rubisco activity 
Ozone: !reduces! Maximum velocity of Rubisco for carboxylation 
Ozone: !impairs! Rate of photorespiration 
Ozone: !decreases! Content of serine hydroxymethyltransferase 
Ozone: !does not modify! Content of H subunit of glycine decarboxylase complex 
Ozone: !stimulates! Mitochondrial respiration 
Ozone: !induces! Transitory stomatal closure