Cytokinins are distributed through the vascular system and trigger responses of target cells via receptor-mediated signal transduction. Perception and transduction of the signal can occur at the plasma membrane or in the cytosol. The signal is terminated by the action of extra- or intracellular cytokinin oxidases. While radiotracer studies have been used to study transport and metabolism of cytokinins in plants, little is known about the kinetic properties of cytokinin transport. To provide a reference dataset, radiolabeled trans-zeatin (tZ) was used for uptake studies in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) cell culture. Uptake kinetics of tZ are multiphasic, indicating the presence of both low- and high-affinity transport systems. The protonophore carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone is an effective inhibitor of cytokinin uptake, consistent with H(+)-mediated uptake. Other physiological cytokinins, such as isopentenyl adenine and benzylaminopurine, are effective competitors of tZ uptake, whereas allantoin has no inhibitory effect. Adenine competes for zeatin uptake, indicating that the degradation product of cytokinin oxidases is transported by the same systems. Comparison of adenine and tZ uptake in Arabidopsis seedlings reveals similar uptake kinetics. Kinetic properties, as well as substrate specificity determined in cell cultures, are compatible with the hypothesis that members of the plant-specific purine permease family play a role in adenine transport for scavenging extracellular adenine and may, in addition, be involved in low-affinity cytokinin uptake.

Cytokinins: !trigger responses! target cells 
Receptor-mediated signal transduction: !occurs at! plasma membrane/cytosol 
Extra-/intracellular cytokinin oxidases: !terminate! signal 
Radiotracer studies: !used to study! transport/metabolism of cytokinins 
Trans-zeatin (tZ): !used for uptake studies! Arabidopsis cell culture 
tZ: !indicates presence of! low-/high-affinity transport systems 
Protonophore carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone: !inhibits! cytokinin uptake 
Isopentenyl adenine/benzylaminopurine: !compete with! tZ uptake 
Allantoin: !has no effect on! tZ uptake 
Adenine: !competes with! zeatin uptake 
Arabidopsis seedlings: !reveal similar! uptake kinetics 
Purine permease family: !play role in! adenine transport/low-affinity cytokinin uptake