The aim of the investigation is to determine the effect of microwave pretreatment of wheat seeds on the resistance of seedlings to osmotic stress. Changes in biophysical, physiological and biochemical characters were measured. The results showed: (1) The magnetic field intensity and seeds temperature increased progressively with microwave pretreatments of 5, 10, 15, 20 s and 25 s compared with controls. Although each microwave pretreatment resulted in an increase in alpha-amylase activity and photon emission intensity, the increase of alpha-amylase activity and photon emission intensity was maximal at a microwave pretreatment of 10 s. (2) Osmotic stress induced by PEG treatment enhanced the concentration of malondialdehyde, while decreasing the activities of nitricoxide synthase, catalase, peroxidase, superoxide dismutase and the concentration of nitric oxide, ascorbic acid, glutathione in the seedlings compared with controls. However, compared to osmotic stress alone, in the seedlings treated with microwave irradiation plus osmotic stress the concentration of malondialdehyde decreased, while the activities of nitricoxide synthase, catalase, peroxidase, superoxide dismutase and the concentration of nitric oxide, ascorbic acid and glutathione increased. These results suggest that a suitable dose of microwave radiation can enhance the capability to eliminate free radicals induced by osmotic stress in wheat seedlings resulting in an increase in resistance to osmotic stress.

Microwave pretreatment: !increases! alpha-amylase activity 
Microwave pretreatment: !increases! photon emission intensity 
PEG treatment: !increases! malondialdehyde concentration 
PEG treatment: !decreases! nitricoxide synthase activity 
PEG treatment: !decreases! catalase activity 
PEG treatment: !decreases! peroxidase activity 
PEG treatment: !decreases! superoxide dismutase activity 
PEG treatment: !decreases! nitric oxide concentration 
PEG treatment: !decreases! ascorbic acid concentration 
PEG treatment: !decreases! glutathione concentration 
Microwave irradiation: !decreases! malondialdehyde concentration 
Microwave irradiation: !increases! nitricoxide synthase activity 
Microwave irradiation: !increases! catalase activity 
Microwave irradiation: !increases! peroxidase activity 
Microwave irradiation: !increases! superoxide dismutase activity 
Microwave irradiation: !