['18923018', 'Despite the fundamental importance and high level of compartmentation of  mitochondrial nucleotide metabolism in plants, our knowledge concerning the  transport of nucleotides across intracellular membranes remains far from  complete. Study of a previously uncharacterized Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) gene (At4g01100) revealed it to be a novel adenine nucleotide  transporter, designated ADNT1, belonging to the mitochondrial carrier family. The  ADNT1 gene shows broad expression at the organ level. Green fluorescent  protein-based cell biological analysis demonstrated targeting of ADNT1 to  mitochondria. While analysis of the expression of beta-glucuronidase fusion  proteins suggested that it was expressed across a broad range of tissue types, it  was most highly expressed in root tips. Direct transport assays with recombinant  and reconstituted ADNT1 were utilized to demonstrate that this protein displays a  relatively narrow substrate specificity largely confined to adenylates and their  closest analogs. ATP uptake was markedly inhibited by the presence of other  adenylates and general inhibitors of mitochondrial transport but not by  bongkrekate or carboxyatractyloside, inhibitors of the previously characterized  ADP/ATP carrier. Furthermore, the kinetics are substantially different from those  of this carrier, with ADNT1 preferring AMP to ADP. Finally, isolation and  characterization of a T-DNA insertional knockout mutant of ADNT1, alongside  complementation and antisense approaches, demonstrated that although deficiency  of this transporter did not seem to greatly alter photosynthetic metabolism, it  did result in reduced root growth and respiration. These findings are discussed  in the context of a potential function for ADNT1 in the provision of the energy  required to support growth in heterotrophic plant tissues.', '2008 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.130310', 'Palmieri']

At4g01100: !encodes! ADNT1 
ADNT1: !localizes to! mitochondria 
ADNT1: !expresses in! root tips 
ADNT1: !transports! adenylates 
ADNT1: !prefers! AMP to ADP 
ADNT1: !inhibits! ATP uptake 
T-DNA insertional knockout mutant of ADNT1: !reduces! root growth and respiration