Acyl sugars containing branched-chain fatty acids (BCFAs) are exuded by glandular trichomes of many species in Solanaceae, having an important defensive role against insects. From isotope-feeding studies, two modes of BCFA elongation have been proposed: (1) fatty acid synthase-mediated two-carbon elongation in the high acyl sugar-producing tomato species Solanum pennellii and Datura metel; and (2) alpha-keto acid elongation-mediated one-carbon increments in several tobacco (Nicotiana) species and a Petunia species. To investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying BCFAs and acyl sugar production in trichomes, we have taken a comparative genomic approach to identify critical enzymatic steps followed by gene silencing and metabolite analysis in S. pennellii and Nicotiana benthamiana. Our study verified the existence of distinct mechanisms of acyl sugar synthesis in Solanaceae. From microarray analyses, genes associated with alpha-keto acid elongation were found to be among the most strongly expressed in N. benthamiana trichomes only, supporting this model in tobacco species. Genes encoding components of the branched-chain keto-acid dehydrogenase complex were expressed at particularly high levels in trichomes of both species, and we show using virus-induced gene silencing that they are required for BCFA production in both cases and for acyl sugar synthesis in N. benthamiana. Functional analysis by down-regulation of specific KAS I genes and cerulenin inhibition indicated the involvement of the fatty acid synthase complex in BCFA production in S. pennellii. In summary, our study highlights both conserved and divergent mechanisms in the production of important defense compounds in Solanaceae and defines potential targets for engineering acyl sugar production in plants for improved pest tolerance.

BCFA: !elongated by! fatty acid synthase-mediated two-carbon elongation
BCFA: !elongated by! alpha-keto acid elongation-mediated one-carbon increments
genes: !associated with! alpha-keto acid elongation 
genes: !expressed in! Nicotiana benthamiana trichomes
genes: !expressed in! Solanum pennellii trichomes
genes: !encoding components of! branched-chain keto-acid dehydrogenase complex
genes: !required for! BCFA production
genes: !required for! acyl sugar synthesis
KAS I genes: !involved in! BCFA production
cerulenin: !inhibited by! KAS I genes