['18952782', "This article presents a detailed model for the regulation of lateral root  formation in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings grown in culture. We demonstrate that  direct contact between the aerial tissues and sucrose in the growth media is  necessary and sufficient to promote emergence of lateral root primordia from the  parent root. Mild osmotic stress is perceived by the root, which then sends an  abscisic acid-dependent signal that causes a decrease in the permeability of  aerial tissues; this reduces uptake of sucrose from the culture media, which  leads to a repression of lateral root formation. Osmotic repression of lateral  root formation in culture can be overcome by mutations that cause the cuticle of  a plant's aerial tissues to become more permeable. Indeed, we report here that  the previously described lateral root development2 mutant overcomes osmotic  repression of lateral root formation because of a point mutation in Long Chain  Acyl-CoA Synthetase2, a gene essential for cutin biosynthesis. Together, our  findings (1) impact the interpretation of experiments that use Arabidopsis grown  in culture to study root system architecture; (2) identify sucrose as an  unexpected regulator of lateral root formation; (3) demonstrate mechanisms by  which roots communicate information to aerial tissues and receive information in  turn; and (4) provide insights into the regulatory pathways that allow plants to  be developmentally plastic while preserving the essential balance between  aboveground and belowground organs.", '2008 Oct', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.107.055475', 'Malamy']

Osmotic stress: !perceived by! root 
root: !sends signal! abscisic acid-dependent signal 
abscisic acid-dependent signal: !causes! decrease in permeability of aerial tissues 
aerial tissues: !reduces uptake of! sucrose 
sucrose: !represses! lateral root formation 
mutations: !cause! cuticle of aerial tissues to become more permeable 
Long Chain Acyl-CoA Synthetase2: !essential for! cutin biosynthesis