To regulate levels of holophytochrome in a spatial-specific manner and investigate the major sites of action of phytochromes during seedling development, we constructed transgenic Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plant lines expressing plastid-targeted mammalian biliverdin IXalpha reductase (pBVR) under regulatory control of CAB3 and MERI5 promoters. Comparative photobiological and phenotypic analyses indicated that spatial-specific expression of pBVR led to the disruption of distinct subsets of phytochrome-regulated responses for different promoters. pBVR expression in photosynthetic tissues (CAB3::pBVR lines) had intermediate effects on chlorophyll accumulation, carotenoid production, anthocyanin synthesis, and leaf development responses in white-light conditions. CAB3::pBVR expression, however, resulted in distinctive phenotypes in far-red (FR) conditions. A number of FR high irradiance responses were disrupted in CAB::pBVR lines, including FR-dependent inhibition of hypocotyl elongation and stimulation of anthocyanin accumulation. By contrast, preferential expression of pBVR in the shoot apical meristem in MERI5::pBVR lines resulted in a phytochrome-deficient, leaf development phenotype under short-day growth conditions. These results implicate leaf-localized phytochrome A as having a unique role in regulating FR-mediated hypocotyl elongation and meristem- and/or leaf primordia-localized phytochromes as having a novel role in phytochrome-dependent responses. Taken together, these studies demonstrate the efficacy of selectively inactivating distinct phytochrome-mediated responses by regulated expression of BVR in transgenic plants, a novel means to investigate the sites of phytochrome photoperception and to regulate specifically light-mediated plant growth and development.

CAB3::pBVR: !disrupts! FR-dependent responses 
MERI5::pBVR: !disrupts! leaf development phenotype 
pBVR: !inactivates! phytochrome-mediated responses 
phytochrome A: !regulates! FR-mediated hypocotyl elongation 
meristem/leaf primordia-localized phytochromes: !has novel role in! phytochrome-dependent responses