Isoprene is the most abundant volatile compound emitted by vegetation. It influences air chemistry and is part of plant defense against abiotic stresses. However, whether isoprene influences biotic interactions between plants and other organisms has not been investigated to date. Here we show a new effect of isoprene, namely its influence on interactions between plants and insects. Herbivory induces the release of plant volatiles that attract the herbivore's enemies, such as parasitic wasps, as a kind of bodyguard. We used transgenic isoprene-emitting Arabidopsis plants in behavioral, chemical, and electrophysiological studies to investigate the effects of isoprene on ecological interactions in 2 tritrophic systems. We demonstrate that isoprene is perceived by the chemoreceptors of the parasitic wasp Diadegma semiclausum and interferes with the attraction of this parasitic wasp to volatiles from herbivore-infested plants. We verified this repellent effect on D. semiclausum female wasps by adding external isoprene to the volatile blend of wild-type plants. In contrast, the antennae of the parasitic wasp Cotesia rubecula do not perceive isoprene and the behavior of this wasp was not altered by isoprene emission. In addition, the performance of the 2 examined lepidopteran herbivores (Pieris rapae and Plutella xylostella) was not affected by isoprene emission. Therefore, attraction of parasitic wasps to host-infested herbaceous plants in the neighborhood of high isoprene emitters, such as poplar or willow, may be hampered by the isoprene emission that repels plant bodyguards.

Isoprene: !affects! Interactions between plants and insects
Herbivory: !induces! Release of plant volatiles
Diadegma semiclausum: !perceives! Isoprene
Isoprene: !interferes with! Attraction of D. semiclausum to volatiles
Cotesia rubecula: !does not perceive! Isoprene
Isoprene: !repells! Plant bodyguards
Pieris rapae: !not affected by! Isoprene emission
Plutella xylostella: !not affected by! Isoprene emission