We report physiological and anatomical characteristics of water transport across roots grown in soil of two cultivars of grapevine (Vitis vinifera) differing in response to water stress (Grenache, isohydric; Chardonnay, anisohydric). Both cultivars have similar root hydraulic conductances (Lo; normalized to root dry weight) that change diurnally. There is a positive correlation between Lo and transpiration. Under water stress, both cultivars have reduced minimum daily Lo (predawn) attributed to the development of apoplastic barriers. Water-stressed and well-watered Chardonnay had the same diurnal change in amplitude of Lo, while water-stressed Grenache showed a reduction in daily amplitude compared with well-watered plants. Hydraulic conductivity of root cortex cells (Lpcell) doubles in Chardonnay but remains unchanged in Grenache. Of the two most highly expressed plasma membrane intrinsic protein (PIP) aquaporins in roots (VvPIP1;1 and VvPIP2;2), only VvPIP2;2 functions as a water channel in Xenopus laevis oocytes. VvPIP1;1 interacts with VvPIP2;2 to induce 3-fold higher water permeability. These two aquaporins are colocated in the root from in situ hybridization and immunolocalization of VvPIP1 and VvPIP2 subfamily members. They occur in root tip, exodermis, root cortex (detected up to 30 mm), and stele. VvPIP2;2 mRNA does not change diurnally or with water stress, in contrast to VvPIP1;1, in which expression reflects the differences in Lo and Lpcell between cultivars in their responses to water stress and rewatering. VvPIP1;1 may regulate water transport across roots such that transpirational demand is matched by root water transport capacity. This occurs on a diurnal basis and in response to water stress that corresponds to the difference in drought tolerance between the cultivars.

VvPIP1;1: !interacts with! VvPIP2;2
VvPIP2;2: !functions as! water channel
VvPIP1;1: !regulates! root water transport
Lo: !correlates with! transpiration
VvPIP1;1: !expresses differently! between cultivars
VvPIP2;2: !localizes to! root tip, exodermis, root cortex, stele