The last steps of chlorophyll (Chl) biosynthesis were studied at different light intensities and temperatures in dark-germinated ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba L.) seedlings. Pigment contents and 77 K fluorescence emission spectra were measured and the plastid ultrastructure was analysed. All dark-grown organs contained protochlorophyllide (Pchlide) forms with similar spectral properties to those of dark-grown angiosperm seedlings, but the ratios of these forms to each other were different. The short-wavelength, monomeric Pchlide forms were always dominating. Etioplasts with small prolamellar bodies (PLBs) and few prothylakoids (PTs) differentiated in the dark-grown stems. Upon illumination with high light intensities (800 micromol m(-2) s(-1) photon flux density, PFD), photo-oxidation and bleaching occurred in the stems and the presence of (1)O(2) was detected. When Chl accumulated in plants illuminated with 15 micromol m(-2) s(-1) PFD it was significantly slower at 10 degrees C than at 20 degrees C. At room temperature, the transformation of etioplasts into young chloroplasts was observed at low light, while it was delayed at 10 degrees C. Grana did not appear in the plastids even after 48 h of greening at 20 degrees C. Reaccumulation of Pchlide forms and re-formation of PLBs occurred when etiolated samples were illuminated with 200 micromol m(-2) s(-1) PFD at room temperature for 24 h and were then re-etiolated for 5 days. The Pchlide forms appeared during re-etiolation had similar spectral properties to those of etiolated seedlings. These results show that ginkgo seedlings are very sensitive to temperature and light conditions during their greening, a fact that should be considered for ginkgo cultivation.

Pchlide: !dominates! dark-grown organs 
light intensity: !affects! Chl accumulation 
temperature: !affects! Chl accumulation 
high light intensity: !causes! photo-oxidation 
low light intensity: !causes! transformation of etioplasts 
grana: !does not appear! in plastids 
re-etiolation: !causes! reaccumulation of Pchlide forms