['19000164', 'Plant growth and development is dependent on the specification and maintenance of  pools of stem cells found in the meristems. Mutations in the Arabidopsis  MERISTEM-DEFECTIVE (MDF) gene lead to a loss of stem cell and meristematic  activity in the root and vegetative shoot. MDF encodes a putative RS domain  protein with a predicted role in transcription or RNA processing control. mdf  mutants exhibit decreased levels of PINFORMED2 (PIN2) and PIN4 mRNAs, which is  associated with a reduction in PIN:GFP levels, and with a defective auxin maximum  in the basal region of the developing mdf embryo and seedling root meristem.  Seedling roots also exhibit reduced PLETHORA (PLT), SCARECROW and SHORTROOT gene  expression, a loss of stem cell activity, terminal differentiation of the root  meristem and defective cell patterning. MDF expression is not defective in the  bodenlos, pin1 or eir1/pin2 auxin mutants, and is not modulated by exogenous  auxin. plt1 plt2 double mutants have unaffected levels of MDF RNA, indicating  that MDF acts upstream of PIN and PLT gene expression. Differentiation of the  shoot stem cell pool also occurs in mdf mutants, associated with a reduced  WUSCHEL (WUS) expression domain and expanded CLAVATA3 (CLV3) domain.  Overexpression of MDF leads to the activation of markers of embryonic identity  and ectopic meristem activity in vegetative tissues. These results demonstrate a  requirement for the MDF-dependent pathway in regulating PIN/PLT- and  WUS/CLV-mediated meristem activity.', '2009 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03738.x', 'Lindsey']

MDF: !affects! PIN2 and PIN4 mRNA levels 
MDF: !regulates! transcription or RNA processing control 
MDF: !modulates! PIN:GFP levels 
MDF: !controls! auxin maximum in developing embryo and seedling root meristem 
MDF: !influences! PLT, SCARECROW and SHORTROOT gene expression 
MDF: !acts upstream of! PIN and PLT gene expression 
MDF: !regulates! WUS expression domain 
MDF: !expands! CLV3 domain 
MDF: !activates! markers of embryonic identity