Ca2+-calmodulin (Ca2+-CaM) is a critical molecule that mediates cellular functions by interacting with various metabolic and signaling pathways. However, the protein expression patterns and accompanying serial cytological responses in Ca2+-CaM signaling deficiency remain enigmatic. Here, we provide a global analysis of the cytological responses and significant alterations in protein expression profiles after trifluoperazine treatment in Picea meyeri, which abrogates Ca2+-CaM signaling. Ninety-three differentially displayed proteins were identified by comparative proteomics at different development stages and were assigned to different functional categories closely related to tip growth machinery. The inhibition of Ca2+-CaM signaling rapidly induced an increase in extracellular Ca2+ influx, resulting in dramatically increased cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations and ultrastructural abnormalities in organelles as the primary responses. Secondary and tertiary alterations included actin filament depolymerization, disrupted patterns of endocytosis and exocytosis, and cell wall remodeling, ultimately resulting in perturbed pollen tube extension. In parallel with these cytological events, time-course experiments revealed that most differentially expressed proteins showed time-dependent quantitative changes (i.e. some signaling proteins and proteins involved in organelle functions and energy production changed first, followed by alterations in proteins related to cytoskeletal organization, secretory pathways, and polysaccharide synthesis). Taken together, Ca2+-CaM dysfunction induced serial cytological responses and temporal changes in protein expression profiles, indicating the pivotal role of Ca2+-CaM in the regulation of tip growth machinery.

Ca2+-CaM: !mediates! cellular functions 
Ca2+-CaM: !inhibits! extracellular Ca2+ influx 
Ca2+-CaM: !induces! cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations 
Ca2+-CaM: !disrupts! organelles 
Ca2+-CaM: !alters! actin filaments 
Ca2+-CaM: !perturbs! pollen tube extension 
Ca2+-CaM: !regulates! tip growth machinery