['19054356', 'In Arabidopsis, bric-a-brac, tramtrack and broad (BTB) domain scaffold proteins  form a family of 80 proteins that have involvement in various signaling pathways.  The five members of the subfamily of BTB AND TAZ DOMAIN proteins (BT1-BT5) have a  typical domain structure that is only observed in land plants. Here, we present a  functional analysis of the BT family, of which at least four members are encoded  by auxin-responsive genes. BT1 is a short-lived protein that is  characteristically targeted for degradation by the 26S proteasome. Expression  pattern, gene structure and sequence analyses indicate that BT1 and BT2 are  closely related. They both localize to the nucleus and the cytosol, whereas the  remaining BT proteins were determined as cytosolic proteins. Detailed molecular  and phenotypic analysis of plants segregating for null mutations in the BT family  revealed substantial redundancy among the BT members, and highlighted that BT  proteins perform crucial roles in both male and female gametophyte development.  BT2 seems to be the predominant gene in this process, in which it is functionally  replaced by BT3 and BT1 through reciprocal transcription regulation.  Compensational expression alters the steady-state mRNA levels among the remaining  BT family members when other BT members are lost, and this contributes towards  functional redundancy. Our data provide a surprising example of functional  redundancy among genes required during gametophyte development, something that  could not be detected in the current screens for gametophyte mutants.', '2009 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03764.x', 'Offringa']

BT1: !localizes to! nucleus and cytosol
BT2: !localizes to! nucleus and cytosol
BT1: !targeted for degradation by! 26S proteasome
BT1: !closely related to! BT2
BT2: !predominant gene in! gametophyte development
BT3: !functionally replaced by! BT1 and BT2
BT family: !performs crucial roles in! male and female gametophyte development
BT family: !exhibits functional redundancy! when other members are lost