Physiological roles of the two distinct chloroplast-targeted ferredoxin-NADP(+) oxidoreductase (FNR) isoforms in Arabidopsis thaliana were studied using T-DNA insertion line fnr1 and RNAi line fnr2. In fnr2 FNR1 was present both as a thylakoid membrane-bound form and as a soluble protein, whereas in fnr1 the FNR2 protein existed solely in soluble form in the stroma. The fnr2 plants resembled fnr1 in having downregulated photosynthetic properties, expressed as low chlorophyll content, low accumulation of photosynthetic thylakoid proteins and reduced carbon fixation rate when compared with wild type (WT). Under standard growth conditions the level of F(0)'rise' and the amplitude of the thermoluminescence afterglow (AG) band, shown to correlate with cyclic electron transfer (CET), were reduced in both fnr mutants. In contrast, when plants were grown under low temperatures, both fnr mutants showed an enhanced rate of CET when compared with the WT. These data exclude the possibility that distinct FNR isoforms feed electrons to specific CET pathways. Nevertheless, the fnr2 mutants had a distinct phenotype upon growth at low temperature. The fnr2 plants grown at low temperature were more tolerant against methyl viologen (MV)-induced cell death than fnr1 and WT. The unique tolerance of fnr2 plants grown at low temperature to oxidative stress correlated with an increased level of reduced ascorbate and reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging enzymes, as well as with a scarcity in the accumulation of thylakoid membrane protein complexes, as compared with fnr1 and WT. These results emphasize a critical role for FNR2 in the redistribution of electrons to various reducing pathways, upon conditions that modify the photosynthetic capacity of the plant.

FNR1: !localizes to! thylakoid membrane 
FNR2: !localizes to! stroma 
fnr2: !enhances! CET rate 
fnr2: !enhances! tolerance to MV-induced cell death 
fnr2: !enhances! reduced ascorbate level 
fnr2: !enhances! ROS scavenging enzymes