Arabidopsis plants with a reduced expression of CHL27 (chl27), an enzyme (EC 1.14.13.81) required for the synthesis of Pchlide, are chlorotic and have a Chl a/b ratio two times higher than wild-type (WT). Knockdown plants transformed with a construct constitutively expressing CHL27 recovered regarding Chl level, a/b ratio and 77K fluorescence. A negative correlation was found between total Chl and Chl a/b ratio in the examined plants. The chl27 plants fail to assemble WT amounts of complete PSI and PSII, leading to an elevated PSII/PSI ratio. The PSI remaining in chl27 is fully functional with a quantum yield higher than for WT. Despite a severe reduction of photosystem II antennae protein (LHCII) and an increased proportion of stroma lammella, the chl27 plants are able to perform state transitions. No major differences were found regarding PSII quantum yield, qN and 1 - qp whereas non-photochemical quenching was decreased by a factor two in chl27 plants. The PSII quantum yield for dark-adapted plants and plants given 10 min recovery after high light treatment were similar for both WT and chl27 showing that chl27 plants are not more susceptible to photoinhibition than WT. Taken together the plant manage to acclimate and to balance the two photosystems well even when it is severely limited in Chl. The way to achieve this differs for the two photosystems: regarding PSI a general reduction of core and antenna subunits occurs with no apparent change in the antenna composition; whereas for PSII there is a preferential loss of antenna proteins.

CHL27: !synthesizes! Pchlide
CHL27: !affects! Chl level, a/b ratio and 77K fluorescence
Chl a/b ratio: !correlates with! total Chl
PSI: !remains functional! in chl27 plants
PSII: !assembles reduced amounts! in chl27 plants
PSII/PSI ratio: !elevated! in chl27 plants
LHCII: !reduced! in chl27 plants
Stroma lammella: !increased proportion! in chl27 plants
State transitions: !performed! by chl27 plants
PSII quantum yield: !similar! for WT and chl27 plants
Photoinhibition: !not more susceptible! for chl27 plants