The synthesis of phytochelatins (PCs) is essential for the detoxification of nonessential metals and metalloids such as cadmium and arsenic in plants and a variety of other organisms. To our knowledge, no direct evidence for a role of PCs in essential metal homeostasis has been reported to date. Prompted by observations in Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Saccharomyces cerevisiae indicating a contribution of PC synthase expression to Zn2+ sequestration, we investigated a known PC-deficient Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutant, cad1-3, and a newly isolated second strong allele, cad1-6, with respect to zinc (Zn) homeostasis. We found that in a medium with low cation content PC-deficient mutants show pronounced Zn2+ hypersensitivity. This phenotype is of comparable strength to the well-documented Cd2+ hypersensitivity of cad1 mutants. PC deficiency also results in significant reduction in root Zn accumulation. To be able to sensitively measure PC accumulation, we established an assay using capillary liquid chromatography coupled to electrospray ionization quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry of derivatized extracts. Plants grown under control conditions consistently showed PC2 accumulation. Analysis of plants treated with same-effect concentrations revealed that Zn2+-elicited PC2 accumulation in roots reached about 30% of the level of Cd2+-elicited PC2 accumulation. We conclude from these data that PC formation is essential for Zn2+ tolerance and provides driving force for the accumulation of Zn. This function might also help explain the mysterious occurrence of PC synthase genes throughout the plant kingdom and in a wide range of other organisms.

PC synthase: !synthesizes! PCs 
PCs: !essential for! detoxification of nonessential metals and metalloids 
PCs: !contribute to! Zn2+ sequestration 
PC-deficient mutants: !show! Zn2+ hypersensitivity 
PC-deficient mutants: !reduce! root Zn accumulation 
Zn2+: !elicits! PC2 accumulation 
PC formation: !essential for! Zn2+ tolerance