Early development of the flower primordium has been studied in Arabidopsis thaliana clavata3-2 (clv3-2) plants with the aid of sequential in vivo replicas and longitudinal microtome sections. Sequential replicas show that, although there is no regular phyllotaxis in the clv3-2 inflorescence shoot apex, the sites of new primordium formation are, to a large extent, predictable. The primordium always appears in a wedge-like region of the meristem periphery flanked by two older primordia. In general, stages of primordium development in clv3-2 are similar to the wild type, but quantitative geometry analysis shows that the clv3-2 primordium shape is affected even before the CLAVATA/WUSCHEL regulatory network would start to operate in the wild-type primordium. The shape of the youngest primordium in the mutant is more variable than in the wild type. In particular, the shape of the adaxial primordium boundary varies and seems to be related to the shape of the space available for the given primordium formation, suggesting that physical constraints play a significant role in primordium shape determination. The role of physical constraints is also manifested in that the shape of the primordium in the later stages, as well as the number and position of sepals, are adjusted to the available space. Longitudinal sections of clv3-2 apices show that the shape of surface cells of the meristem and young primordium is different from the wild type. Moreover, there is only one tunica layer in both the meristem and in the primordium until it becomes a bulge that is distinctly separated from the meristem. Starting from this stage, the anticlinal divisions predominate in subprotodermal cells, suggesting that the distribution of periclinal and anticlinal cell divisions in the early development of the flower primordium is not directly affected by the clv3-2 mutation.

clv3-2 mutation: !affects! primordium shape
primordium formation: !localizes to! wedge-like region of meristem periphery
CLAVATA/WUSCHEL regulatory network: !operates in! wild-type primordium
physical constraints: !play a role in! primordium shape determination
tunica layer: !only one in! meristem and primordium
clv3-2 mutation: !not directly affects! distribution of periclinal and anticlinal cell divisions