Changes of the water permeability aqùaporin (AQP) activity of leaf cells were investigated in response to different light regimes (low versus high). Using a cell pressure probe, hydraulic properties (half-time of water exchange, T(1/2) infinity 1/water permeability) of parenchyma cells in the midrib tissue of maize (Zea mays L.) leaves have been measured. A new perfusion technique was applied to excised leaves to keep turgor constant and to modify the environment around cells by perfusing solutions using a pressure chamber. In response to low light (LL) of 200 micromol m(-2) s(-1), T(1/2) decreased during the perfusion of a control solution of 0.5 mM CaCl(2) by a factor of two. This was in line with earlier results from leaf cells of intact maize plants at a constant turgor. In contrast, high light (HL) at intensities of 800 micromol m(-2) s(-1) and 1800 micromol m(-2) s(-1) increased the T(1/2) in two-thirds of cells by factors of 14 and 35, respectively. The effects of HL on T(1/2) were similar to those caused by H(2)O(2) treatment in the presence of Fe(2+), which produced *OH (Fenton reaction; reversible oxidative gating of aquaporins). Treatments with 20 mM H(2)O(2) following Fe(2+) pre-treatments increased the T(1/2) by a factor of 30. Those increased T(1/2) values could be partly recovered, either when the perfusion solution was changed back to the control solution or when LL was applied. 3mM of the antioxidant glutathione also reversed the effects of HL. The data suggest that HL could induce reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as *OH, and they affected water relations. The results provide evidence that the varying light climate adjusts water flow at the cell level; that is, water flow is maximized at a certain light intensity and then reduced again by HL. Light effects are discussed in terms of an oxidative gating of aquaporins by ROS.

AQP: !affected by! Light 
Light: !induces! ROS 
ROS: !oxidatively gates! AQP 
AQP: !enhanced by! H2O2 
H2O2: !reversed by! Glutathione