The growth of soybean plants were examined when subjected to three contrasting irradiance levels and to various combinations of nutrient solution Fe and Mn concentrations. Two Rhizobium-nodulated soybean genotypes (PI 227557 and Biloxi), which had been previously found to differ in their growth response to various Fe and Mn solutions, were studied. Both genotypes displayed the poorest growth, nodulation and the lowest chlorophyll and nodule ureide concentration at high irradiance (HI), regardless of the solution Fe and Mn concentrations. However, the genotypes differed under HI in their accumulation of Fe. For solution concentrations greater than 13 microM, PI 227557 accumulated up to 1200 microg Feg(-1) leaf dry wt mainly in the form of ferritin crystals within chloroplasts. In contrast, leaf Fe concentrations in Biloxi only reached 300 microg Feg(-1) dry wt and there were no ferritin crystals. Also, in PI 227557 HI induced more severe distortions in leaf cells and nodule ultrastructure than in Biloxi. Based on its poor growth under HI, PI 227557 could be categorized as an Fe-inefficient genotype prone to undergo photoinhibition at HI, in spite of the ferritin crystals in the chloroplasts. Enhanced growth, nodulation, chlorophyll and ureide concentrations in nodules as well as leaf ureide catabolism occurred in both genotypes grown at moderate irradiance (MI) in Fe solutions from 13 to 60 microM supplied with 20 microM Mn. At low irradiance (LI), plant growth and nodulation were lower than at MI values, but higher than those of plants at HI. Irradiance and solution Fe concentration did not alter leaf Cu and Zn concentration in either genotype, with the higher concentrations of these two elements detected in Biloxi. Solutions with Fe concentrations greater than 100 microM were deleterious for both genotypes at all irradiances. Low Fe and high Mn concentrations in leaves was bound to result in the best growth at HI.

Gene: !affects! Growth 
Gene: !affects! Nodulation 
Gene: !affects! Chlorophyll concentration 
Gene: !affects! Nodule ureide concentration 
Gene: !affects! Leaf Fe accumulation 
Gene: !affects! Leaf cell distortion 
Gene: !affects! Leaf ureide catabolism 
Gene: !affects! Leaf Cu and Zn concentration