['19108776', 'BACKGROUND: Highly elongated eukaryotic cells (e.g., neuronal axons, fungal  hyphae, and pollen tubes) are generated through continuous apically restricted  growth (tip growth), which universally requires tip-localized Rho GTPases. We  used the oscillating pollen tube as a model system to determine the function and  regulation of Rho GTPases in tip growth. Our previous work showed that the  spatiotemporal dynamics of the apical cap of the activated Rho-like GTPase from  Plant 1 (ROP1) are critical for tip growth in pollen tubes. However, the  underlying mechanism for the generation and maintenance of this dynamic apical  cap is poorly understood. RESULTS: A screen for mutations that enhance  ROP1-overexpression-induced depolarization of pollen-tube growth identified REN1  (ROP1 enhancer 1) in Arabidopsis, whose null mutations turn elongated pollen  tubes into bulbous cells. REN1 encodes a novel Rho GTPase-activating protein  (RhoGAP) required for restricting the ROP1 activity to the pollen-tube tip. REN1  was localized to exocytic vesicles accumulated in the pollen-tube apex, as well  as to the apical plasma membrane at the site of ROP1 activation. The apical  localization of REN1 and its function in controlling growth polarity was  compromised by disruption of ROP1-dependent F-actin and vesicular trafficking,  which indicates that REN1 targeting and function is regulated by ROP1 downstream  signaling. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the REN1 RhoGAP controls a  negative-feedback-based global inhibition of ROP1. This function provides a  critical self-organizing mechanism, by which ROP signaling is spatially limited  to the growth site and temporally oscillates during continuous tip growth.  Similar spatiotemporal control of Rho GTPase signaling may also play an important  role in cell-polarity control in other systems, including tip growth in fungi and  cell movement in animals.', '2008 Dec 23', 'Curr Biol', '10.1016/j.cub.2008.11.057', 'Yang']

ROP1: !localizes to! pollen-tube tip 
REN1: !localizes to! exocytic vesicles & apical plasma membrane 
REN1: !interacts with! ROP1 
REN1: !represses! ROP1 activity 
ROP1: !enhances! F-actin & vesicular trafficking 
REN1: !synthesizes! negative-feedback-based global inhibition of ROP1