['19112492', 'The NSP-interacting kinase (NIK) receptor-mediated defense pathway has been  identified recently as a virulence target of the geminivirus nuclear shuttle  protein (NSP). However, the NIK1-NSP interaction does not fit into the  elicitor-receptor model of resistance, and hence the molecular mechanism that  links this antiviral response to receptor activation remains obscure. Here, we  identified a ribosomal protein, rpL10A, as a specific partner and substrate of  NIK1 that functions as an immediate downstream effector of NIK1-mediated  response. Phosphorylation of cytosolic rpL10A by NIK1 redirects the protein to  the nucleus where it may act to modulate viral infection. While ectopic  expression of normal NIK1 or a hyperactive NIK1 mutant promotes the accumulation  of phosphorylated rpL10A within the nuclei, an inactive NIK1 mutant fails to  redirect the protein to the nuclei of co-transfected cells. Likewise, a mutant  rpL10A defective for NIK1 phosphorylation is not redirected to the nucleus.  Furthermore, loss of rpL10A function enhances susceptibility to geminivirus  infection, resembling the phenotype of nik1 null alleles. We also provide  evidence that geminivirus infection directly interferes with NIK1-mediated  nuclear relocalization of rpL10A as a counterdefensive measure. However, the  NIK1-mediated defense signaling neither activates RNA silencing nor promotes a  hypersensitive response but inhibits plant growth and development. Although the  virulence function of the particular geminivirus NSP studied here overcomes this  layer of defense in Arabidopsis, the NIK1-mediated signaling response may be  involved in restricting the host range of other viruses.', '2008 Dec', 'PLoS Pathog', '10.1371/journal.ppat.1000247', 'Fontes']

NIK1: !phosphorylates! rpL10A
rpL10A: !redirects to! nucleus
NIK1: !inhibits! plant growth and development
NSP: !overcomes! NIK1-mediated defense signaling
geminivirus infection: !interferes with! NIK1-mediated nuclear relocalization of rpL10A