Four hydrogen peroxide detecting probes, 3,3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB), Amplex Red (AR), Amplex Ultra Red (AUR) and a europium-tetracycline complex (Eu(3)Tc) were infiltrated into tobacco leaves and tested for sensitivity to light, toxicity, subcellular localization and capacity to detect H(2)O(2) in vivo. In the absence of leaves, in water solutions, AUR was very much sensitive to strong light, AR showed slight light sensitivity, while DAB and Eu(3)Tc were insensitive to irradiation. When infiltrated into the leaves, the probes decreased the photochemical yield (Phi(PSII)) in the following order of effect AR > DAB > AUR > Eu(3)Tc. With the exception of Eu(3)Tc, all probes stimulated the build-up of non-photochemical quenching either temporally (DAB, AUR) or permanently (AR), showing that their presence may already limit the photosynthetic capacity of leaves, even in the absence of additional stress. This should be taken into account when using these probes in plant stress experiments. Confocal laser scanning microscopy studies with the three fluorescent H(2)O(2) probes showed that the localizations of Eu(3)Tc and AUR were mainly intercellular. AR partly penetrated into leaf chloroplasts but probably not into the thylakoid membranes. Photosynthesis-related stress applications of AR seem to be limited by the low availability of internal leaf peroxidases. Applications of AR for kinetic H(2)O(2) measurements would require a co-infiltration of external peroxidase, imposing another artificial modifying factor and thus taking experiments further from ideal, in vivo conditions. Our results suggest that the studied H(2)O(2) probes should be used in leaf studies with caution, carefully balancing benefits and artifacts.

AUR: !sensitive to! strong light 
AR: !sensitive to! slight light 
DAB, Eu(3)Tc: !insensitive to! irradiation 
AR: !greater effect than! DAB, AUR, Eu(3)Tc 
DAB, AUR: !stimulate! non-photochemical quenching 
Eu(3)Tc, AUR: !localize to! intercellular 
AR: !partly penetrate! chloroplasts 
AR: !limited by! low availability of internal leaf peroxidases 
H2O2 probes: !used with caution! in leaf studies