Vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid, AsA) is an essential metabolite for plants and animals. Kiwifruit (Actinidia spp.) are a rich dietary source of AsA for humans. To understand AsA biosynthesis in kiwifruit, AsA levels and the relative expression of genes putatively involved in AsA biosynthesis, regeneration, and transport were correlated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction in leaves and during fruit development in four kiwifruit genotypes (three species; A. eriantha, A. chinensis, and A. deliciosa). During fruit development, fruit AsA concentration peaked between 4 and 6 weeks after anthesis with A. eriantha having 3-16-fold higher AsA than other genotypes. The rise in AsA concentration typically occurred close to the peak in expression of the L-galactose pathway biosynthetic genes, particularly the GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase gene. The high concentration of AsA found in the fruit of A. eriantha is probably due to higher expression of the GDP-mannose-3',5'-epimerase and GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase genes. Over-expression of the kiwifruit GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase gene in Arabidopsis resulted in up to a 4-fold increase in AsA, while up to a 7-fold increase in AsA was observed in transient expression studies where both GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase and GDP-mannose-3',5'-epimerase genes were co-expressed. These studies show the importance of GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase as a rate-limiting step to AsA, and demonstrate how AsA can be significantly increased in plants.

Vitamin C: !essential metabolite for! plants and animals
Kiwifruit: !rich dietary source of! AsA for humans
AsA biosynthesis: !correlated by! quantitative polymerase chain reaction
A. eriantha: !3-16-fold higher! AsA than other genotypes
L-galactose pathway biosynthetic genes: !peak in expression of! during fruit development
GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase gene: !high concentration of! AsA in A. eriantha
GDP-mannose-3',5'-epimerase gene: !higher expression of! in A. eriantha
GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase gene: !over-expression of! in Arabidopsis
GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase and GDP-mannose-3',5'-epimerase genes: !co-expression of! in transient expression studies
GDP-L-galactose guanyltransferase: !rate-limiting step to! AsA