French bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) is a legume that transports most of the atmospheric nitrogen fixed in its nodules to the aerial parts of the plant as ureides. Changes in ureide content and in enzymatic activities involved in their metabolism were identified in the cotyledons and embryonic axes during germination and early seedling development. Accumulation of ureides (ca. 1300 nmol per pair of cotyledons) was observed in the cotyledons of dry seeds. Throughout germination, the total amount of ureides slightly decreased to about 1200 nmol, but increased both in cotyledons and in embryonic axes after radicle emergence. In the axes, the ureides were almost equally distributed in roots, hypocotyls and epicotyls. The pattern of ureide distribution was not affected by the presence of nitrate or sucrose in the media up to 6 days after imbibition. Ureides are synthesized from purines because allopurinol (a xanthine dehydrogenase inhibitor) blocks the increase of ureides. Allantoin and allantoate-degrading activities were detected in French bean dried seeds, whereas no ureidoglycolate-degrading activity was detected. During germination, the levels of the three activities remain unchanged in cotyledons. After radicle emergence, the levels of activities in cotyledons changed. Allantoin-degrading activity increased, allantoate-degrading activity decreased and ureidoglycolate-degrading activity remained undetectable in cotyledons. In developing embryonic axes, the three activities were detected throughout germination and early seedling development. The embryonic axes are able to synthesize ureides, because those compounds accumulated in axes without cotyledons.

Ureides: !accumulate in! cotyledons 
Ureides: !synthesized from! purines 
Allantoin-degrading activity: !increases in! cotyledons 
Allantoate-degrading activity: !decreases in! cotyledons 
Ureidoglycolate-degrading activity: !remains undetectable in! cotyledons 
Ureides: !accumulate in! embryonic axes 
Embryonic axes: !synthesize! ureides