Changes in antioxidant metabolism because of the effect of salinity stress (0, 80, 160 or 240 mM NaCl) on protective enzyme activities under ambient (350 micromol mol(-1)) and elevated (700 micromol mol(-1)) CO(2) concentrations were investigated in two barley cultivars (Hordeum vulgare L., cvs Alpha and Iranis). Electrolyte leakage, peroxidation, antioxidant enzyme activities [superoxide dismutase (SOD), EC 1.15.1.1; ascorbate peroxidase (APX), EC 1.11.1.11; catalase (CAT), EC 1.11.1.6; dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR), EC 1.8.5.1; monodehydroascorbate reductase (MDHAR), EC 1.6.5.4; glutathione reductase (GR), EC 1.6.4.2] and their isoenzymatic profiles were determined. Under salinity and ambient CO(2), upregulation of antioxidant enzymes such as SOD, APX, CAT, DHAR and GR occurred. However, this upregulation was not enough to counteract all ROS formation as both ion leakage and lipid peroxidation came into play. The higher constitutive SOD and CAT activities together with a higher contribution of Cu,Zn-SOD 1 detected in Iranis might possibly contribute and make this cultivar more salt-tolerant than Alpha. Elevated CO(2) alone had no effect on the constitutive levels of antioxidant enzymes in Iranis, whereas in Alpha it induced an increase in SOD, CAT and MDHAR together with a decrease of DHAR and GR. Under combined conditions of elevated CO(2) and salinity the oxidative damage recorded was lower, above all in Alpha, together with a lower upregulation of the antioxidant system. So it can be concluded that elevated CO(2) mitigates the oxidative stress caused by salinity, involving lower ROS generation and a better maintenance of redox homeostasis as a consequence of higher assimilation rates and lower photorespiration, being the response dependent on the cultivar analysed.

SOD: !upregulates! Salinity 
APX: !upregulates! Salinity 
CAT: !upregulates! Salinity 
DHAR: !upregulates! Salinity 
GR: !upregulates! Salinity 
SOD: !increases! Elevated CO2 
CAT: !increases! Elevated CO2 
MDHAR: !increases! Elevated CO2 
DHAR: !decreases! Elevated CO2 
GR: !decreases! Elevated CO2 
Elevated CO2: !mitigates! Oxidative Stress 
Salinity: !causes! Oxidative Stress