Developmental phase transitions in the plant root system have not been well characterized. In this study we compared the dynamics of sucrose accumulation with changes in gene expression analyzed with cDNA-amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) in the developing tap root of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris, L.) during the first 9 weeks after emergence (WAE). Although differences between lines were evident as soon as 9 WAE, sucrose showed a marked increase in the rate of accumulation between 4 and 6 WAE and a remarkable shift in gene expression was observed between 5 and 6 WAE. These changes were evident in two unrelated genetic backgrounds and suggest that physiological and gene expression changes represent a functional differentiation of the tap root. These changes were considered as indicators of a developmental change in the sugar beet root system. To identify genes and metabolic pathways involved in this developmental shift, a root cDNA library was hybridized with probes enriched for 3- and 7-WAE transcripts and differentially expressed transcripts were analyzed by cDNA microarray. Several genes involved in the regulation of tissue development were found to be differentially regulated. Genes involved in protein metabolism, disease-related and secretory system were upregulated before the functional differentiation transition, while genes under hormonal control were upregulated after the functional differentiation transition. This developmental phase change of the root system is important to understand plant developmental regulation at the whole-plant level and will likely be useful as early selection parameter in breeding programs.

sucrose: !increases! 4-6 WAE
gene expression: !shifts! 5-6 WAE
gene expression: !indicates! functional differentiation
probes: !hybridized with! root cDNA library
differentially expressed transcripts: !analyzed by! cDNA microarray
genes: !involved in! regulation of tissue development
genes: !upregulated before! functional differentiation transition
genes: !upregulated after! functional differentiation transition