['19144004', 'Reproduction of flowering plants requires the growth of pollen tubes to deliver  immotile sperm for fertilization. Pollen tube growth resembles that of polarized  metazoan cells, in that some molecular mechanisms underlying cell polarization  and growth are evolutionarily conserved, including the functions of Rho GTPases  and the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton. However, a role for AGC kinases,  crucial signaling mediators in polarized metazoan cells, has yet to be shown in  pollen tubes. Here we demonstrate that two Arabidopsis AGC kinases are critical  for polarized growth of pollen tubes. AGC1.5 and AGC1.7 are pollen-specific genes  expressed during late developmental stages. Pollen tubes of single mutants had no  detectable phenotypes during in vitro or in vivo germination, whereas those of  double mutants were wider and twisted, due to frequent changes of growth  trajectory in vitro. Pollen tubes of the double mutant also had reduced growth  and were probably compromised in response to guidance cues in vivo. In the agc1.5  background, downregulation of AGC1.7 using an antisense construct phenocopied the  growth defect of double mutant pollen tubes, providing additional support for a  redundant function of AGC1.5/1.7 in pollen tube growth. Using the actin marker  mouse Talin, we show that pollen tubes of double mutants had relatively  unaffected longitudinal actin cables but had ectopic filamentous actin,  indicating disturbed control of polarity. Our results demonstrate that AGC1.5 and  AGC1.7 are critical components of the internal machinery of the pollen tube  leading to polarized growth of pollen tubes.', '2009 May', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03792.x', 'McCormick']

AGC1.5: !critical for! polarized growth of pollen tubes 
AGC1.7: !critical for! polarized growth of pollen tubes 
AGC1.5/1.7: !redundant function in! pollen tube growth 
AGC1.5: !downregulated by! AGC1.7 antisense construct 
pollen tubes: !have! reduced growth 
pollen tubes: !show! frequent changes of growth trajectory 
pollen tubes: !have! relatively unaffected longitudinal actin cables 
pollen tubes: !have! ectopic filamentous actin