['19154206', "Little is known about the role of proteins that lack primary sequence homology  with any known motifs (proteins with unknown functions, PUFs); these comprise  more than 10% of all proteins. This paper offers a generalized experimental  strategy for identifying the functions of such proteins, particularly in relation  to metabolism. Using this strategy, we have identified a novel regulatory  function for Arabidopsis locus At3g30720 (which we term QQS for qua-quine  starch). QQS expression, revealed through global mRNA profiling, is up-regulated  in an Arabidopsis Atss3 mutant that lacks starch synthase III and has increased  leaf starch content. Analysis of public microarray data using MetaOmGraph  (metnetdb.org), in combination with transgenic Arabidopsis lines containing QQS  promoter-GUS transgenes, indicated that QQS expression responds to a variety of  developmental/genetic/environmental perturbations. In addition to the increase in  the Atss3 mutant, QQS is up-regulated in the carbohydrate mutants mex1 and sis8.  A 586 nt sequence for the QQS mRNA was identified by 5' and 3' RACE experiments.  The QQS transcript is predicted to encode a protein of 59 amino acids, whose  expression was confirmed by immunological Western blot analysis. The QQS gene is  recognizable in sequenced Arabidopsis ecotypes, but is not identifiable in any  other sequenced species, including the closely related Brassica napus. Transgenic  RNA interference lines in which QQS expression is reduced show excess leaf starch  content at the end of the illumination phase of a diurnal cycle. Taken together,  the data identify QQS as a potential novel regulator of starch biosynthesis.", '2009 May', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03793.x', 'Wurtele']

QQS: !up-regulated in! Atss3 mutant 
QQS: !up-regulated in! mex1 and sis8 mutants 
QQS: !encodes! protein of 59 amino acids 
QQS: !recognizable in! sequenced Arabidopsis ecotypes 
QQS: !not identifiable in! other sequenced species 
QQS: !potential novel regulator of! starch biosynthesis