['19170934', 'An Arabidopsis thaliana drought-tolerant mutant, altered expression of APX2  (alx8), has constitutively increased abscisic acid (ABA) content, increased  expression of genes responsive to high light stress and is reported to be drought  tolerant. We have identified alx8 as a mutation in SAL1, an enzyme that can  dephosphorylate dinucleotide phosphates or inositol phosphates. Previously  identified mutations in SAL1, including fiery (fry1-1), were reported as being  more sensitive to drought imposed by detachment of rosettes. Here we demonstrate  that alx8, fry1-1 and a T-DNA insertional knockout allele all have markedly  increased resistance to drought when water is withheld from soil-grown intact  plants. Microarray analysis revealed constitutively altered expression of more  than 1800 genes in both alx8 and fry1-1. The up-regulated genes included some  characterized stress response genes, but few are inducible by ABA. Metabolomic  analysis revealed that both mutants exhibit a similar, dramatic reprogramming of  metabolism, including increased levels of the polyamine putrescine implicated in  stress tolerance, and the accumulation of a number of unknown, potential  osmoprotectant carbohydrate derivatives. Under well-watered conditions, there was  no substantial difference between alx8 and Col-0 in biomass at maturity; plant  water use efficiency (WUE) as measured by carbon isotope discrimination; or  stomatal index, morphology or aperture. Thus, SAL1 acts as a negative regulator  of predominantly ABA-independent and also ABA-dependent stress response pathways,  such that its inactivation results in altered osmoprotectants, higher leaf  relative water content and maintenance of viable tissues during prolonged water  stress.', '2009 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03780.x', 'Pogson']

SAL1: !regulates! ABA-independent and ABA-dependent stress response pathways
alx8: !increases! resistance to drought
fry1-1: !increases! resistance to drought
alx8/fry1-1: !exhibit! increased levels of putrescine
alx8/fry1-1: !accumulate! unknown, potential osmoprotectant carbohydrate derivatives
alx8/fry1-1: !maintain! viable tissues during prolonged water stress