['19176722', 'Salicylic acid (SA) is a critical mediator of plant innate immunity. It plays an  important role in limiting the growth and reproduction of the virulent powdery  mildew (PM) Golovinomyces orontii on Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). To  investigate this later phase of the PM interaction and the role played by SA, we  performed replicated global expression profiling for wild-type and SA  biosynthetic mutant isochorismate synthase1 (ics1) Arabidopsis from 0 to 7 d  after infection. We found that ICS1-impacted genes constitute 3.8% of profiled  genes, with known molecular markers of Arabidopsis defense ranked very highly by  the multivariate empirical Bayes statistic (T(2) statistic). Functional analyses  of T(2)-selected genes identified statistically significant PM-impacted  processes, including photosynthesis, cell wall modification, and alkaloid  metabolism, that are ICS1 independent. ICS1-impacted processes include redox,  vacuolar transport/secretion, and signaling. Our data also support a role for  ICS1 (SA) in iron and calcium homeostasis and identify components of SA cross  talk with other phytohormones. Through our analysis, 39 novel PM-impacted  transcriptional regulators were identified. Insertion mutants in one of these  regulators, PUX2 (for plant ubiquitin regulatory X domain-containing protein 2),  results in significantly reduced reproduction of the PM in a cell  death-independent manner. Although little is known about PUX2, PUX1 acts as a  negative regulator of Arabidopsis CDC48, an essential AAA-ATPase chaperone that  mediates diverse cellular activities, including homotypic fusion of endoplasmic  reticulum and Golgi membranes, endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein  degradation, cell cycle progression, and apoptosis. Future work will elucidate  the functional role of the novel regulator PUX2 in PM resistance.', '2009 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.132985', 'Wildermuth']

ICS1: !affects! SA biosynthesis 
ICS1: !impacts! processes 
PM: !impacts! photosynthesis 
PM: !impacts! cell wall modification 
PM: !impacts! alkaloid metabolism 
ICS1: !impacts! redox 
ICS1: !impacts! vacuolar transport/secretion 
ICS1: !impacts! signaling 
ICS1: !impacts! iron homeostasis 
ICS1: !impacts! calcium homeostasis 
PUX2: !regulates! CDC48 
CDC48: !mediates! homotypic fusion 
CDC48: !mediates! endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation 
CDC48: !mediates! cell cycle progression 
CDC48: !mediates! apoptosis 
PUX2: !regulates! PM reproduction