Stomatal guard cells are functionally specialized epidermal cells usually arranged in pairs surrounding a pore. Changes in ion fluxes, and more specifically osmolytes, within the guard cells drive opening/closing of the pore, allowing gas exchange while limiting water loss through evapo-transpiration. Adjustments of the pore aperture to optimize these conflicting needs are thus centrally important for land plants to survive, especially with the rise in CO(2) associated with global warming and increasing water scarcity this century. The basic biophysical events in modulating membrane transport have been gradually delineated over two decades. Genetics and molecular approaches in recent years have complemented and extended these earlier studies to identify major regulatory nodes. In Arabidopsis, the reference for guard cell genetics, stomatal opening driven by K(+) entry is mainly through KAT1 and KAT2, two voltage-gated K(+) inward-rectifying channels that are activated on hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane principally by the OST2 H(+)-ATPase (proton pump coupled to ATP hydrolysis). By contrast, stomatal closing is caused by K(+) efflux mainly through GORK, the outward-rectifying channel activated by membrane depolarization. The depolarization is most likely initiated by SLAC1, an anion channel distantly related to the dicarboxylate/malic acid transport protein found in fungi and bacteria. Beyond this established framework, there is also burgeoning evidence for the involvement of additional transporters, such as homologues to the multi-drug resistance proteins (or ABC transporters) as intimated by several pharmacological and reverse genetics studies. General inhibitors of protein kinases and protein phosphatases have been shown to profoundly affect guard cell membrane transport properties. Indeed, the first regulatory enzymes underpinning these transport processes revealed genetically were several protein phosphatases of the 2C class and the OST1 kinase, a member of the SnRK2 family. Taken together, these results are providing the first glimpses of an emerging signalling complex critical for modulating the stomatal aperture in response to environmental stimuli.

KAT1: !activates! K(+) inward-rectifying channels
KAT2: !activates! K(+) inward-rectifying channels
GORK: !causes! K(+) efflux
SLAC1: !initiates! membrane depolarization
OST2 H(+)-ATPase: !coupled to! ATP hydrolysis
OST1 kinase: !member of! SnRK2 family
protein phosphatases of the 2C class: !regulatory enzymes for! transport processes