Ethylene response factor (ERF) proteins are important plant-specific transcription factors. Increasing evidence shows that ERF proteins regulate plant pathogen resistance, abiotic stress response and plant development through interaction with different stress responsive pathways. Previously, we revealed that overexpression of TERF1 in tobacco activates a cluster gene expression through interacting with GCC box and dehydration responsive element (DRE), resulting in enhanced sensitivity to abscisic acid (ABA) and tolerance to drought, and dark green leaves of mature plants, indicating that TERF1 participates in the integration of ethylene and osmotic responses. Here we further report that overexpression of TERF1 confers sugar response in tobacco. Analysis of the novel isolated tomato TERF1 promoter provides information indicating that there are many cis-acting elements, including sugar responsive elements (SURE) and W box, suggesting that TERF1 might be sugar inducible. This prediction is confirmed by results of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction amplification, indicating that transcripts of TERF1 are accumulated in tomato seedlings after application of glucose. Further investigation indicates that the expression of TERF1 in tobacco enhances sensitivity to glucose during seed germination, root and seedling development, showing a decrease of the fresh weight and root elongation under glucose treatment. Detailed investigations provide evidence that TERF1 interacts with the sugar responsive cis-acting element SURE and activates the expression of sugar response genes, establishing the transcriptional regulation of TERF1 in sugar response. Therefore, our results deepen our understanding of the glucose response mediated by the ERF protein TERF1 in tobacco.

ERF: !interacts with! stress responsive pathways
TERF1: !activates! cluster gene expression
TERF1: !interacts with! GCC box and DRE
TERF1: !enhances! sensitivity to ABA and tolerance to drought
TERF1: !confers! sugar response in tobacco
TERF1: !interacts with! SURE
TERF1: !activates! sugar response genes