['19201913', 'To gain further insight into abscisic acid (ABA) signaling and its role in growth  regulation, we have screened for Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutants  hypersensitive to ABA-mediated root growth inhibition. As a result, we have  identified a loss-of-function allele of BREVIS RADIX (BRX) in the Columbia  background, named brx-2, which shows enhanced response to ABA-mediated inhibition  of root growth. BRX encodes a key regulator of cell proliferation and elongation  in the root, which has been implicated in the brassinosteroid (BR) pathway as  well as in the regulation of auxin-responsive gene expression. Mutants affected  in BR signaling that are not impaired in root growth, such as bes1-D, bzr1-D, and  bsu1-D, also showed enhanced sensitivity to ABA-mediated inhibition of root  growth. Triple loss-of-function mutants affected in PP2Cs, which act as negative  regulators of ABA signaling, showed impaired root growth in the absence of  exogenous ABA, indicating that disturbed regulation of ABA sensitivity impairs  root growth. In agreement with this result, diminishing ABA sensitivity of brx-2  by crossing it with a 35S:HAB1 ABA-insensitive line allowed significantly higher  recovery of root growth after brassinolide treatment. Finally, transcriptomic  analysis revealed that ABA treatment negatively affects auxin signaling in  wild-type and brx-2 roots and that ABA response is globally altered in brx-2.  Taken together, our results reveal an interaction between BRs, auxin, and ABA in  the control of root growth and indicate that altered sensitivity to ABA is partly  responsible for the brx short-root phenotype.', '2009 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.108.133819', 'Rodriguez']

BRX: !regulates! Cell proliferation and elongation 
BES1-D, BZR1-D, BSU1-D: !show enhanced sensitivity to! ABA-mediated inhibition of root growth 
PP2Cs: !act as negative regulators of! ABA signaling 
35S:HAB1 ABA-insensitive line: !diminishes ABA sensitivity of! brx-2 
ABA: !negatively affects! Auxin signaling 
BRs: !interact with! Auxin and ABA in control of root growth