Bud mutations often arise in citrus. The selection of mutants is one of the most important breeding channels in citrus. However, the molecular basis of bud mutation has rarely been studied. To identify differentially expressed genes in a spontaneous sweet orange [C. sinensis (L.) Osbeck] bud mutation which causes lycopene accumulation, low citric acid, and high sucrose in fruit, suppression subtractive hybridization and microarray analysis were performed to decipher this bud mutation during fruit development. After sequencing of the differentially expressed clones, a total of 267 non-redundant transcripts were obtained and 182 (68.2%) of them shared homology (E-value < or = 1x10(-10)) with known gene products. Few genes were constitutively up- or down-regulated (fold change > or = 2) in the bud mutation during fruit development. Self-organizing tree algorithm analysis results showed that 95.1% of the differentially expressed genes were extensively coordinated with the initiation of lycopene accumulation. Metabolic process, cellular process, establishment of localization, response to stimulus, and biological regulation-related transcripts were among the most regulated genes. These genes were involved in many biological processes such as organic acid metabolism, lipid metabolism, transport, and pyruvate metabolism, etc. Moreover, 13 genes which were differentially regulated at 170 d after flowering shared homology with previously described signal transduction or transcription factors. The information generated in this study provides new clues to aid in the understanding of bud mutation in citrus.

Gene: !affects! Metabolic Process
Gene: !affects! Cellular Process
Gene: !affects! Establishment of Localization
Gene: !affects! Response to Stimulus
Gene: !affects! Biological Regulation
Gene: !enhances! Lycopene Accumulation
Gene: !involves! Organic Acid Metabolism
Gene: !involves! Lipid Metabolism
Gene: !involves! Transport
Gene: !involves! Pyruvate Metabolism
Gene: !regulates! Signal Transduction
Gene: !regulates! Transcription Factors