['19228337', 'Adherin plays an important role in loading the cohesin complex onto chromosomes,  and is essential for the establishment of sister-chromatid cohesion. We have  identified and analyzed the Arabidopsis adherin homolog AtSCC2. Interestingly,  the sequence analysis of AtSCC2 and of other putative plant adherin homologs  revealed the presence of a PHD finger, which is not found in their fungal and  animal counterparts. AtSCC2 is identical to EMB2773, and mutants show early  embryo lethality and formation of giant endosperm nuclei. A role for AtSCC2 in  sister-chromatid cohesion was established by using conditional RNAi and examining  meiotic chromosome organization. AtSCC2-RNAi lines showed sterility, arising from  the following defects in meiotic chromosome organization: failure of homologous  pairing, loss of sister-chromatid cohesion, mixed segregation of chromosomes and  chromosome fragmentation. The mutant phenotype, which included defects in  chromosome organization and cohesion in prophase I, is distinct from that of the  Arabidopsis cohesin mutant Atrec8, which retains centromere cohesion up to  anaphase I. Immunostaining experiments revealed the aberrant distribution of the  cohesin subunit AtSCC3 on chromosomes, and defects in chromosomal axis formation,  in the meiocytes of AtSCC2-RNAi lines. These results demonstrate a role for  AtSCC2 in sister-chromatid cohesion and centromere organization, and show that  the machinery responsible for the establishment of cohesion is conserved in  plants.', '2009 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03845.x', 'Siddiqi']

Adherin: !loads! Cohesin complex 
AtSCC2: !identical to! EMB2773 
AtSCC2: !essential for! Sister-chromatid cohesion 
AtSCC2: !contains! PHD finger 
AtSCC2-RNAi lines: !show! Sterility 
AtSCC2-RNAi lines: !failure of! Homologous pairing 
AtSCC2-RNAi lines: !loss of! Sister-chromatid cohesion 
AtSCC2-RNAi lines: !mixed segregation of! Chromosomes 
AtSCC2-RNAi lines: !chromosome fragmentation! 
AtSCC3: !aberrant distribution on! Chromosomes 
AtSCC3: !defects in! Chromosomal axis formation