['19223973', 'BACKGROUND: Plant root growth and development is highly plastic and can adapt to  many environmental conditions. Sugar signaling has been shown to affect root  growth and development by interacting with phytohormones such as gibberellins,  cytokinin and abscisic acid. Auxin signaling and transport has been earlier shown  to be controlling plant root length, number of lateral roots, root hair and root  growth direction. PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Increasing concentration of glucose not  only controls root length, root hair and number of lateral roots but can also  modulate root growth direction. Since root growth and development is also  controlled by auxin, whole genome transcript profiling was done to find out the  extent of interaction between glucose and auxin response pathways. Glucose alone  could transcriptionally regulate 376 (62%) genes out of 604 genes affected by  IAA. Presence of glucose could also modulate the extent of regulation 2 fold or  more of almost 63% genes induced or repressed by IAA. Interestingly, glucose  could affect induction or repression of IAA affected genes (35%) even if glucose  alone had no significant effect on the transcription of these genes itself.  Glucose could affect auxin biosynthetic YUCCA genes family members, auxin  transporter PIN proteins, receptor TIR1 and members of a number of gene families  including AUX/IAA, GH3 and SAUR involved in auxin signaling. Arabidopsis auxin  receptor tir1 and response mutants, axr2, axr3 and slr1 not only display a defect  in glucose induced change in root length, root hair elongation and lateral root  production but also accentuate glucose induced increase in root growth  randomization from vertical suggesting glucose effects on plant root growth and  development are mediated by auxin signaling components. CONCLUSION: Our findings  implicate an important role of the glucose interacting with auxin signaling and  transport machinery to control seedling root growth and development in changing  nutrient conditions.', '2009', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0004502', 'Laxmi']

glucose: !affects! root length
glucose: !affects! root hair elongation
glucose: !affects! number of lateral roots
glucose: !modulates! root growth direction
glucose: !transcriptionally regulates! 376 genes
glucose: !modulates! 63% genes induced/repressed by IAA
glucose: !affects! 35% genes with no significant effect on transcription
glucose: !affects! auxin biosynthetic YUCCA genes
glucose: !affects! auxin transporter PIN proteins
glucose: !affects! receptor TIR1
glucose: !affects! AUX/IAA, GH3 and SAUR gene families
glucose: !mediated by! auxin signaling components