After-ripening (AR) in Sisymbrium officinale seeds altered SoACS7, SoACO2, SoGA20ox2, SoGA3ox2, and SoGA2ox6 gene expression. Except for SoGA20ox2 expression, which sharply diminished, the expression of the other genes rose during development, particularly that of SoACS7. In contrast, only the SoACO2 and SoGA2ox6 transcripts increased with seed desiccation; the others decreased. AR increased the SoGA3ox2 transcript in dry seed, but dramatically decreased the SoACS7 transcript. At the onset of imbibition, AR inhibited SoACS7 and SoACO2 expression and stimulated that of SoGA20ox2, SoGA3ox2, and SoGA2ox6, demonstrating that the participation of ethylene (ET) and gibberellins (GAs) differs in after-ripened and non-after-ripened seeds. The inhibition of SoACO2 expression in the presence of GA(4+7), paclobutrazol (PB), inhibitors of ET synthesis and signalling (IESS), and notably ET+GA(4+7) indicated ET-GA cross-talk in non-after-ripened seeds. A positive effect of AR in reversing this inhibition was found. The idea of ET-GA cross-talk is also supported by the effect of ET on SoGA3ox2 expression, notably induced by the AR process. In contrast, SoGA20ox2 expression did not appear to be susceptible to AR. SoGA2ox6 expression, poorly known in seeds, suggests that AR prompted an up-regulation under all treatments studied, whereas in non-after-ripened seeds expression was down-regulated. On the other hand, the beta-mannanase (MAN) activity dramatically increased in dry after-ripened seed, being significantly boosted by ET. The absence of MAN inhibition by IESS suggests that although ET seems to be one of the factors controlling MAN, its presence did not appear to be essential. GA(4+7) only increased MAN in seeds which were after-ripened. Here, it is proposed that ET and GAs participate actively in establishing the AR process.

SoACS7: !increases with! AR
SoACO2: !increases with! desiccation
SoGA20ox2: !decreases with! AR
SoGA3ox2: !increased by! AR
SoGA2ox6: !up-regulated by! AR
ET: !inhibits! SoACO2
GA(4+7): !inhibits! SoACO2
IESS: !inhibits! SoACO2
ET+GA(4+7): !inhibits! SoACO2
ET: !induces! SoGA3ox2
GA(4+7): !increases! MAN
IESS: !does not inhibit! MAN