['19247443', 'Position-dependent cell fate determination and pattern formation are unique  aspects of the development of plant structures. The establishment of  single-celled leaf hairs (trichomes) from pluripotent epidermal (protodermal)  cells in Arabidopsis provides a powerful system to determine the gene regulatory  networks involved in cell fate determination. To obtain a holistic view of the  regulatory events associated with the differentiation of Arabidopsis epidermal  cells into trichomes, we combined expression and genome-wide location analyses  (ChIP-chip) on the trichome developmental selectors GLABRA3 (GL3) and GLABRA1  (GL1), encoding basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and MYB transcription factors,  respectively. Meta-analysis was used to integrate genome-wide expression results  contrasting wild type and gl3 or gl1 mutants with changes in gene expression over  time using inducible versions of GL3 and GL1. This resulted in the identification  of a minimal set of genes associated with the differentiation of epidermal cells  into trichomes. ChIP-chip experiments, complemented by the targeted examination  of factors known to participate in trichome initiation or patterning, identified  about 20 novel GL3/GL1 direct targets. In addition to genes involved in the  control of gene expression, such as the transcription factors SCL8 and MYC1, we  identified SIM (SIAMESE), encoding a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, and RBR1  (RETINOBLASTOMA RELATED1), corresponding to a negative regulator of the cell  cycle transcription factor E2F, as GL3/GL1 immediate targets, directly  implicating these trichome regulators in the control of the endocycle. The  expression of many of the identified GL3/GL1 direct targets was specific to very  early stages of trichome initiation, suggesting that they participate in some of  the earliest known processes associated with protodermal cell differentiation. By  combining this knowledge with the analysis of genes associated with trichome  formation, our results reveal the architecture of the top tiers of the  hierarchical structure of the regulatory network involved in epidermal cell  differentiation and trichome formation.', '2009 Feb', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1000396', 'Grotewold']

GL3: !regulates! GL1 
GL3/GL1: !directly target! SCL8 
GL3/GL1: !directly target! MYC1 
GL3/GL1: !directly target! SIM 
GL3/GL1: !directly target! RBR1 
GL3/GL1: !control! endocycle 
GL3/GL1: !participate in! earliest processes of protodermal cell differentiation