The diversified physiological responses in cyanobacteria under ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation have been broadly researched. The changes in the metabolic control mechanisms hidden behind these physiological traits still need to be further investigated. This research attempts to identify some of the internal mechanisms of several stressful phenotypes such as a decreased growth rate, an impaired photosystem, and the degradation of photosynthetic pigments. Different expression levels of proteins in the cytoplasm of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 under short-term and long-term UV-B stress were investigated by using a comparative proteomic approach. One hundred and twelve differentially expressed protein spots were identified by mass spectrometry to match 75 diverse protein species. They mainly focus on amino acid biosynthesis, photosynthesis and respiration, energy metabolism, protein biosynthesis, cell defence, and other functional groups. By focusing on these areas, the study reveals the correlation between UV-B stress-responsive proteins and the physiological changes listed above. The research, showing that short-term response-proteins are quite different from long-term response-proteins, helps to identify the change in homeostatic mechanisms in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Related putative functions of these proteins and the physiological responses of cyanobacteria under UV-B stress, a UV-B responsive protein network in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 under long-term stress was successfully produced. Such a protein network helps to increase our understanding of the comprehensive functional network cyanobacteria use to adapt to UV-B stress. In addition, 30 novel proteins not previously found related to UV-B stress were identified. This opens up new areas for exploration to identify the response to UV-B stress in cyanobacteria.

Gene: !affects! Physiological response 
Gene: !synthesizes! Protein 
Protein: !localizes to! Cytoplasm 
Protein: !enhances! Amino acid biosynthesis 
Protein: !represses! Photosynthesis 
Protein: !interacts with! Energy metabolism