In hermaphroditic plants, female reproductive success often varies among different positions within an inflorescence. However, few studies have evaluated the relative importance of underlying causes such as pollen limitation, resource limitation or architectural effect, and few have compared male allocation. During a 2-year investigation, we found that female reproductive success of an acropetally flowering species, Corydalis remota Fisch. ex Maxim. var. lineariloba Maxim. was significantly lower in the upper late developing flowers when compared with the lower early flowers. Supplementation with outcross pollen did not improve female reproductive success of the upper flowers, while removal of the lower developing fruits significantly increased female reproductive success of the upper flowers in both years, evidencing resource limitation of the upper flowers. Female production in upper flowers was greatly improved by simultaneous pollen supplementation of the upper flowers and removal of the lower fruits, suggesting that, when resources are abundant, pollen may limit the female reproductive success of the upper flowers. The less seed mass in the upper flowers didn't increase in all treatments due to architecture. In the upper flowers, ovule production was significantly lower and the pollen : ovule ratio was significantly higher. These results suggest that male-biased sex allocation in the upper flowers may lead to increased male reproductive success, whereas the lower flowers have higher female reproductive success.

pollen limitation: !affects! female reproductive success 
resource limitation: !affects! female reproductive success 
architectural effect: !affects! female reproductive success 
pollen supplementation: !improves! female reproductive success 
removal of lower fruits: !increases! female reproductive success 
pollen supplementation: !enhances! female reproductive success 
lower flowers: !have higher! female reproductive success 
upper flowers: !have lower! female reproductive success 
ovule production: !is lower in! upper flowers 
pollen : ovule ratio: !is higher in! upper flowers