The starch statolith hypothesis of gravity sensing in plants postulates that the sedimentation of statoliths in specialized statocytes (columella cells) provides the means for converting the gravitational potential energy into a biochemical signal. We have analyzed the sedimentation kinetics of statoliths in the central S2 columella cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. The statoliths can form compact aggregates with gap sizes between statoliths approaching <30 nm. Significant intra-aggregate sliding motions of individual statoliths suggest a contribution of hydrodynamic forces to the motion of statoliths. The reorientation of the columella cells accelerates the statoliths toward the central cytoplasm within <1 s of reorientation. During the subsequent sedimentation phase, the statoliths tend to move at a distance to the cortical endoplasmic reticulum (ER) boundary and interact only transiently with the ER. Statoliths moved by laser tweezers against the ER boundary experience an elastic lift force upon release from the optical trap. High-resolution electron tomography analysis of statolith-to-ER contact sites indicate that the weight of statoliths is sufficient to locally deform the ER membranes that can potentially activate mechanosensitive ion channels. We suggest that in root columella cells, the transduction of the kinetic energy of sedimenting statoliths into a biochemical signal involves a combination of statolith-driven motion of the cytosol, statolith-induced deformation of the ER membranes, and a rapid release of kinetic energy from the ER during reorientation to activate mechanosensitive sites within the central columella cells.

statolith: !sediments in! columella cells 
statolith: !slides within! aggregates 
statolith: !accelerates toward! cytoplasm 
statolith: !moves at distance to! ER boundary 
statolith: !experiences lift force from! optical trap 
statolith: !deforms! ER membranes 
cytosol: !moved by! statoliths 
ER: !activated by! statolith-induced deformation