['19271961', 'We previously reported that patatin-like protein 2 (PLP2), a pathogen-induced  patatin-like lipid acyl hydrolase, promotes cell death and negatively affects  Arabidopsis resistance to the fungus Botrytis cinerea and to the bacteria  Pseudomonas syringae. We show here that, on the contrary, PLP2 contributes to  resistance to Cucumber mosaic virus, an obligate parasite inducing the  hypersensitive response. These contrasted impacts on different pathosystems were  also reflected by differential effects on defense gene induction. To examine a  possible link between PLP2 lipolytic activity and oxylipin metabolism, gene  expression profiling was performed and identified B. cinerea among these  pathogens as the strongest inducer of most oxylipin biosynthetic genes.  Quantitative oxylipin profiling in wild-type and PLP2-modified,  Botrytis-challenged plants established the massive accumulation of oxidized fatty  acid derivatives in infected leaves. Several compounds previously described as  modulating plant tissue damage and issued from the alpha-dioxygenase pathway were  found to accumulate in a PLP2-dependent manner. Finally, the contribution of PLP2  to genetically controlled cell death was evaluated using PLP2-silenced or  -overexpressing plants crossed with the lesion mimic mutant vascular-associated  death 1 (vad1). Phenotypic analysis of double-mutant progeny showed that PLP2  expression strongly promotes necrotic symptoms in vad1 leaves. Collectively, our  data indicate that PLP2 is an integral component of the plant cell death  execution machinery, possibly providing fatty acid precursors for the  biosynthesis of specific oxylipins and differentially affecting resistance to  pathogens with distinct lifestyles.', '2009 Apr', 'Mol Plant Microbe Interact', '10.1094/MPMI-22-4-0469', 'Heitz']

PLP2: !promotes! Cell Death 
PLP2: !contributes to! Resistance to Cucumber Mosaic Virus 
PLP2: !induces! Defense Gene Expression 
PLP2: !accumulates! Oxidized Fatty Acid Derivatives 
PLP2: !modulates! Plant Tissue Damage 
PLP2: !strongly promotes! Necrotic Symptoms in vad1 Leaves