A comprehensive proteomic approach was applied to investigate molecular events occurring upon inoculation of Medicago truncatula cell-suspension cultures with the oomycete root pathogen Aphanomyces euteiches. Establishment of an inoculation assay in the cell cultures allowed a direct comparison between proteins induced by elicitation with a crude culture extract of the oomycete and by inoculation with A. euteiches zoospores representing the natural infection carrier. Oxidative burst assays revealed responsiveness of the cell cultures for perception of elicitation and inoculation signals. The plant "elicitation proteome" resembles the "inoculation proteome" in early incubation stages and includes proteins induced following initial oxidative burst and defense reactions, but also proteins involved in the antioxidative system. However, approximately 2 days after incubation, the inoculation proteome differs drastically from the proteome of elicited cultures, where a cessation of responses assignable to A. euteiches elicitation occurred. The specific protein induction patterns of zoospore-inoculated cells appeared consistent with the protein induction identified in recent studies for an A. euteiches infection in planta and consist of three functional groups: i) pathogenesis-related proteins, ii) proteins associated with secondary phenylpropanoid or phytoalexin metabolism, and, particularly, iii) proteins assigned to carbohydrate metabolism and energy-related cellular processes. Phosphoproteomic analyses revealed consistent and specific activation of these defense-related pathways already at very early timepoints of inoculation, providing evidence that the identified protein profiles are representative for an established A. euteiches infection of M. truncatula.

oxidative burst: !reveals! responsiveness 
elicitation proteome: !resembles! inoculation proteome 
inoculation proteome: !differs from! elicitation proteome 
pathogenesis-related proteins: !associated with! inoculation 
secondary phenylpropanoid/phytoalexin metabolism proteins: !associated with! inoculation 
carbohydrate metabolism/energy-related cellular process proteins: !associated with! inoculation 
phosphoproteomic analyses: !reveal! defense-related pathways