['19286967', 'Phytochromes are dimeric chromoproteins that regulate plant responses to red (R)  and far-red (FR) light. The Arabidopsis thaliana genome encodes five phytochrome  apoproteins: type I phyA mediates responses to FR, and type II phyB-phyE mediate  shade avoidance and classical R/FR-reversible responses. In this study, we  describe the complete in vivo complement of homodimeric and heterodimeric type II  phytochromes. Unexpectedly, phyC and phyE do not homodimerize and are present in  seedlings only as heterodimers with phyB and phyD. Roles in light regulation of  hypocotyl length, leaf area, and flowering time are demonstrated for  heterodimeric phytochromes containing phyC or phyE. Heterodimers of phyC and  chromophoreless phyB are inactive, indicating that phyC subunits require  spectrally intact dimer partners to be active themselves. Consistent with the  obligate heterodimerization of phyC and phyE, phyC is made unstable by removal of  its phyB binding partner, and overexpression of phyE results in accumulation of  phyE monomers. Following a pulse of red light, phyA, phyB, phyC, and phyD  interact in vivo with the PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR3 basic helix-loop-helix  transcription factor, and this interaction is FR reversible. Therefore, most or  all of the type I and type II phytochromes, including heterodimeric forms, appear  to function through PIF-mediated pathways. These findings link an unanticipated  diversity of plant R/FR photoreceptor structures to established phytochrome  signaling mechanisms.', '2009 Mar', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.108.065227', 'Sharrock']

phyA: !mediates responses to! FR 
phyB-phyE: !mediate shade avoidance and classical R/FR-reversible responses! 
phyC: !heterodimerizes with! phyB 
phyD: !heterodimerizes with! phyB 
phyE: !heterodimerizes with! phyD 
phyC: !requires spectrally intact dimer partner to be active! 
phyE: !made unstable by removal of its phyB binding partner! 
phyA, phyB, phyC, phyD: !interact with! PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR3