['19291320', 'BACKGROUND: Arabidopsis ovules comprise four morphologically distinct parts: the  nucellus, which contains the embryo sac, two integuments that become the seed  coat, and the funiculus that anchors the ovule within the carpel. Analysis of  developmental mutants has shown that ovule morphogenesis relies on tightly  regulated genetic interactions that can serve as a model for developmental  regulation. Redundancy, pleiotropic effects and subtle phenotypes may preclude  identification of mutants affecting some processes in screens for phenotypic  changes. Expression-based gene discovery can be used access such obscured genes.  RESULTS: Affymetrix microarrays were used for expression-based gene discovery to  identify sets of genes expressed in either or both integuments. The genes were  identified by comparison of pistil mRNA from wild type with mRNA from two  mutants; inner no outer (ino, which lacks the outer integument), and aintegumenta  (ant, which lacks both integuments). Pools of pistils representing early and late  stages of ovule development were evaluated and data from the three genotypes were  used to designate genes that were predominantly expressed in the integuments  using pair-wise and cluster analyses. Approximately two hundred genes were found  to have a high probability of preferential expression in these structures, and  the predictive nature of the expression classes was confirmed with reverse  transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and in situ hybridization. CONCLUSION:  The results showed that it was possible to use a mutant, ant, with broad effects  on plant phenotype to identify genes expressed specifically in ovules, when  coupled with predictions from known gene expression patterns, or in combination  with a more specific mutant, ino. Robust microarray averaging (RMA) analysis of  array data provided the most reliable comparisons, especially for weakly  expressed genes. The studies yielded an over-abundance of transcriptional  regulators in the identified genes, and these form a set of candidate genes for  evaluation of roles in ovule development using reverse genetics.', '2009 Mar 16', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-9-29', 'Gasser']

gene: !expressed in! integuments 
mutant: !identifies! genes 
RMA: !provides! reliable comparisons 
transcriptional regulators: !form! candidate genes 
candidate genes: !evaluate roles in! ovule development