['19304929', 'Nicotianamine chelates and transports micronutrient metal ions in plants. It has  been speculated that nicotianamine is involved in seed loading with  micronutrients. A tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) mutant (chloronerva) and a  tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) transgenic line have been utilized to analyze the  effects of nicotianamine loss. These mutants showed early leaf chlorosis and had  sterile flowers. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) has four NICOTIANAMINE  SYNTHASE (NAS) genes. We constructed two quadruple nas mutants: one had full loss  of NAS function, was sterile, and showed a chloronerva-like phenotype (nas4x-2);  another mutant, with intermediate phenotype (nas4x-1), developed chlorotic  leaves, which became severe upon transition from the vegetative to the  reproductive phase and upon iron (Fe) deficiency. Residual nicotianamine levels  were sufficient to sustain the life cycle. Therefore, the nas4x-1 mutant enabled  us to study late nicotianamine functions. This mutant had no detectable  nicotianamine in rosette leaves of the reproductive stage but low nicotianamine  levels in vegetative rosette leaves and seeds. Fe accumulated in the rosette  leaves, while less Fe was present in flowers and seeds. Leaves, roots, and  flowers showed symptoms of Fe deficiency, whereas leaves also showed signs of  sufficient Fe supply, as revealed by molecular-physiological analysis. The mutant  was not able to fully mobilize Fe to sustain Fe supply of flowers and seeds in  the normal way. Thus, nicotianamine is needed for correct supply of seeds with  Fe. These results are fundamental for plant manipulation approaches to modify Fe  homeostasis regulation through alterations of NAS genes.', '2009 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.136374', 'Bauer']

Nicotianamine: !synthesizes! NAS 
NAS: !affects! Fe homeostasis 
NAS: !represses! chloronerva-like phenotype 
NAS: !enhances! Fe mobilization 
NAS: !localizes to! rosette leaves, roots, and flowers 
NAS: !interacts with! seeds