['19326245', 'Plant mitochondria include gamma-type carbonic anhydrases (gammaCAs) of unknown  function. In Arabidopsis, the gammaCAs form a gene family of five members which  all are attached to the NADH dehydrogenase complex (complex I) of the respiratory  chain. Here we report a functional analysis of gamma carbonic anhydrase 2 (CA2).  The gene encoding CA2 is constitutively expressed in all plant organs  investigated but it is ten fold induced in flowers, particularly in tapetal  tissue. Ectopic expression of CA2 in Arabidopsis causes male sterility in  transgenic plants. In normal anther development, secondary thickenings of the  endothecial cell wall cause anthers to open upon dehydration. Histological  analyses revealed that abnormal secondary thickening prevents anther opening in  35S::CA2 transgenic plants. CA2 abundance in transgenic plants is increased 2-3  fold compared to wild-type plants as revealed by Western blotting analyses.  Moreover, abundance of other members of the CA family, termed CA3 and CAL2, is  increased in transgenic plants. Oxygen uptake measurements revealed that  respiration in transgenic plants is mainly based on NADH reduction by the  alternative NADH dehydrogenases present in plant mitochondria. Furthermore, the  formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is very low in transgenic plants. We  propose that reduction in ROS inhibits H(2)O(2) dependent lignin polymerization  in CA2 over-expressing plants, thereby causing male sterility.', '2009 Jul', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-009-9484-z', 'Zabaleta']

CA2: !localizes to! Complex I 
CA2: !enhances! Tapetal tissue 
35S::CA2: !causes! Male sterility 
Secondary thickenings: !prevents! Anther opening 
CA2: !increases! Abundance in transgenic plants 
CA3/CAL2: !increases! Abundance in transgenic plants 
NADH dehydrogenases: !mediates! Respiration in transgenic plants 
Reactive oxygen species: !reduces! Formation in transgenic plants 
H2O2: !inhibits! Lignin polymerization in CA2 over-expressing plants