The plant cell cycle is equipped with two principal control points: PCP1 in G1 and PCP2 in G2 phase. These checkpoints can arrest the cell cycle in response to carbohydrate starvation, while sugar presence can revive the replication and mitotic activity. The process of cell cycle revival is strongly repressed by okadaic acid (OA) or 6-dimethylaminopurine (6-DMAP), inhibitors of specific protein phosphatases 1 or 2A or kinases (cyclin-dependent kinases), respectively. In the present study, it was investigated whether inhibition of cell cycle revival is performed through interference of the above-mentioned inhibitors with the metabolic pathway of sucrose applied to the cells. Changes of hexokinase (HK) and fructokinase (FK) activities, key enzymes of hexose metabolism, were analyzed in Vicia faba root meristem cells arrested in G1 and G2 phase by carbohydrate starvation as well as in those recovered with glucose or sucrose in the presence of OA or 6-DMAP. It was shown that in the sugar-starved cells, the activity of both enzymes decreased significantly. During cell regeneration with carbohydrates, the activity of HK was induced more by sucrose than by glucose, while FK remained inactive after glucose addition. Moreover, in situ investigation of the activities of HK and FK showed that OA-induced and 6-DMAP-induced repression of the cell cycle revival is connected with the interference of these drugs in the metabolic pathway of sucrose. It was also indicated that stronger OA-induced and 6-DMAP-induced inhibition of the replication and mitosis revival, at the early stages of sucrose regeneration, was correlated with the stronger influence of these inhibitors on HK and FK activities.

HK: !induced by! sucrose 
FK: !inactive after! glucose addition 
OA: !interferes with! metabolic pathway of sucrose 
6-DMAP: !interferes with! metabolic pathway of sucrose 
OA: !inhibits! cell cycle revival 
6-DMAP: !inhibits! cell cycle revival 
OA: !influences! HK and FK activities 
6-DMAP: !influences! HK and FK activities