['19346440', 'The actin cytoskeleton has been implicated in plant defenses against pathogenic  fungi and oomycetes with limited, indirect evidence. To date, there are no  reports linking actin with resistance against phytopathogenic bacteria. The  dynamic behavior of actin filaments is regulated by a diverse array of  actin-binding proteins, among which is the Actin-Depolymerizing Factor (ADF)  family of proteins. Here, we demonstrate that actin dynamics play a role in the  activation of gene-for-gene resistance in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  following inoculation with the phytopathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas syringae pv  tomato. Using a reverse genetics approach, we explored the roles of Arabidopsis  ADFs in plant defenses. AtADF4 was identified as being specifically required for  resistance triggered by the effector AvrPphB but not AvrRpt2 or AvrB. Recombinant  AtADF4 bound to monomeric actin (G-actin) with a marked preference for the  ADP-loaded form and inhibited the rate of nucleotide exchange on G-actin,  indicating that AtADF4 is a bona fide actin-depolymerizing factor. Exogenous  application of the actin-disrupting agent cytochalasin D partially rescued the  Atadf4 mutant in the AvrPphB-mediated hypersensitive response, demonstrating that  AtADF4 mediates defense signaling through modification of the actin cytoskeleton.  Unlike the mechanism by which the actin cytoskeleton confers resistance against  fungi and oomycetes, AtADF4 is not involved in resistance against pathogen entry.  Collectively, this study identifies AtADF4 as a novel component of the plant  defense signaling pathway and provides strong evidence for actin dynamics as a  primary component that orchestrates plant defenses against P. syringae.', '2009 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.137604', 'Day']

AtADF4: !mediates! defense signaling 
AtADF4: !binds to! G-actin 
AtADF4: !inhibits! nucleotide exchange 
cytochalasin D: !rescues! Atadf4 mutant 
actin cytoskeleton: !confers! resistance against fungi/oomycetes 
actin cytoskeleton: !orchestrates! plant defenses against P. syringae