Ubiquitination is mediated by the sequential action of at least three enzymes: the E1 (ubiquitin-activating enzyme), E2 (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme) and E3 (ubiquitin ligase) proteins. Polyubiquitination of target proteins is also implicated in several critical cellular processes. Although Arabidopsis genome research has estimated more than 1,300 proteins involved in ubiquitination, little is known about the biochemical functions of these proteins. Here we demonstrate a novel, simple and high-sensitive method for in vitro analysis of ubiquitination and polyubiquitination based on wheat cell-free protein synthesis and luminescent detection. Using wheat cell-free synthesis, 11 E3 proteins from Arabidopsis full-length cDNA templates were produced. These proteins were analyzed either in the translation mixture or purified recombinant protein from the translation mixture. In our luminescent method using FLAG- or His-tagged and biotinylated ubiquitins, the polyubiquitin chain on AtUBC22, UPL5 and UPL7 (HECT) and CIP8 (RING) was detected. Also, binding of ubiquitin to these proteins was detected using biotinylated ubiquitin and FLAG-tagged recombinant protein. Furthermore, screening of the RING 6 subgroup demonstrated that At1g55530 was capable of polyubiquitin chain formation like CIP8. Interestingly, these ubiquitinations were carried out without the addition of exogenous E1 and/or E2 proteins, indicating that these enzymes were endogenous to the wheat cell-free system. The amount of polyubiquitinated proteins in the crude translation reaction mixture was unaffected by treatment with MG132, suggesting that our system does not contain 26S proteasome-dependent protein degradation activity. In this study, we developed a simple wheat cell-free based luminescence method that could be a powerful tool for comprehensive ubiquitination analysis.

E1: !mediates! Ubiquitination 
E2: !mediates! Ubiquitination 
E3: !mediates! Ubiquitination 
AtUBC22: !forms! Polyubiquitin chain 
UPL5: !forms! Polyubiquitin chain 
UPL7: !forms! Polyubiquitin chain 
CIP8: !forms! Polyubiquitin chain 
At1g55530: !forms! Polyubiquitin chain 
FLAG-tagged protein: !binds to! Ubiquitin 
His-tagged protein: !binds to! Ubiquitin 
Biotinylated ubiquitin: !binds to! FLAG-tagged protein 
Biotinylated ubiquitin: !binds to! His-tagged protein 
MG132: !does not affect! Polyubiquitinated proteins