Few molecular studies have been devoted to the finger drop process that occurs during banana fruit ripening. Recent studies revealed the involvement of changes in the properties of cell wall polysaccharides in the pedicel rupture area. In this study, the expression of cell-wall modifying genes was monitored in peel tissue during post-harvest ripening of Cavendish banana fruit, at median area (control zone) and compared with that in the pedicel rupture area (drop zone). To this end, three pectin methylesterase (PME) and seven xyloglucan endotransglycosylase/hydrolase (XTH) genes were isolated. The accumulation of their mRNAs and those of polygalaturonase, expansin, and pectate lyase genes already isolated from banana were examined. During post-harvest ripening, transcripts of all genes were detected in both zones, but accumulated differentially. MaPME1, MaPG1, and MaXTH4 mRNA levels did not change in either zone. Levels of MaPME3 and MaPG3 mRNAs increased greatly only in the control zone and at the late ripening stages. For other genes, the main molecular changes occurred 1-4 d after ripening induction. MaPME2, MaPEL1, MaPEL2, MaPG4, MaXTH6, MaXTH8, MaXTH9, MaEXP1, MaEXP4, and MaEXP5 accumulated highly in the drop zone, contrary to MaXTH3 and MaXTH5, and MaEXP2 throughout ripening. For MaPG2, MaXET1, and MaXET2 genes, high accumulation in the drop zone was transient. The transcriptional data obtained from all genes examined suggested that finger drop and peel softening involved similar mechanisms. These findings also led to the proposal of a sequence of molecular events leading to finger drop and to suggest some candidates.

MaPME1: !localizes to! control zone
MaPME3: !localizes to! control zone
MaPME2: !localizes to! drop zone
MaPEL1: !localizes to! drop zone
MaPEL2: !localizes to! drop zone
MaPG1: !localizes to! control zone
MaPG2: !localizes to! drop zone
MaPG3: !localizes to! control zone
MaPG4: !localizes to! drop zone
MaXTH3: !localizes to! control zone
MaXTH4: !localizes to! control zone
MaXTH5: !localizes to! control zone
MaXTH6: !localizes to! drop zone
MaXTH8: !localizes to! drop zone
MaXTH9: !localizes to! drop zone
MaXET1: !localizes to! drop zone
MaXET2: !localizes to! drop zone
MaEXP1: !localizes to! drop zone
MaEXP2: !localizes to! control zone
MaEXP4: !localizes to! drop zone
MaEXP5