['19366698', 'Phospholipid N-methyltransferase (PLMT) enzymes catalyze the  S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methylation of ethanolamine-containing  phospholipids to produce the abundant membrane lipid phosphatidylcholine  (PtdCho). In mammals and yeast, PLMT activities are required for the de novo  synthesis of the choline headgroup found in PtdCho. PLMT enzyme activities have  also been reported in plants, yet their roles in PtdCho biosynthesis are less  clear because most plants can produce the choline headgroup entirely via soluble  substrates, initiated by the methylation of free ethanolamine-phosphate. To gain  further insights into the function of PLMT enzymes in plants, we isolated PLMT  cDNAs from Arabidopsis and soybean (Glycine max) based upon primary amino acid  sequence homology to the rat PLMT, phosphatidylethanolamine N-methyltransferase.  Using a heterologous yeast expression system, it was shown that plant PLMTs  methylate phosphatidylmonomethylethanolamine and phosphatidyldimethylethanolamine  but cannot utilize phosphatidylethanolamine as a substrate. Identification of an  Arabidopsis line containing a knock-out dissociator transposon insertion within  the single copy AtPLMT gene allowed us to investigate the consequences of loss of  PLMT function. Although the accumulation of the PLMT substrates  phosphatidylmonomethylethanolamine and phosphatidyldimethylethanolamine was  considerably elevated in the atplmt knock-out line, PtdCho levels remained  normal, and no obvious differences were observed in plant morphology or  development under standard growth conditions. However, because the metabolic  routes through which PtdCho is synthesized in plants vary greatly among differing  species, it is predicted that the degree with which PtdCho synthesis is dependent  upon PLMT activities will also vary widely throughout the plant kingdom.', '2009 Jun 5', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M109.005991', 'Dewey']

Phospholipid N-methyltransferase (PLMT): !catalyzes! S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methylation 
PLMT: !required for! de novo synthesis of choline headgroup 
PLMT: !isolated from! Arabidopsis and soybean 
PLMT: !methylates! phosphatidylmonomethylethanolamine and phosphatidyldimethylethanolamine 
AtPLMT gene: !knocked out! in Arabidopsis line 
AtPLMT knock-out line: !elevates! PLMT substrates 
AtPLMT knock-out line: !no difference observed! in plant morphology or development