In view of the projected increase in the frequency of extreme events during this century, we investigated the impact of a drought extreme on leaf ecophysiological parameters and carbon isotope composition (delta(13)C) of grassland communities with species richness (S) of one, three or nine species. The communities, grown for 3 years at either ambient air temperatures (ambient T(air)) or ambient T(air) + 3 degrees C (elevated T(air)), were additionally subjected to an imposed drought by withholding water for 24 days. During the previous 3 years equal precipitation was applied in both temperature treatments, thus communities at elevated T(air) had experienced more frequent, mild droughts. However, it was unknown whether this resulted in a higher resistance for facing extreme droughts. At similar soil matric potentials stomatal conductance (g(s)) and transpiration (Tr) were higher at elevated than ambient T(air), indicating acclimation to lower soil water content. Despite the stomatal acclimation observed, plants in elevated T(air) showed a lower resistance to the drought extreme as indicated by their lower photosynthetic rate (A(max)), g(s) and Tr during the entire duration of the drought extreme. Lower values for A(max), Tr and g(s) were also recorded in species at S = 3 as compared with species at S = 1 for both temperature treatments, but no further differences with S = 9 suggesting that stress was not alleviated at higher S-levels. The discrimination of (13)C was poorly correlated with measurements of instantaneous leaf water-use efficiency (A(max)/Tr) and, with this time scale and sampling method, it was not possible to detect any potential change in plant water-use efficiency using leaf delta(13)C.

drought extreme: !affects! leaf ecophysiological parameters 
drought extreme: !affects! carbon isotope composition 
species richness: !influences! stomatal conductance 
species richness: !influences! transpiration 
species richness: !influences! photosynthetic rate 
temperature: !influences! stomatal conductance 
temperature: !influences! transpiration 
temperature: !influences! photosynthetic rate 
leaf water-use efficiency: !correlated with! discrimination of (13)C