['19372224', 'Chloroplasts are the sites of photosynthesis in plants, and they contain their  own multicopy, requisite genome. Chloroplasts are also major sites for production  of reactive oxygen species, which can damage essential components of the  chloroplast, including the chloroplast genome. Compared with mitochondria in  animals, relatively little is known about the potential to repair oxidative DNA  damage in chloroplasts. Here we provide evidence of DNA  glycosylase-lyase/endonuclease activity involved in base excision repair of  oxidized pyrimidines in chloroplast protein extracts of Arabidopsis thaliana.  Three base excision repair components (two endonuclease III homologs and an  apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease) that might account for this activity were  identified by bioinformatics. Transient expression of protein-green fluorescent  protein fusions showed that all three are targeted to the chloroplast and  co-localized with chloroplast DNA in nucleoids. The  glycosylase-lyase/endonuclease activity of one of the endonuclease III homologs,  AtNTH2, which had not previously been characterized, was confirmed in vitro.  T-DNA insertions in each of these genes were identified, and the physiological  and biochemical phenotypes of the single, double, and triple mutants were  analyzed. This mutant analysis revealed the presence of a third glycosylase  activity and potentially another pathway for repair of oxidative DNA damage in  chloroplasts.', '2009 Jun 19', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M109.008342', 'Niyogi']

Chloroplasts: !contain! Multicopy Genome 
Chloroplasts: !produce! Reactive Oxygen Species 
DNA Glycosylase-Lyase/Endonuclease: !involved in! Base Excision Repair 
Two Endonuclease III Homologs: !targeted to! Chloroplast 
Apurinic/Apyrimidinic Endonuclease: !co-localized with! Chloroplast DNA 
AtNTH2: !confirmed in! In Vitro Activity 
T-DNA Insertions: !identified in! Each Gene 
Single, Double, Triple Mutants: !analyzed for! Physiological and Biochemical Phenotypes 
Third Glycosylase Activity: !revealed by! Mutant Analysis