In this study, two crystallized maltodextrins were generated that consist of the same oligoglucan pattern but differ strikingly in the physical order of double helices. As revealed by x-ray diffraction, they represent the highly ordered A- and B-type allomorphs. Both crystallized maltodextrins were similar in size distribution and birefringence. They were used as model substrates to study the consecutive action of the two starch-related dikinases, the glucan, water dikinase and the phosphoglucan, water dikinase. The glucan, water dikinase and the phosphoglucan, water dikinase selectively esterify glucosyl residues in the C6 and C3 positions, respectively. Recombinant glucan, water dikinase phosphorylated both allomorphs with similar rates and caused complete glucan solubilization. Soluble neutral maltodextrins inhibited the glucan, water dikinase-mediated phosphorylation of crystalline particles. Recombinant phosphoglucan, water dikinase phosphorylated both the A- and B-type allomorphs only following a prephosphorylation by the glucan, water dikinase, and the activity increased with the extent of prephosphorylation. The action of the phosphoglucan, water dikinase on the prephosphorylated A- and B-type allomorphs differed. When acting on the B-type allomorph, by far more phosphoglucans were solubilized as compared with the A type. However, with both allomorphs, the phosphoglucan, water dikinase formed significant amounts of monophosphorylated phosphoglucans. Thus, the enzyme is capable of acting on neutral maltodextrins. It is concluded that the actual carbohydrate substrate of the phosphoglucan, water dikinase is defined by physical rather than by chemical parameters. A model is proposed that explains, at the molecular level, the consecutive action of the two starch-related dikinases.

glucan, water dikinase: !phosphorylates! A- and B-type allomorphs 
soluble neutral maltodextrins: !inhibit! glucan, water dikinase-mediated phosphorylation 
phosphoglucan, water dikinase: !requires prephosphorylation by! glucan, water dikinase 
phosphoglucan, water dikinase: !acts differently on! A- and B-type allomorphs 
phosphoglucan, water dikinase: !forms! monophosphorylated phosphoglucans