['19392705', 'VERNALIZATION INSENSITIVE 3 (VIN3), which is required for the  vernalization-mediated epigenetic repression of FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) in  Arabidopsis thaliana, is quantitatively induced in response to low temperatures.  We found that hypoxic conditions also induce VIN3 in a quantitative manner but  high salt, high temperatures and osmotic stress do not. Inhibition of  mitochondrial respiration did not induce VIN3 expression, consistent with the  lack of VIN3 induction in response to other stresses that affect the rate of  mitochondrial respiration. De novo protein synthesis is required for VIN3  induction during hypoxic conditions; this situation is not the case for VIN3  induction by low temperatures, indicating that different mechanisms act to induce  VIN3 expression in response to cold and hypoxic conditions. Without VIN3  activity, fewer seedlings survived following a 72-h period of hypoxic treatment,  indicating that VIN3 is required for the survival of Arabidopsis thaliana in  response to hypoxic stress. Complementation of the vin3 mutant with a VIN3  transgene restored the wild-type response to low oxygen and confirmed the role of  VIN3 in protecting both shoots and roots during low oxygen conditions. Loss of  VIN3 protein did not affect the transcriptional regulation of genes known to be  important in the response to low oxygen stress, which suggests that there is a  novel mechanism to combat hypoxia that involves VIN3. This mechanism is likely to  involve chromatin remodelling and may be similar to the role of VIN3 in the  epigenetic repression of FLC during the vernalization response.', '2009 Aug', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03891.x', 'Jean']

VIN3: !quantitatively induced by! low temperatures 
VIN3: !quantitatively induced by! hypoxic conditions 
VIN3: !requires de novo protein synthesis for induction by! hypoxic conditions 
VIN3: !required for survival of! Arabidopsis thaliana 
VIN3: !complemented by! VIN3 transgene 
VIN3: !likely involves chromatin remodelling similar to role in! vernalization response