['19392706', 'The embryo of Arabidopsis seeds is symplasmically isolated from the surrounding  seed coat and endosperm, and uptake of nutrients from the seed apoplast is  required for embryo growth and storage reserve accumulation. With the aim of  understanding the importance of nitrogen (N) uptake into developing embryos, we  analysed two mutants of AAP1 (At1g58360), an amino acid transporter that was  localized to Arabidopsis embryos. In mature and desiccated aap1 seeds the total N  and carbon content was reduced while the total free amino acid levels were  strongly increased. Separately analysed embryos and seed coats/endosperm of  mature seeds showed that the elevated amounts in amino acids were caused by an  accumulation in the seed coat/endosperm, demonstrating that a decrease in uptake  of amino acids by the aap1 embryo affects the N pool in the seed coat/endosperm.  Also, the number of protein bodies was increased in the aap1 endosperm,  suggesting that the accumulation of free amino acids triggered protein synthesis.  Analysis of seed storage compounds revealed that the total fatty acid content was  unchanged in aap1 seeds, but storage protein levels were decreased. Expression  analysis of genes of seed N transport, metabolism and storage was in agreement  with the biochemical data. In addition, seed weight, as well as total silique and  seed number, was reduced in the mutants. Together, these results demonstrate that  seed protein synthesis and seed weight is dependent on N availability and that  AAP1-mediated uptake of amino acids by the embryo is important for storage  protein synthesis and seed yield.', '2009 Aug', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03890.x', 'Tegeder']

AAP1: !localizes to! Arabidopsis embryos 
AAP1: !affects! N pool in seed coat/endosperm 
AAP1: !enhances! Protein synthesis 
AAP1: !represses! Storage protein levels 
N availability: !affects! Seed protein synthesis 
N availability: !affects! Seed weight 
N availability: !affects! Total silique and seed number