Calcium signals are critical for the regulation of polarized growth in many eukaryotic cells, including pollen tubes and neurons. In plants, the regulatory pathways that code and decode Ca(2+) signals are poorly understood. In Arabidopsis thaliana, genetic evidence presented here indicates that pollen tube tip growth involves the redundant activity of two Ca(2+)-dependent protein kinases (CPKs), isoforms CPK17 and -34. Both isoforms appear to target to the plasma membrane, as shown by imaging of CPK17-yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) and CPK34-YFP in growing pollen tubes. Segregation analyses from two independent sets of T-DNA insertion mutants indicate that a double disruption of CPK17 and -34 results in an approximately 350-fold reduction in pollen transmission efficiency. The near sterile phenotype of homozygous double mutants could be rescued through pollen expression of a CPK34-YFP fusion. In contrast, a transgene rescue was blocked by mutations engineered to disrupt the Ca(2+)-activation mechanism of CPK34 (CPK34-YFP-E465A,E500A), providing in vivo evidence linking Ca(2+) activation to a biological function of a CPK. While double mutant pollen tubes displayed normal morphology, relative growth rates for the most rapidly growing tubes were reduced by more than three-fold compared with wild type. In addition, while most mutant tubes appeared to grow far enough to reach ovules, the vast majority (>90%) still failed to locate and fertilize ovules. Together, these results provide genetic evidence that CPKs are essential to pollen fitness, and support a mechanistic model in which CPK17 and -34 transduce Ca(2+) signals to increase the rate of pollen tube tip growth and facilitate a response to tropism cues.

CPK17: !transduces! Ca(2+) signals 
CPK34: !transduces! Ca(2+) signals 
CPK17: !targets to! plasma membrane 
CPK34: !targets to! plasma membrane 
CPK17: !interacts with! CPK34 
CPK17: !enhances! pollen transmission efficiency 
CPK34: !enhances! pollen transmission efficiency 
CPK34: !rescues! double mutant phenotype 
CPK34: !activates! biological function 
CPK17: !reduces! relative growth rates 
CPK34: !reduces! relative growth rates 
CPK17: !facilitates! response to tropism cues 
CPK34: !facilitates! response to tropism cues