['19411372', "Functional transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules are a prerequisite for protein  biosynthesis. Several processing steps are required to generate the mature  functional tRNA from precursor molecules. Two of the early processing steps  involve cleavage at the tRNA 5' end and the tRNA 3' end. While processing at the  tRNA 5' end is performed by RNase P, cleavage at the 3' end is catalyzed by the  endonuclease tRNase Z. In eukaryotes, tRNase Z enzymes are found in two versions:  a short form of about 250 to 300 amino acids and a long form of about 700 to 900  amino acids. All eukaryotic genomes analyzed to date encode at least one long  tRNase Z protein. Of those, Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) is the only  organism that encodes four tRNase Z proteins, two short forms and two long forms.  We show here that the four proteins are distributed to different subcellular  compartments in the plant cell: the nucleus, the cytoplasm, the mitochondrion,  and the chloroplast. One tRNase Z is present only in the cytoplasm, one protein  is found exclusively in mitochondria, while the third one has dual locations:  nucleus and mitochondria. None of these three tRNase Z proteins is essential. The  fourth tRNase Z protein is present in chloroplasts, and deletion of its gene  results in an embryo-lethal phenotype. In vitro analysis with the recombinant  proteins showed that all four tRNase Z enzymes have tRNA 3' processing activity.  In addition, the mitochondrial tRNase Z proteins cleave tRNA-like elements that  serve as processing signals in mitochondrial mRNA maturation.", '2009 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.137950', 'Marchfelder']

RNase P: !cleaves! tRNA 5' end 
tRNase Z: !cleaves! tRNA 3' end 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !encodes! four tRNase Z proteins 
four tRNase Z proteins: !localize to! different subcellular compartments 
one tRNase Z protein: !present only in! cytoplasm 
one protein: !found exclusively in! mitochondria 
third one: !dual locations in! nucleus and mitochondria 
fourth tRNase Z protein: !present in! chloroplasts 
deletion of fourth tRNase Z gene: !results in! embryo-lethal phenotype 
all four tRNase Z enzymes: !have tRNA 3' processing activity! 
mitochondrial tRNase Z proteins: !cleave tRNA-like elements!