Arabinogalactan proteins (AGPs) are structurally complex plasma membrane and cell wall proteoglycans that are implicated in diverse developmental processes, including plant sexual reproduction. Male gametogenesis (pollen grain development) is fundamental to plant sexual reproduction. The role of two abundant, pollen-specific AGPs, AGP6, and AGP11, have been investigated here. The pollen specificity of these proteoglycans suggested that they are integral to pollen biogenesis and their strong sequence homology indicated a potential for overlapping function. Indeed, single gene transposon insertion knockouts for both AGPs showed no discernible phenotype. However, in plants homozygous for one of the insertions and heterozygous for the other, in homozygous double mutants, and in RNAi and amiRNA transgenic plants that were down-regulated for both genes, many pollen grains failed to develop normally, leading to their collapse. The microscopic observations of these aborted pollen grains showed a condensed cytoplasm, membrane blebbing and the presence of small lytic vacuoles. Later in development, the generative cells that arise from mitotic divisions were not seen to go into the second mitosis. Anther wall development, the establishment of the endothecium thickenings, the opening of the stomium, and the deposition of the pollen coat were all normal in the knockout and knockdown lines. Our data provide strong evidence that these two proteoglycans have overlapping and important functions in gametophytic pollen grain development.

AGP6: !implicated in! plant sexual reproduction
AGP11: !implicated in! plant sexual reproduction
AGP6: !strong sequence homology with! AGP11
AGP6: !knockout of! no discernible phenotype
AGP11: !knockout of! no discernible phenotype
AGP6: !heterozygous for! AGP11: !aborted pollen grains!
AGP11: !heterozygous for! AGP6: !aborted pollen grains!
AGP6: !RNAi and amiRNA transgenic plants down-regulated for! !aborted pollen grains!
AGP11: !RNAi and amiRNA transgenic plants down-regulated for! !aborted pollen grains!
AGP6: !overlapping and important functions in! gametophytic pollen grain development
AGP11: !overlapping and important functions in! gametophytic pollen grain development