The phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) is a key regulator of plant growth and development as well as plant responses to situations of decreased water availability. Protein phosphatases type 2C (PP2Cs) from group A, which includes the ABI1/HAB1 and PP2CA branches, are key negative regulators of ABA signaling. Specifically, HAB1, ABI1, ABI2, and PP2CA have been shown to affect both seed and vegetative responses to ABA. To further understand their contribution to ABA signaling and to unravel possible genetic interactions and functional redundancy among them, we have generated different combinations of double and triple mutants impaired in these PP2Cs. Interestingly, hab1-1pp2ca-1 and abi1-2pp2ca-1 double mutants showed reduced water loss and enhanced resistance to drought stress, which further supports the role of PP2CA in vegetative responses to ABA. Two triple hab1-1abi1-2abi2-2 and hab1-1abi1-2pp2ca-1 mutants were generated, which showed an extreme response to exogenous ABA, impaired growth, and partial constitutive response to endogenous ABA. Thus, transcriptomic analysis revealed a partial up-regulation/down-regulation of a subset of ABA-responsive genes in both triple mutants in the absence of exogenous ABA. Comparison of ABA responses in the different pp2c mutants showed that a progressive increase in ABA sensitivity could be obtained through combined inactivation of these PP2Cs. These results indicate that ABA response is finely tuned by the integrated action of these genes, which is required to prevent a constitutive response to endogenous ABA that might have a deleterious effect on growth and development in the absence of environmental stress.

ABA: !regulates! Plant growth/development
PP2Cs: !regulate! ABA signaling
HAB1: !affects! Seed/vegetative responses to ABA
ABI1: !affects! Seed/vegetative responses to ABA
ABI2: !affects! Seed/vegetative responses to ABA
PP2CA: !affects! Seed/vegetative responses to ABA
HAB1: !enhances! Resistance to drought stress
ABI1: !enhances! Resistance to drought stress
PP2CA: !enhances! Resistance to drought stress
HAB1: !interacts with! ABI1
ABI1: !interacts with! ABI2
ABI2: !interacts with! PP2CA
HAB1: !synthesizes! Extreme response to exogenous ABA
ABI1: !synthesizes! Extreme response to exogenous ABA
ABI2: !synthesizes! Extreme response to exogenous ABA
PP2CA: !synthesizes! Extreme response to exogenous ABA