['19458117', 'Following pollination, the epidermal cells of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) ovule undergo a complex differentiation process that includes the  synthesis and polar secretion of pectinaceous mucilage followed by the production  of a secondary cell wall. Wetting of mature seeds leads to the rapid bursting of  these mucilage secretory cells to release a hydrophilic gel that surrounds the  seed and is believed to aid in seed hydration and germination. A novel mutant is  identified where mucilage release is both patchy and slow and whose seeds display  delayed germination. While developmental analysis of mutant seeds reveals no  change in mucilage secretory cell morphology, changes in monosaccharide  quantities are detected, suggesting the mucilage release defect results from  altered mucilage composition. Plasmid rescue and cloning of the mutant locus  revealed a T-DNA insertion in AtBXL1, which encodes a putative bifunctional  beta-d-xylosidase/alpha-l-arabinofuranosidase that has been implicated as a  beta-d-xylosidase acting during vascular development. Chemical and immunological  analyses of mucilage extracted from bxl1 mutant seeds and antibody staining of  developing seed coats reveal an increase in (1-->5)-linked arabinans, suggesting  that BXL1 is acting as an alpha-l-arabinofuranosidase in the seed coat. This  implication is supported by the ability to rescue mucilage release through  treatment of bxl1 seeds with exogenous alpha-l-arabinofuranosidases. Together,  these results suggest that trimming of rhamnogalacturonan I arabinan side chains  is required for correct mucilage release and reveal a new role for BXL1 as an  alpha-l-arabinofuranosidase acting in seed coat development.', '2009 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.138388', 'Western']

Pollination: !triggers! Mucilage Secretion 
Mature Seeds: !release! Hydrophilic Gel 
Mutant Locus: !encodes! AtBXL1 
AtBXL1: !acts as! Beta-d-xylosidase/Alpha-l-arabinofuranosidase 
bxl1 Mutant Seeds: !increase! (1-->5)-linked Arabinans 
Exogenous Alpha-l-arabinofuranosidases: !rescue! Mucilage Release 
BXL1: !acts as! Alpha-l-arabinofuranosidase in Seed Coat Development