['19457862', 'Methionine oxidation leads to the formation of S- and R-diastereomers of  methionine sulfoxide (MetSO), which are reduced back to methionine by methionine  sulfoxide reductases (MSRs) A and B, respectively. MSRBs are classified in two  groups depending on the conservation of one or two redox-active Cys; 2-Cys MSRBs  possess a catalytic Cys-reducing MetSO and a resolving Cys, allowing regeneration  by thioredoxins. The second type, 1-Cys MSRBs, possess only the catalytic Cys.  The biochemical mechanisms involved in activity regeneration of 1-Cys MSRBs  remain largely elusive. In the present work we used recombinant plastidial  Arabidopsis thaliana MSRB1 and MSRB2 as models for 1-Cys and 2-Cys MSRBs,  respectively, to delineate the Trx- and glutaredoxin-dependent reduction  mechanisms. Activity assays carried out using a series of cysteine mutants and  various reductants combined with measurements of free thiols under distinct  oxidation conditions and mass spectrometry experiments show that the 2-Cys MSRB2  is reduced by Trx through a dithiol-disulfide exchange involving both  redox-active Cys of the two partners. Regarding 1-Cys MSRB1, oxidation of the  enzyme after substrate reduction leads to the formation of a stable sulfenic acid  on the catalytic Cys, which is subsequently glutathionylated. The  deglutathionylation of MSRB1 is achieved by both mono- and dithiol glutaredoxins  and involves only their N-terminal conserved catalytic Cys. This study proposes a  detailed mechanism of the regeneration of 1-Cys MSRB activity by glutaredoxins,  which likely constitute physiological reductants for this type of MSR.', '2009 Jul 10', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M109.015487', 'Rey']

Methionine oxidation: !leads to! S- and R-diastereomers of methionine sulfoxide 
MSRBs: !classified into! two groups 
2-Cys MSRBs: !possess! catalytic Cys-reducing MetSO and resolving Cys 
1-Cys MSRBs: !possess! only catalytic Cys 
Trx: !reduces! 2-Cys MSRB2 
Sulfenic acid: !forms on! catalytic Cys of 1-Cys MSRB1 
Glutaredoxins: !deglutathionylate! MSRB1