['19453443', 'A forward-genetic screen in Arabidopsis led to the isolation of several arsenic  tolerance mutants. ars5 was the strongest arsenate- and arsenite-resistant mutant  identified in this genetic screen. Here, we report the characterization and  cloning of the ars5 mutant gene. ars5 is shown to exhibit an increased  accumulation of arsenic and thiol compounds during arsenic stress. Rough mapping  together with microarray-based expression mapping identified the ars5 mutation in  the alpha subunit F (PAF1) of the 26S proteasome complex. Characterization of an  independent paf1 T-DNA insertion allele and complementation by PAF1 confirmed  that paf1 mutation is responsible for the enhanced thiol accumulation and arsenic  tolerance phenotypes. Arsenic tolerance was not observed in a knock-out mutant of  the highly homologous PAF2 gene. However, genetic complementation of ars5 by the  overexpression of PAF2 suggests that the PAF2 protein is functionally equivalent  to PAF1 when expressed at high levels. No detectible difference was observed in  total ubiquitinylated protein profiles between ars5 and wild-type (WT)  Arabidopsis, suggesting that the arsenic tolerance observed in ars5 is not  derived from a general impairment in proteasome-mediated protein degradation.  Quantitative RT-PCR showed that arsenic induces the enhanced transcriptional  activation of several key genes that function in glutathione and phytochelatin  biosynthesis in the WT, and this arsenic induction of gene expression is more  dramatic in ars5. The enhanced transcriptional response to arsenic and the  increased accumulation of thiol compounds in ars5, compared with WT, suggest the  presence of a positive regulation pathway for thiol biosynthesis that is enhanced  in the ars5 background.', '2009 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03914.x', 'Schroeder']

ars5: !exhibits! increased arsenic and thiol accumulation
ars5: !identified in! alpha subunit F (PAF1) of 26S proteasome complex
paf1: !responsible for! enhanced thiol accumulation and arsenic tolerance phenotypes
PAF2: !functionally equivalent to! PAF1 when expressed at high levels
ars5: !not derived from! general impairment in proteasome-mediated protein degradation
arsenic: !induces! enhanced transcriptional activation of key genes in WT
arsenic: !induces more dramatically! in ars5
ars5: !suggests presence of! positive regulation pathway for thiol biosynthesis