['19482916', 'Plant cells integrate signals from external sources and from organelles to  regulate gene expression, referred to as anterograde and retrograde signaling,  respectively. Functional characterization of the promoter of ALTERNATIVE  OXIDASE1a (AOX1a) from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), a marker for  mitochondrial retrograde response, was carried out by testing the ability of the  AOX1a promoter to drive expression of the reporter gene GUS. This approach  identified a strong repressor element, designated the B element, that was  necessary for an increased promoter activity in response to the mitochondrial  complex I inhibitor rotenone. This element overlaps with a previously identified  potential binding site for the transcription factor ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE4  (ABI4). AOX1a promoter activity was fully derepressed in abi4 mutants and was  unresponsive to rotenone. Furthermore, deletion of the B element of the AOX1a  promoter resulted in increased GUS staining activity compared to the wild-type  promoter in transgenic plants. Binding of the ABI4 transcription factor to this  region of the AOX1a promoter was demonstrated by electromobility shift and yeast  one-hybrid assays. Analysis of transcript abundance for AOX1a in abi4 mutant  lines revealed significantly increased levels of AOX1a mRNA that could not be  further induced by rotenone, consistent with the role of ABI4 as a repressor that  is derepressed in response to rotenone. These results show that ABI4 plays a  central role in mediating mitochondrial retrograde signals to induce the  expression of AOX1a. Furthermore, they provide a molecular link between  mitochondrial and chloroplast retrograde signaling, as ABI4 has been previously  shown to act downstream of at least two chloroplast retrograde signaling  pathways.', '2009 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.139782', 'Whelan']

AOX1a: !repressed by! ABI4 
ABI4: !binds to! AOX1a promoter 
ABI4: !derepressed by! rotenone 
AOX1a: !enhanced by! abi4 mutants 
AOX1a: !induced by! mitochondrial retrograde signals 
ABI4: !downstream of! chloroplast retrograde signaling pathways