Hydraulic traits and hydraulic-related structural properties were examined in three deciduous (Hevea brasiliensis, Macaranga denticulate, and Bischofia javanica) and three evergreen (Drypetes indica, Aleurites moluccana, and Codiaeum variegatum) Euphorbiaceae tree species from a seasonally tropical forest in south-western China. Xylem water potential at 50% loss of stem hydraulic conductivity (P50(stem)) was more negative in the evergreen tree, but leaf water potential at 50% loss of leaf hydraulic conductivity (P50(leaf)) did not function as P50(stem) did. Furthermore, P50(stem) was more negative than P50(leaf) in the evergreen tree; contrarily, this pattern was not observed in the deciduous tree. Leaf hydraulic conductivity overlapped considerably, but stem hydraulic conductivity diverged between the evergreen and deciduous tree. Correspondingly, structural properties of leaves overlapped substantially; however, structural properties of stem diverged markedly. Consequently, leaf and stem hydraulic traits were closely correlated with leaf and stem structural properties, respectively. Additionally, stem hydraulic efficiency was significantly correlated with stem hydraulic resistance to embolism; nevertheless, such a hydraulic pattern was not found in leaf hydraulics. Thus, these results suggest: (1) that the evergreen and deciduous tree mainly diverge in stem hydraulics, but not in leaf hydraulics, (2) that regardless of leaf or stem, their hydraulic traits result primarily from structural properties, and not from leaf phenology, (3) that leaves are more vulnerable to drought-induced embolism than stem in the evergreen tree, but not always in the deciduous tree and (4) that there exists a trade-off between hydraulic efficiency and safety for stem hydraulics, but not for leaf hydraulics.

P50(stem): !more negative in! evergreen tree
P50(leaf): !did not function as! P50(stem)
P50(stem): !more negative than! P50(leaf)
deciduous tree: !not observed in! P50(stem) pattern
leaf hydraulic conductivity: !overlapped considerably! stem hydraulic conductivity
structural properties: !overlapped substantially! leaves
structural properties: !diverged markedly! stem
hydraulic traits: !closely correlated with! leaf/stem structural properties
stem hydraulic efficiency: !significantly correlated with! stem hydraulic resistance to embolism
leaf hydraulics: !no hydraulic pattern found in! leaf hydraulics
evergreen/deciduous tree: !mainly diverge in! stem hydraulics
hydraulic traits: !result primarily from! structural properties
leaves: !more vulnerable to! drought-induced embolism
evergreen tree: !not always in! deciduous tree
hydraulic efficiency: !trade-off between! hydraulic safety