['19493973', 'Eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4B is known to interact with multiple  initiation factors, mRNA, rRNA, and poly(A) binding protein (PABP). To gain a  better understanding of the function of eIF4B, the two isoforms from Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) were expressed and analyzed using biophysical and  biochemical methods. Plant eIF4B was found by ultracentrifugation and light  scattering analysis to most likely be a monomer with an extended structure. An  extended structure would facilitate the multiple interactions of eIF4B with mRNA  as well as other initiation factors (eIF4A, eIF4G, PABP, and eIF3). Eight mRNAs,  barley (Hordeum vulgare) alpha-amylase mRNA, rabbit beta-hemoglobin mRNA,  Arabidopsis heat shock protein 21 (HSP21) mRNA, oat (Avena sativa) globulin,  wheat (Triticum aestivum) germin, maize (Zea mays) alcohol dehydrogenase,  satellite tobacco necrosis virus RNA, and alfalfa mosaic virus (AMV) 4, were used  in wheat germ in vitro translation assays to measure their dependence on eIF4B  and eIF4F isoforms. The two Arabidopsis eIF4B isoforms, as well as native and  recombinant wheat eIF4B, showed similar responses in the translation assay. AMV  RNA 4 and Arabidopsis HSP21 showed only a slight dependence on the presence of  eIF4B isoforms, whereas rabbit beta-hemoglobin mRNA and wheat germin mRNA showed  modest dependence. Barley alpha-amylase, oat globulin, and satellite tobacco  necrosis virus RNA displayed the strongest dependence on eIF4B. These results  suggest that eIF4B has some effects on mRNA discrimination during initiation of  translation. Barley alpha-amylase, oat globulin, and rabbit beta-hemoglobin mRNA  showed the highest activity with eIF4F, whereas Arabidopsis HSP21 and AMV RNA 4  used both eIF4F and eIF(iso)4F equally well. These results suggest that  differential or optimal translation of mRNAs may require initiation complexes  composed of specific isoforms of initiation factor gene products. Thus,  individual mRNAs or classes of mRNAs may respond to the relative abundance of a  particular initiation factor(s), which in turn may affect the amount of protein  translated. It is likely that optimal multifactor initiation complexes exist that  allow for optimal translation of mRNAs under a variety of cellular conditions.', '2009 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.138438', 'Browning']

eIF4B: !interacts with! mRNA
eIF4B: !interacts with! eIF4A
eIF4B: !interacts with! eIF4G
eIF4B: !interacts with! PABP
eIF4B: !interacts with! eIF3
eIF4F: !enhances! Barley alpha-amylase
eIF4F: !enhances! Oat globulin
eIF4F: !enhances! Rabbit beta-hemoglobin mRNA
eIF(iso)4F: !enhances! Arabidopsis HSP21
eIF(iso)4F: !enhances! AMV RNA 4