Glucosinolates (GSLs) are secondary metabolites in Brassicaceae plants synthesized from amino acids. Methionine-derived GSLs (Met-GSLs) with diverse side chains of various lengths are the major GSLs in Arabidopsis. Methionine chain elongation enzymes are responsible for variations in chain length in Met-GSL biosynthesis. The genes encoding methionine chain elongation enzymes are considered to have been recruited from the leucine biosynthetic pathway in the course of evolution. Among them, the genes encoding methylthioalkylmalate synthases and aminotransferases have been identified; however, the remaining genes that encode methylthioalkylmalate isomerase (MAM-I) and methylthioalkylmalate dehydro-genase (MAM-D) remain to be identified. In a previous study based on transcriptome co-expression analysis, we identified candidate genes for the large subunit of MAM-I and MAM-D. In this study, we confirmed their predicted functions by targeted GSL analysis of the knockout mutants, and named the respective genes MAM-IL1/AtleuC1 and MAM-D1/AtIMD1. Metabolic profiling of the knockout mutants of methionine chain elongation enzymes, conducted by means of widely targeted metabolomics, implied that these enzymes have roles in controlling metabolism from methionine to primary and methionine-related secondary metabolites. As shown here, an omics-based approach is an efficient strategy for the functional elucidation of genes involved in metabolism.

Methionine-derived GSLs: !synthesized from! amino acids 
Methionine chain elongation enzymes: !responsible for! variations in chain length 
Methylthioalkylmalate synthases: !identified as! genes encoding methionine chain elongation enzymes 
Aminotransferases: !identified as! genes encoding methionine chain elongation enzymes 
Methylthioalkylmalate isomerase: !remains to be identified! 
Methylthioalkylmalate dehydrogenase: !remains to be identified! 
Omics-based approach: !efficient strategy for! functional elucidation of genes involved in metabolism