Quantitative analysis of geometry and surface growth based on the sequential replica method is used to compare morphogenesis at the shoot apex of Anagallis arvensis in the reproductive and vegetative phases of development. Formation of three types of lateral organs takes place at the Anagallis shoot apical meristem (SAM): vegetative leaf primordia are formed during the vegetative phase and leaf-like bracts and flower primordia during the reproductive phase. Although the shapes of all the three types of primordia are very similar during their early developmental stages, areal growth rates and anisotropy of apex surface growth accompanying formation of leaf or bract primordia are profoundly different from those during formation of flower primordia. This provides an example of different modes of de novo formation of a given shape. Moreover, growth accompanying the formation of the boundary between the SAM and flower primordium is entirely different from growth at the adaxial leaf or bract primordium boundary. In the latter, areal growth rates at the future boundary are the lowest of all the apex surface, while in the former they are relatively very high. The direction of maximal growth rate is latitudinal (along the future boundary) in the case of leaf or bract primordium but meridional (across the boundary) in the case of flower. The replica method does not enable direct analysis of growth in the direction perpendicular to the apex surface (anticlinal direction). Nevertheless, the reconstructed surfaces of consecutive replicas taken from an individual apex allow general directions of SAM surface bulging accompanying primordium formation to be recognized. Precise alignment of consecutive reconstructions shows that the direction of initial bulging during the leaf or bract formation is nearly parallel to the shoot axis (upward bulging), while in the case of flower it is perpendicular to the axis (lateral bulging). In future, such 3D reconstructions can be used to assess displacement velocity fields so that growth in the anticlinal direction can be assessed. In terms of self-perpetuation, the inflorescence SAM of Anagallis differs from the SAM in the vegetative phase in that the centrally located region of slow growth is less distinct in the inflorescence SAM. Moreover, the position of this slowly growing zone with respect to cells is not stable in the course of the meristem ontogeny.

SAM: !forms! Leaf primordia 
SAM: !forms! Bract primordia 
SAM: !forms! Flower primordia 
Areal growth rate: !differs between! Leaf/bract primordia and flower primordia 
Growth direction: !differs between! Leaf/bract primordia and flower primordia 
SAM: !differs in self-perpetuation between! Vegetative and reproductive phases