Aechmea mertensii is a tank-bromeliad that roots on ant-gardens initiated by the ants Camponotus femoratus and Pachycondyla goeldii. Its leaves form compartments acting as phytotelmata that hold rainwater and provide habitats for invertebrates. In this article, we aimed to determine whether the association with either C. femoratus or P. goeldii influenced the vegetative traits of A. mertensii, invertebrate diversity and nutrient assimilation by the leaves. Transmitted light, vegetative traits and phytotelmata contents were compared between the two A. mertensii ant-gardens. Camponotus femoratus colonized partially shaded areas, whereas P. goeldii colonized exposed areas. The bromeliads' rosettes had a large canopy (C. femoratus ant-gardens), or were smaller and amphora shaped (P. goeldii ant-gardens). There were significant differences in leaf anatomy, as shaded leaves were thicker than exposed leaves. The mean volumes of water, fine particulate organic matter and detritus in C. femoratus-associated bromeliads were three to five times higher than in P. goeldii-associated bromeliads. Moreover, the highest invertebrate diversity and leaf delta(15)N values were found in C. femoratus-associated bromeliads. This study enhances our understanding of the dynamics of biodiversity, and shows how ant-plant interactions can have trophic consequences and thus influence the architecture of the interacting plant via a complex feedback loop.

Camponotus femoratus: !colonizes! partially shaded areas
Pachycondyla goeldii: !colonizes! exposed areas
Camponotus femoratus: !influences! vegetative traits of A. mertensii
Pachycondyla goeldii: !influences! vegetative traits of A. mertensii
Camponotus femoratus: !increases! water, fine particulate organic matter and detritus
Pachycondyla goeldii: !decreases! water, fine particulate organic matter and detritus
Camponotus femoratus: !enhances! invertebrate diversity
Pachycondyla goeldii: !reduces! invertebrate diversity
Camponotus femoratus: !increases! leaf delta(15)N values
Pachycondyla goeldii: !decreases! leaf delta(15)N values