Leaf anatomy, stomatal density, and leaf conductance were studied in 10 species of Spartina (Poaceae) from low versus high salt marsh, and freshwater habitats. Internal structure, external morphology, cuticle structure, and stomatal densities were studied with light and electron microscopy. Functional significance of leaf structure was examined by measures of CO(2) uptake and stomatal distributions. All species have Kranz anatomy and C(4)delta(13)C values. Freshwater species have thin leaves with small ridges on adaxial sides and stomata on both adaxial and abaxial sides. By contrast, salt marsh species have thick leaves with very pronounced ridges on the adaxial side and stomata located almost exclusively on adaxial leaf surfaces. Salt marsh species also have a thicker cuticle on the abaxial than on the adaxial side of leaves, and CO(2) uptake during photosynthesis is restricted to the adaxial leaf surface. Salt marsh species are adapted to controlling water loss by having stomata in leaf furrows on the adaxial side, which increases the boundary layer, and by having large leaf ridges that fit together as the leaf rolls during water stress. Differences in structural-functional features of photosynthesis in Spartina species are suggested to be related to adaptations to saline environments.

Leaf anatomy: !differs between! Freshwater/Salt marsh species
Stomatal density: !varies between! Freshwater/Salt marsh species
Leaf conductance: !differs between! Freshwater/Salt marsh species
Kranz anatomy: !present in! All species
C(4)delta(13)C values: !present in! All species
Thin leaves: !characteristic of! Freshwater species
Small ridges: !on adaxial side of! Freshwater species
Stomata: !on both sides of! Freshwater species
Thick leaves: !characteristic of! Salt marsh species
Very pronounced ridges: !on adaxial side of! Salt marsh species
Stomata: !on adaxial side of! Salt marsh species
Thicker cuticle: !on abaxial side of! Salt marsh species
CO(2) uptake: !restricted to! Adaxial leaf surface
Stomata: !in leaf furrows on! Adaxial side
Large leaf ridges: !fit together as! Leaf rolls