Plants are sensitive to stimuli from the environment (e.g., wind, rain, contact, pricking, wounding). They usually respond to such stimuli by metabolic or morphogenetic changes. Sometimes the information corresponding to a stimulus may be "stored" in the plant where it remains inactive until a second stimulus "recalls" this information and finally allows it to take effect. Two experimental systems have proved especially useful in unravelling the main features of these memory-like processes.In the system based on Bidens seedlings, an asymmetrical treatment (e.g., pricking, or gently rubbing one of the seedling cotyledons) causes the cotyledonary buds to grow asymmetrically after release of apical dominance by decapitation of the seedlings. This information may be stored within the seedlings, without taking effect, for at least two weeks; then the information may be recalled by subjecting the seedlings to a second, appropriate, treatment that permits transduction of the signal into the final response (differential growth of the buds). Whilst storage is an irreversible, all-or-nothing process, recall is sensitive to a number of factors, including the intensity of these factors, and can readily be enabled or disabled. In consequence, it is possible to recall the stored message several times successively.In the system based on flax seedlings, stimulation such as manipulation stimulus, drought, wind, cold shock and radiation from a GSM telephone or from a 105 GHz Gunn oscillator, has no apparent effect. If, however, the seedlings are subjected at the same time to transient calcium depletion, numerous epidermal meristems form in their hypocotyls. When the calcium depletion treatment is applied a few days after the mechanical treatment, the time taken for the meristems to appear is increased by a number of days exactly equal to that between the application of the mechanical treatment and the beginning of the calcium depletion treatment. This means that a meristem-production information corresponding to the stimulation treatment has been stored in the plants, without any apparent effect, until the calcium depletion treatment recalls this information to allow it to take effect. Gel electrophoresis has shown that a few protein spots are changed (pI shift, appearance or disappearance of a spot) as a consequence of the application of the treatments that store or recall a meristem-production signal in flax seedlings. A SIMS investigation has revealed that the pI shift of one of these spots is probably due to protein phosphorylation. Modifications of the proteome have also been observed in Arabidopsis seedlings subjected to stimuli such as cold shock or radiation from a GSM telephone.

environment: !stimulates! Plants 
pricking/rubbing: !stores! Information 
second stimulus: !recalls! Information 
calcium depletion: !recalls! Meristem-production signal 
protein spots: !change due to! Treatments 
protein phosphorylation: !causes! pI shift