['19529829', 'A hyper-osmotically sensitive mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana, designated hos3-1  (high expression of osmotically responsive genes), was identified based on its  hyper-luminescence of RD29A:LUC promoter fusion plants upon treatment with NaCl  and ABA. These responses implicate the disrupted gene as a direct or indirect  negative regulator of the RD29A stress-responsive pathway. By sequencing the  flanking regions of the T-DNA borders, it was determined that the disrupted gene  is at locus At4g36830, annotated as encoding a putative protein with high  homology to CIG30 (ELO2/FEN1). CIG30 has been implicated in synthesis of very  long chain fatty acids (VLCFA), which are essential precursors for sphingolipids  and ceramides. Altered stress responses characteristic of ABA-hypersensitivity,  including reduced root growth inhibition and reduced germination with ABA  treatment and reduced water loss from leaves, were exhibited by allelic hos3-1  and hos3-2 mutants. The hos3-2 mutant is partially suppressed in its transcript  abundance and is inherited as a recessive trait. Further, the HOS3 ORF under the  control of the 35SCaMV promoter restored wild-type NaCl- and ABA-root growth  sensitivity as well as RD29A:LUC luminescence in mutant plants. We also show here  that the HOS3 wild-type gene functionally complements the sensitivity of elo2 and  elo3 yeast mutants to monensin. Furthermore, both hos3-1 and hos3-2 alleles  shared increased sensitivity to the herbicide Metolachlor, which inhibits acyl  chain elongation in synthesis of VLCFA, and HOS3 functionally complemented both  elo2 and elo3 and restored levels of VLCFA. Together, these data establish that  HOS3 inhibits ABA-mediated stress responses and implicate the VLCFA pathway and  products as control points for several aspects of abiotic stress signaling and  responses. The results also provide support for a role of ceramide in the control  of stomatal behavior.', '2009 Jan', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/ssn085', 'Li']

hos3-1: !implicates! RD29A pathway 
hos3-1: !encodes! CIG30 
CIG30: !synthesizes! VLCFA 
hos3-1/2: !exhibits! ABA-hypersensitivity 
HOS3: !restores! NaCl- and ABA-root growth sensitivity 
HOS3: !complements! elo2/3 yeast mutants 
HOS3: !restores! VLCFA levels 
VLCFA: !controls! abiotic stress signaling/responses 
ceramide: !controls! stomatal behavior