Immunolocalization of auxin using a new specific antibody revealed, besides the expected diffuse cytoplasmic signal, enrichments of auxin at end-poles (cross-walls), within endosomes and within nuclei of those root apex cells which accumulate abundant F-actin at their end-poles. In Brefeldin A (BFA) treated roots, a strong auxin signal was scored within BFA-induced compartments of cells having abundant actin and auxin at their end-poles, as well as within adjacent endosomes, but not in other root cells. Importantly, several types of polar auxin transport (PAT) inhibitors exert similar inhibitory effects on endocytosis, vesicle recycling, and on the enrichments of F-actin at the end-poles. These findings indicate that auxin is transported across F-actin-enriched end-poles (synapses) via neurotransmitter-like secretion. This new concept finds genetic support from the semaphore1, rum1 and rum1/lrt1 mutants of maize which are impaired in PAT, endocytosis and vesicle recycling, as well as in recruitment of F-actin and auxin to the auxin transporting end-poles. Although PIN1 localizes abundantly to the end-poles, and they also fail to support the formation of in these mutants affected in PAT, auxin and F-actin are depleted from their end-poles which also fail to support formation of the large BFA-induced compartments.

Auxin: !localizes to! end-poles 
Auxin: !transported across! F-actin-enriched end-poles 
BFA: !induces! compartments 
PAT inhibitors: !inhibit! endocytosis 
PAT inhibitors: !inhibit! vesicle recycling 
PAT inhibitors: !inhibit! enrichments of F-actin at end-poles 
semaphore1, rum1 and rum1/lrt1 mutants: !impaired in! PAT 
semaphore1, rum1 and rum1/lrt1 mutants: !impaired in! endocytosis 
semaphore1, rum1 and rum1/lrt1 mutants: !impaired in! vesicle recycling 
semaphore1, rum1 and rum1/lrt1 mutants: !impaired in! recruitment of F-actin and auxin to auxin transporting end-poles 
PIN1: !localizes to! end-poles 
PIN1: !fails to support! formation of BFA-induced compartments