['19533160', 'In contrast to yeast, plant interphase nuclei often display incomplete alignment  (cohesion) along sister chromatid arms. Sister chromatid cohesion mediated by the  multi-subunit cohesin complex is essential for correct chromosome segregation  during nuclear divisions and for DNA recombination repair. The cohesin complex  consists of the conserved proteins SMC1, SMC3, SCC3, and an alpha-kleisin  subunit. Viable homozygous mutants could be selected for the Arabidopsis thaliana  alpha-kleisins SYN1, SYN2, and SYN4, which can partially compensate each other.  For the kleisin SYN3 and for the single-copy genes SMC1, SMC3, and SCC3, only  heterozygous mutants were obtained that displayed between 77% and 97% of the  wild-type transcript level. Compared to wild-type nuclei, sister chromatid  alignment was significantly decreased along arms in 4C nuclei of the homozygous  syn1 and syn4 and even of the heterozygous smc1, smc3, scc3, and syn3 mutants.  Knocking out SYN1 and SYN4 additionally impaired sister centromere cohesion.  Homozygous mutants of SWITCH1 (required for meiotic sister chromatid alignment)  displayed sterility and decreased sister arm alignment. For the cohesin loading  complex subunit SCC2, only heterozygous mutants affecting sister centromere  alignment were obtained. Defects of the alpha-kleisin SYN4, which impair sister  chromatid alignment in 4C differentiated nuclei, do apparently not disturb  alignment during prometaphase nor cause aneuploidy in meristematic cells. The  syn2, 3, 4 scc3 and swi1 mutants display a high frequency of anaphases with  bridges (~10% to >20% compared to 2.6% in wild type). Our results suggest that  (a) already a slight reduction of the average transcript level in heterozygous  cohesin mutants may cause perturbation of cohesion, at least in some leaf cells  at distinct loci; (b) the decreased sister chromatid alignment in cohesin mutants  can obviously not fully be compensated by other cohesion mechanisms such as DNA  concatenation; (c) some cohesin genes, in addition to cohesion, might have  further essential functions (e.g., for genome stability, apparently by  facilitating correct recombination repair of double-strand breaks).', '2009 Oct', 'Chromosoma', '10.1007/s00412-009-0220-x', 'Schubert']

SMC1: !interacts with! SMC3
SMC3: !interacts with! SCC3
SCC3: !interacts with! alpha-kleisin
alpha-kleisin: !synthesizes! SYN1, SYN2, SYN4
SYN1: !affects! sister chromatid alignment
SYN2: !affects! sister chromatid alignment
SYN3: !affects! sister chromatid alignment
SYN4: !affects! sister chromatid alignment
SMC1: !affects! sister chromatid alignment
SMC3: !affects! sister chromatid alignment
SCC3: !affects! sister chromatid alignment
SWITCH1: !affects! sister chromatid alignment
SCC2: !affects! sister centromere alignment