Cuttings of Populus przewalskii and P. cathayana, which originated from high and low altitudes in southwest China, were used to examine the effect of water stress on the morphological, physiological and biochemical traits of plants in a greenhouse for one growing season. The dry mass accumulation and allocation, gas exchanges, extent of peroxidation damage, osmotic adjustment and antioxidative defenses, and amounts of pigments were measured to characterize the differences in peroxidation damage and protective mechanisms of two poplar species that contrast in drought tolerance. Under water stress, poplars showed a series of biochemical adjustments and morphological changes as follows: a decrease in leaf relative water content, gas exchanges, plant growth and dry mass accumulation; an increase in relative allocation to roots; an increase in the osmolyte contents (e.g. total amino acids). Additionally, water deficit induced an increase in peroxidation damage [as indicated by an increase in electrolyte leakage, malondialdehyde (MDA), carbonyl (C = O ) and hydrogen peroxide (H(2) O(2) ) content], enhanced activities or contents of antioxidants (e.g. ascorbate peroxidase, guaiacol peroxidase, glutathione redutase and ascorbic acid) and reduced amounts of leaf pigments (e.g. chlorophyll and carotenoid). Furthermore, there were significant differences in the extent of morphological and biochemical changes between the two poplar species. Compared with P. cathayana, P. przewalskii responded to water stress by allocating relatively more to root dry mass, possessing a higher net photosynthesis rate, and having more efficient protective mechanisms, such as more osmolyte accumulation, stronger antioxidant activities and lower chlorophyll/carotenoid ratio. Thus, P. przewalskii suffered less damage as deduced from lower levels of electrolyte leakage, MDA, C=O and H(2) O(2) content. Therefore, P. przewalskii originating from high altitude could possess more efficient protective mechanisms than P. cathayana, which is from low-altitude habitats.

P. przewalskii: !allocates more to! root dry mass
P. przewalskii: !possesses higher! net photosynthesis rate
P. przewalskii: !has more efficient! protective mechanisms
P. przewalskii: !suffers less damage! from water stress
P. cathayana: !originates from! low-altitude habitats