['19548978', 'RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1 (RCD1) is an important regulator of stress and  hormonal and developmental responses in Arabidopsis thaliana. Together with its  closest homolog, SIMILAR TO RCD-ONE1 (SRO1), it is the only Arabidopsis protein  containing the WWE domain, which is known to mediate protein-protein interactions  in other organisms. Additionally, these two proteins contain the core catalytic  region of poly-ADP-ribose transferases and a conserved C-terminal domain. Tissue  and subcellular localization data indicate that RCD1 and SRO1 have partially  overlapping functions in plant development. In contrast mutant data indicate that  rcd1 has defects in plant development, whereas sro1 displays normal development.  However, the rcd1 sro1 double mutant has severe growth defects, indicating that  RCD1 and SRO1 exemplify an important genetic principle - unequal genetic  redundancy. A large pair-wise interaction test against the REGIA transcription  factor collection revealed that RCD1 interacts with a large number of  transcription factors belonging to several protein families, such as AP2/ERF, NAC  and basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH), and that SRO1 interacts with a smaller subset  of these. Full genome array analysis indicated that in many cases targets of  these transcription factors have altered expression in the rcd1 but not the sro1  mutant. Taken together RCD1 and SRO1 are required for proper plant development.', '2009 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03951.x', 'Kangasjarvi']

RCD1: !contains! WWE domain 
RCD1: !interacts with! REGIA transcription factor collection 
SRO1: !contains! core catalytic region of poly-ADP-ribose transferases 
SRO1: !interacts with! smaller subset of REGIA transcription factor collection 
RCD1: !localizes to! plant development 
SRO1: !localizes to! plant development 
RCD1: !enhances! expression of targets of transcription factors 
SRO1: !represses! expression of targets of transcription factors 
RCD1: !synthesizes! AP2/ERF, NAC and bHLH proteins 
SRO1: !synthesizes! AP2/ERF, NAC and bHLH proteins