['19558640', 'BACKGROUND: DNA ligase enzymes catalyse the joining of adjacent polynucleotides  and as such play important roles in DNA replication and repair pathways.  Eukaryotes possess multiple DNA ligases with distinct roles in DNA metabolism,  with clear differences in the functions of DNA ligase orthologues between  animals, yeast and plants. DNA ligase 1, present in all eukaryotes, plays  critical roles in both DNA repair and replication and is indispensable for cell  viability. RESULTS: Knockout mutants of atlig1 are lethal. Therefore, RNAi lines  with reduced levels of AtLIG1 were generated to allow the roles and importance of  Arabidopsis DNA ligase 1 in DNA metabolism to be elucidated. Viable plants were  fertile but displayed a severely stunted and stressed growth phenotype. Cell size  was reduced in the silenced lines, whilst flow cytometry analysis revealed an  increase of cells in S-phase in atlig1-RNAi lines relative to wild type plants.  Comet assay analysis of isolated nuclei showed atlig1-RNAi lines displayed slower  repair of single strand breaks (SSBs) and also double strand breaks (DSBs),  implicating AtLIG1 in repair of both these lesions. CONCLUSION: Reduced levels of  Arabidopsis DNA ligase 1 in the silenced lines are sufficient to support plant  development but result in retarded growth and reduced cell size, which may  reflect roles for AtLIG1 in both replication and repair. The finding that DNA  ligase 1 plays an important role in DSB repair in addition to its known function  in SSB repair, demonstrates the existence of a previously uncharacterised novel  pathway, independent of the conserved NHEJ. These results indicate that DNA  ligase 1 functions in both DNA replication and in repair of both ss and dsDNA  strand breaks in higher plants.', '2009 Jun 26', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-9-79', 'West']

AtLIG1: !plays critical role in! DNA repair and replication 
AtLIG1: !is indispensable for! cell viability 
atlig1-RNAi: !results in! retarded growth and reduced cell size 
atlig1-RNAi: !implicates AtLIG1 in! repair of single strand breaks (SSBs) and double strand breaks (DSBs) 
AtLIG1: !functions in! DNA replication and repair of both ss and dsDNA strand breaks