Using pharmacological and biochemical approaches, the role of protein phosphorylation and the interrelationship between water stress-enhanced kinase activity, antioxidant enzyme activity, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) accumulation and endogenous abscisic acid in maize (Zea mays L.) leaves were investigated. Water-stress upregulated the activities of total protein phosphorylation and Ca2+-dependent protein kinase, and the upregulation was blocked in abscisic acid-deficient vp5 mutant. Furthermore, pretreatments with a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase inhibitor and a scavenger of H2O2 significantly reduced the increased activities of total protein kinase and Ca2+-dependent protein kinase in maize leaves exposed to water stress. Pretreatments with different protein kinase inhibitors also reduced the water stress-induced H2O2 production and the water stress-enhanced activities of antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, catalase, ascorbate peroxidase and glutathione reductase. The data suggest that protein phosphorylation and H2O2 generation are required for water stress-induced antioxidant defense in maize leaves and that crosstalk between protein phosphorylation and H2O2 generation may occur.

water stress: !upregulates! total protein phosphorylation
water stress: !upregulates! Ca2+-dependent protein kinase
abscisic acid: !blocks! upregulation of total protein phosphorylation
abscisic acid: !blocks! upregulation of Ca2+-dependent protein kinase
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase inhibitor: !reduces! increased activities of total protein kinase
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase inhibitor: !reduces! increased activities of Ca2+-dependent protein kinase
scavenger of H2O2: !reduces! increased activities of total protein kinase
scavenger of H2O2: !reduces! increased activities of Ca2+-dependent protein kinase
protein kinase inhibitors: !reduce! water stress-induced H2O2 production
protein kinase inhibitors: !reduce! water stress-enhanced activities of antioxidant enzymes