['19564892', 'Chloroplasts are plant-specific organelles that evolved from endosymbiotic  cyanobacteria. They divide through binary fission. Selection of the chloroplast  division site is pivotal for the symmetric chloroplast division. In E. coli,  positioning of the division site at the midpoint of the cell is regulated by  dynamic oscillation of the Min system, which includes MinC, MinD and MinE.  Homologs of MinD and MinE in plants are involved in chloroplast division. The  homolog of MinC still has not been identified in higher plants. However, an  FtsZ-like protein, ARC3, was found to be involved in chloroplast division site  positioning. Here, we report that chloroplast division site positioning 1  (AtCDP1) is a novel chloroplast division protein involved in chloroplast division  site placement in Arabidopsis. AtCDP1 was discovered by screening an Arabidopsis  cDNA expression library in bacteria for colonies with a cell division phenotype.  AtCDP1 is exclusively expressed in young green tissues in Arabidopsis. Elongated  chloroplasts with multiple division sites were observed in the loss-of-function  cdp1 mutant. Overexpression of AtCDP1 caused a chloroplast division phenotype  too. Protein interaction assays suggested that AtCDP1 may mediate the chloroplast  division site positioning through the interaction with ARC3. Overall, our results  indicate that AtCDP1 is a novel component of the chloroplast division site  positioning system, and the working mechanism of this system is different from  that of the traditional MinCDE system in prokaryotic cells.', '2009 Jul', 'Cell Res', '10.1038/cr.2009.78', 'He']

MinD: !interacts with! MinE 
MinC: !not identified in! higher plants 
ARC3: !involved in! chloroplast division site positioning 
AtCDP1: !discovered by! screening cDNA expression library 
AtCDP1: !exclusively expressed in! young green tissues 
AtCDP1: !causes! chloroplast division phenotype 
AtCDP1: !interacts with! ARC3 
AtCDP1: !component of! chloroplast division site positioning system