Salinity is one of the major abiotic stresses affecting arable crops worldwide, and is the most stringent factor limiting plant distribution and productivity. In the present study, the possible use of in vitro culture to evaluate the growth and physiological responses to salt-induced stress in cultivated explants of Citrus macrophylla was analyzed. For this purpose, micropropagated adult explants were grown in proliferation and rooting media supplemented with different concentrations of NaCl. All growth parameters were decreased significantly by these NaCl treatments; this was accompanied by visible symptoms of salt injury in the proliferated shoots from 60mM NaCl and in the rooted shoots from 40mM NaCl. Malondialdehyde (MDA) increased with increasing salinity in proliferated shoots, indicating a rising degree of membrane damage. The concentration of total chlorophyll significantly decreased in the presence of NaCl, and this effect was more pronounced in the rooted explants. The Na(+) and Cl(-) concentrations in the explants increased significantly with the salinity level, but Cl(-) levels were higher in the proliferated explants than in the rooted explants. For osmotic adjustment, high concentrations of compatible solutes (proline and quaternary ammonium compounds-QAC) accumulated in salt-stressed plants in proliferation, but differences were not observed in rooted explants. In proliferation, proline and QAC were highly correlated with the sodium and chloride concentrations in the explants, indicating a possible role of these compounds in osmotic adjustment. The plant concentrations of NO(3)(-), K(+), Mg(2+), Ca(+) and Fe were also affected by the NaCl concentration of the medium. We suggest that the important deleterious effects in the in vitro explants of Citrus macrophylla grown at increasing NaCl concentrations were due mainly to toxic effects of saline ions, particularly Cl(-), at the cellular level.

NaCl: !affects! Growth Parameters 
NaCl: !increases! Malondialdehyde 
NaCl: !decreases! Total Chlorophyll 
NaCl: !increases! Na(+) and Cl(-) Concentrations 
Proline/QAC: !accumulate in! Salt-Stressed Plants 
Proline/QAC: !correlated with! Sodium and Chloride Concentrations 
NaCl: !affects! NO(3)(-), K(+), Mg(2+), Ca(+) and Fe Concentrations