['19605548', 'The explosive 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) is a significant environmental  pollutant that is both toxic and recalcitrant to degradation. Phytoremediation is  being increasingly proposed as a viable alternative to conventional remediation  technologies to clean up explosives-contaminated sites. Despite the potential of  this technology, relatively little is known about the innate enzymology of TNT  detoxification in plants. To further elucidate this, we used microarray analysis  to identify Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genes up-regulated by exposure to  TNT and found that the expression of oxophytodienoate reductases (OPRs) increased  in response to TNT. The OPRs share similarity with the Old Yellow Enzyme family,  bacterial members of which have been shown to transform explosives. The three  predominantly expressed forms, OPR1, OPR2, and OPR3, were recombinantly expressed  and affinity purified. Subsequent biochemical characterization revealed that all  three OPRs are able to transform TNT to yield nitro-reduced TNT derivatives, with  OPR1 additionally producing the aromatic ring-reduced products hydride and  dihydride Meisenheimer complexes. Arabidopsis plants overexpressing OPR1 removed  TNT more quickly from liquid culture, produced increased levels of transformation  products, and maintained higher fresh weight biomasses than wild-type plants. In  contrast, OPR1,2 RNA interference lines removed less TNT, produced fewer  transformation products, and had lower biomasses. When grown on solid medium, two  of the three OPR1 lines and all of the OPR2-overexpressing lines exhibited  significantly enhanced tolerance to TNT. These data suggest that, in concert with  other detoxification mechanisms, OPRs play a physiological role in xenobiotic  detoxification.', '2009 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.141598', 'Bruce']

TNT: !up-regulates! OPRs 
OPRs: !transform! TNT 
OPR1: !produces! ring-reduced products 
OPR1: !enhances! TNT removal 
OPR2: !enhances! tolerance to TNT