A highly evolved surveillance system in plants is able to detect a broad range of signals originating from pathogens, damaged tissues, or altered developmental processes, initiating sophisticated molecular mechanisms that result in defence, wound healing, and development. Microbe-associated molecular pattern molecules (MAMPs), damage-associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs), virulence factors, secreted proteins, and processed peptides can be recognized directly or indirectly by this surveillance system. Nucleotide binding-leucine rich repeat proteins (NB-LRR) are intracellular receptors and have been targeted by breeders for decades to elicit resistance to crop pathogens in the field. Receptor-like kinases (RLKs) or receptor like proteins (RLPs) are membrane bound signalling molecules with an extracellular receptor domain. They provide an early warning system for the presence of potential pathogens and activate protective immune signalling in plants. In addition, they act as a signal amplifier in the case of tissue damage, establishing symbiotic relationships and effecting developmental processes. The identification of several important ligands for the RLK-type receptors provided an opportunity to understand how plants differentiate, how they distinguish beneficial and detrimental stimuli, and how they co-ordinate the role of various types of receptors under varying environmental conditions. The diverse roles of extra-and intracellular plant receptors are examined here and the recent findings on how they promote defence and development is reviewed.

MAMPs: !recognized by! surveillance system
DAMPs: !recognized by! surveillance system
virulence factors: !recognized by! surveillance system
secreted proteins: !recognized by! surveillance system
processed peptides: !recognized by! surveillance system
NB-LRR: !targeted by! breeders
RLKs: !provide! early warning system
RLPs: !activate! protective immune signalling
ligands: !identified for! RLK-type receptors
extra-cellular receptors: !promote! defence
intra-cellular receptors: !promote! development