['19648231', 'Previously, the GRF-INTERACTING FACTOR1 (GIF1)/ANGUSTIFOLIA3 (AN3) transcription  coactivator gene, a member of a small gene family comprising three genes, was  characterized as a positive regulator of cell proliferation in lateral organs,  such as leaves and flowers, of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). As yet, it  remains unclear how GIF1/AN3 affects the cell proliferation process. In this  study, we demonstrate that the other members of the GIF gene family, GIF2 and  GIF3, are also required for cell proliferation and lateral organ growth, as gif1,  gif2, and gif3 mutations cause a synergistic reduction in cell numbers, leading  to small lateral organs. Furthermore, GIF1, GIF2, and GIF3 overexpression  complemented a cell proliferation defect of the gif1 mutant and significantly  increased lateral organ growth of wild-type plants as well, indicating that  members of the GIF gene family are functionally redundant. Kinematic analysis on  leaf growth revealed that the gif triple mutant as well as other strong gif  mutants developed leaf primordia with fewer cells, which was due to the low rate  of cell proliferation, eventually resulting in earlier exit from the  proliferative phase of organ growth. The low proliferative activity of primordial  leaves was accompanied by decreased expression of cell cycle-regulating genes,  indicating that GIF genes may act upstream of cell cycle regulators. Analysis of  gif double and triple mutants clarified a previously undescribed role of the GIF  gene family: gif mutants had small vegetative shoot apical meristems, which was  correlated with the development of small leaf primordia. gif triple mutants also  displayed defective structures of floral organs. Taken together, our results  suggest that the GIF gene family plays important roles in the control of cell  proliferation via cell cycle regulation and in other developmental properties  that are associated with shoot apical meristem function.', '2009 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.141838', 'Kim']

GIF1/AN3: !affects! Cell Proliferation 
GIF2/GIF3: !redundantly affect! Cell Proliferation 
GIF genes: !regulate! Cell Cycle-Regulating Genes 
GIF genes: !control! Cell Proliferation 
GIF genes: !influence! Shoot Apical Meristem Function