Pseudogenes (Psi) are nonfunctional genomic sequences resembling functional genes. Knowledge of Psis can improve genome annotation and our understanding of genome evolution. However, there has been relatively little systemic study of Psis in plants. In this study, we characterized the evolution and expression patterns of Psis in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and rice (Oryza sativa). In contrast to animal Psis, many plant Psis experienced much stronger purifying selection. In addition, plant Psis experiencing stronger selective constraints tend to be derived from relatively ancient duplicates, suggesting that they were functional for a relatively long time but became Psis recently. Interestingly, the regions 5' to the first stops in the Psis have experienced stronger selective constraints compared with 3' regions, suggesting that the 5' regions were functional for a longer period of time after the premature stops appeared. We found that few Psis have expression evidence, and their expression levels tend to be lower compared with annotated genes. Furthermore, Psis with expressed sequence tags tend to be derived from relatively recent duplication events, indicating that Psi expression may be due to insufficient time for complete degeneration of regulatory signals. Finally, larger protein domain families have significantly more Psis in general. However, while families involved in environmental stress responses have a significant excess of Psis, transcription factors and receptor-like kinases have lower than expected numbers of Psis, consistent with their elevated retention rate in plant genomes. Our findings illustrate peculiar properties of plant Psis, providing additional insight into the evolution of duplicate genes and benefiting future genome annotation.

Psi: !experience! Stronger Purifying Selection 
Psi: !derived from! Ancient Duplicates 
Psi: !have stronger selective constraints! 5' Regions 
Psi: !have lower expression levels! Annotated Genes 
Psi: !tend to be derived from! Recent Duplication Events 
Psi: !have more! Larger Protein Domain Families 
Psi: !have an excess of! Environmental Stress Responses 
Psi: !have lower than expected numbers of! Transcription Factors 
Psi: !have lower than expected numbers of! Receptor-Like Kinases