In rice (Oryza sativa) adventitious root primordia are formed at the nodes as part of normal development. Upon submergence of rice plants, adventitious roots emerge from the nodes preceded by death of epidermal cells above the root primordia. Cell death is induced by ethylene and mediated by hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)). Pharmacological experiments indicated that epidermal cell death was dependent on signaling through G proteins. Treatment with GTP-gamma-S induced epidermal cell death, whereas GDP-beta-S partially inhibited ethylene-induced cell death. The dwarf1 (d1) mutant of rice has repressed expression of the Galpha subunit RGA1 of heterotrimeric G protein. In d1 plants, cell death in response to ethylene and H(2)O(2) was nearly completely abolished, indicating that signaling through Galpha is essential. Ethylene and H(2)O(2) were previously shown to alter gene expression in epidermal cells that undergo cell death. Transcriptional regulation was not generally affected in the d1 mutant, indicating that altered gene expression is not sufficient to trigger cell death in the absence of Galpha. Analysis of genes encoding proteins related to G protein signaling revealed that four small GTPase genes, two GTPase-activating protein genes, and one GDP dissociation inhibitor gene but not RGA1 were differentially expressed in epidermal cells above adventitious roots, indicating that Galpha activity is regulated posttranscriptionally.

ethylene: !induces! cell death
H2O2: !mediates! cell death
G proteins: !signal through! cell death
GTP-gamma-S: !induces! cell death
GDP-beta-S: !inhibits! cell death
d1 mutant: !abolishes! cell death
Galpha: !essential for! cell death
gene expression: !altered by! ethylene/H2O2
RGA1: !not sufficient to! trigger cell death
4 small GTPase genes: !differentially expressed in! epidermal cells
2 GTPase-activating protein genes: !differentially expressed in! epidermal cells
1 GDP dissociation inhibitor gene: !differentially expressed in! epidermal cells