UDP-galactose:flavonoid 3-O-galactosyltransferase (UFGalT) is responsible for cyanidin 3-galactoside (cy3-gal) synthesis from cyanidin (cy) and UDP-galactose (UDP-gal) which are, respectively, catalyzed by anthocyanidin synthase (ANS) and UDP-glucose 4-epimerase (UGE). To clarify the contribution of UDP-galactose pathway to cy3-gal accumulation in apple skin, we analyzed the contents of UDP-gal and UDP-glucose (UDP-glu), cy, and, cy3-gal contents along with UGE activity. We confirmed that transcript levels for apple ANS and UDP-glucose: flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase (UFGT) coincided with anthocyanin accumulation in three apple cultivars differing in their skin colors. During fruit development, changes in level of cy coincided with that of cy3-gal, whereas UDP-gal and UGE activity showed no similar trend with cy3-gal. Significant correlation was not observed between the changes in UGE activity and UDP-sugar contents. The effect of temperature and UV-B radiation (different environmental conditions) on the accumulation of UDP-sugars, cy and cy3-gal, and UGE activity were also investigated in a pale-red cultivar. High temperature tended to depress the accumulation of both UDP-sugars and cy concomitant with the decrease in cy3-gal content irrespective of UV-B radiation. Although there was no high inhibition of both cy and UDP-sugars at low-temperature without UV-B, cy3-gal accumulation was highly depressed. UGE activity was highest at low temperature with UV-B, but not much different under other conditions. Most of the parameters under different environmental conditions were significantly correlated with each other. Based on these results, contribution of UDP-sugar biosynthetic pathway to anthocyanin biosynthesis under different environmental conditions as well as during fruit development is discussed.

ANS: !catalyzes! cy
UGE: !catalyzes! UDP-gal
UFGalT: !synthesizes! cy3-gal
cy: !correlates with! cy3-gal
UDP-gal: !correlates with! cy3-gal
UDP-glu: !correlates with! cy3-gal
UFGT: !coincides with! anthocyanin accumulation
temperature: !depresses! UDP-sugars and cy
UV-B radiation: !inhibits! cy3-gal accumulation