Using in vitro systems, numerous authors have cited the sensitivity of pollen tube growth to high temperature as a major cause of low yields for crops with valuable reproductive structures. We investigated the hypothesis that in vivo fertilization efficiency would be negatively affected by heat stress-induced changes in energy reserves and calcium-mediated oxidative status in the pistil. Gossypium hirsutum plants exposed to optimal (30/20 degrees C) or high day temperature (38/20 degrees C) conditions during flowering were analyzed for fertilization efficiency via UV microscopic observation of pollen tube-containing ovules and for soluble carbohydrates, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), calcium, antioxidant enzyme activity and NADPH oxidase (NOX; EC 1.6.3.1) activity in the pistil. Leaf measurements included gas exchange, chlorophyll content, quantum efficiency and ATP content of the subtending leaf on the day of anthesis. In the pistil fertilization efficiency, soluble carbohydrates, ATP content and NOX activity declined significantly, whereas water soluble calcium and glutathione reductase (EC 1.8.1.7) activity increased, and superoxide dismutase (EC 1.15.1.1) activity remained unchanged. In leaves, heat stress decreased photosynthesis, quantum efficiency and chlorophyll content, but increased stomatal conductance. We conclude that decreased source leaf activity either inhibits pollen development, tube growth through the style or guidance to the ovules as a result of an insufficient energy supply to the developing pistil. We further conclude that a calcium-augmented antioxidant response in heat-stressed pistils interferes with enzymatic superoxide production needed for normal pollen tube growth and fertilization of the ovule.

Heat Stress: !decreases! Fertilization Efficiency
Heat Stress: !decreases! Soluble Carbohydrates
Heat Stress: !decreases! ATP Content
Heat Stress: !increases! Water Soluble Calcium
Heat Stress: !increases! Glutathione Reductase Activity
Heat Stress: !unchanged! Superoxide Dismutase Activity
Heat Stress: !decreases! Photosynthesis
Heat Stress: !decreases! Quantum Efficiency
Heat Stress: !decreases! Chlorophyll Content
Heat Stress: !increases! Stomatal Conductance