['19656342', 'Flowering is controlled by a network of pathways that converge to regulate a  small number of floral integrator genes. We studied the interactions in  Arabidopsis between three of these integrators, flowering locus T (FT), twin  sister of FT (TSF) and suppressor of overexpression of constans 1 (SOC1), as well  as their repression by the MADS box transcription factor short vegetative phase  (SVP). FT is a mobile signal transmitted from the leaf to the meristem to  initiate flowering. Using mRNA null alleles, we show that FT and the closely  related TSF are not essential for flowering, but that the double mutant is  photoperiod-insensitive. Inactivation of both genes also fully suppresses the  early-flowering phenotype caused by over-expression of constans (CO), a  transcriptional regulator in the photoperiod pathway. In addition, we demonstrate  that TSF and FT have similar biochemical functions by showing that they interact  in yeast with the same bZIP transcription factors. Expression of FT or TSF from  promoters specific for phloem companion cells drives early flowering of the  double mutant, so no expression of either gene is required in the meristem.  Furthermore, TSF, like FT, is repressed by SVP, but the triple mutant svp-41  ft-10 tsf-1 expresses SOC1 in the meristem sooner and flowers earlier than ft-10  tsf-1. Thus we distinguish the functions of SVP in repressing FT and TSF in the  leaf and SOC1 in the meristem. In addition, a time course of in situ  hybridizations suggested that repression of SVP and activation of SOC1 proceed  simultaneously in the meristem. These observations clarify the relationships  between these early regulators of the floral transition, and further emphasize  the relatedness of mechanisms acting in the leaf and meristem to control  flowering time.', '2009 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03986.x', 'Coupland']

FT: !transmits! signal 
TSF: !interacts with! bZIP transcription factors 
FT/TSF: !repressed by! SVP 
SVP: !represses! FT/TSF 
CO: !causes! early-flowering phenotype 
SVP: !represses! SOC1 
SOC1: !activated by! SVP