Ageing reduces vigour and viability in maize inbred lines due to non-heritable degenerative changes. Besides non-heritable genetic changes due to chromosome aberrations and damage in the DNA sequence, heritable changes during maize conservation have been reported. Genetic variability among aged seeds of inbred lines could be used for association studies with seed germination. The objective of this study was to identify genes related to germination in aged seeds. The sweet corn inbred line P39 and the field corn inbred line EP44 were used as plant material. Bulks of living and dead seeds after 20 and 22 years of storage were compared by using simple sequence repeats (SSRs) and, when the bulks differed for a marker, the individual grains were genotyped. Differences between dead and living seeds could be explained by residual variability, spontaneous mutation, or ageing. Variability was larger for chromosome 7 than for other chromosomes, and for distal than for proximal markers, suggesting some relationships between position in the genome and viability in aged seed. Polymorphic SSRs between living and dead seeds were found in six known genes, including pathogenesis-related protein 2, superoxide dismutase 4, catalase 3, opaque endosperm 2, and metallothionein1 that were related to germination, along with golden plant 2. In addition, five novel candidate genes have been identified; three of them could be involved in resistance to diseases, one in detoxification of electrophillic compounds, and another in transcription regulation. Therefore, genetic variability among aged seeds of inbreds was useful for preliminary association analysis to identify candidate genes.

Ageing: !reduces! Vigour/Viability
SSRs: !compare! Living/Dead Seeds
Pathogenesis-related protein 2: !related to! Germination
Superoxide dismutase 4: !related to! Germination
Catalase 3: !related to! Germination
Opaque endosperm 2: !related to! Germination
Metallothionein1: !related to! Germination
Golden plant 2: !related to! Germination
Residual Variability: !explains! Differences
Spontaneous Mutation: !explains! Differences
Ageing: !explains! Differences
Chromosome 7: !larger variability than! Other Chromosomes
Distal Markers: !larger variability than! Proximal Markers
Genetic Variability: !useful for! Association Analysis
Candidate Genes: !identify! Association Analysis