['19682287', 'Polar membrane glycerolipids occur in a mixture of molecular species defined by a  polar head group and characteristic acyl groups esterified to a glycerol  backbone. A molecular species of phosphatidylglycerol specific to chloroplasts of  plants carries a Delta(3-trans) hexadecenoic acid in the sn-2 position of its  core glyceryl moiety. The fad4-1 mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana missing this  particular phosphatidylglycerol molecular species lacks the necessary fatty acid  desaturase, or a component thereof. The overwhelming majority of acyl groups  associated with membrane lipids in plants contains double bonds with a cis  configuration. However, FAD4 is unusual because it is involved in the formation  of a trans double bond introduced close to the carboxyl group of palmitic acid,  which is specifically esterified to the sn-2 glyceryl carbon of  phosphatidylglycerol. As a first step towards the analysis of this unusual  desaturase reaction, the FAD4 gene was identified by mapping of the FAD4 locus  and coexpression analysis with known lipid genes. FAD4 encodes a predicted  integral membrane protein that appears to be unrelated to classic membrane bound  fatty acid desaturases based on overall sequence conservation. However, the FAD4  protein contains two histidine motifs resembling those of metalloproteins such as  fatty acid desaturases. FAD4 is targeted to the plastid. Overexpression of the  cDNA in transgenic Arabidopsis led to increased accumulation of the  Delta(3-trans) hexadecanoyl group in phosphatidylglycerol relative to wild type.  Taken together these results are consistent with the hypothesis that FAD4 is the  founding member of a novel class of fatty acid desaturases.', '2009 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04001.x', 'Benning']

FAD4: !encodes! integral membrane protein 
FAD4: !maps to! FAD4 locus 
FAD4: !coexpresses with! known lipid genes 
FAD4: !contains! histidine motifs 
FAD4: !targets to! plastid 
FAD4: !overexpression of cDNA! increases Delta(3-trans) hexadecanoyl group in phosphatidylglycerol