Selenium appears to be an important protective agent that decreases cadmium-induced toxic effects in animals and plants. The aim of these studies was to investigate the changes of properties of chloroplast membranes obtained from Cd-treated rape seedlings caused by Se additions. Chloroplasts were isolated from leaves of 3-week-old rape plants cultured on Murashige-Skoog media supplied with 2 microM Na(2)SeO(4) and/or 400 microM CdCl(2) under in vitro conditions. The following physicochemical characteristics of chloroplasts were chosen as indicators of Se-effects: average size, zeta potential, ultrastructure, lipid and fatty acid composition and fluidity of envelope membrane. The results suggest that Se can partly counterbalance the destructive effects of Cd. This protective action led to an increase of chloroplast size reduced by Cd treatment and rebuilt, to some extent, the chloroplast ultrastructure. Lipid and fatty acid composition of chloroplast envelopes modified by Cd showed a decrease in digalactosyl-diacylglycerol content and an increase of content of monogalactosyl-diacylglycerol and phospholipid fractions, as well as an increase of fatty acid saturation of all lipids studied. The change in fatty acid saturation correlated well with a decrease of membrane fluidity and with a diminishing of absolute values of zeta potential. The presence of selenium in cultured media caused a partial reversal of the detected changes, which was especially visible in properties related to the hydrophobic part of an envelope, i.e. fatty acid saturation and fluidity.

CdCl2: !decreases! Chloroplast size
CdCl2: !alters! Ultrastructure
CdCl2: !modifies! Lipid/Fatty acid composition
CdCl2: !increases! Fatty acid saturation
CdCl2: !decreases! Membrane fluidity
CdCl2: !diminishes! Zeta potential
Na2SeO4: !partly counterbalances! Cd-induced effects
Na2SeO4: !increases! Chloroplast size
Na2SeO4: !rebuilds! Chloroplast ultrastructure
Na2SeO4: !decreases! Digalactosyl-diacylglycerol content
Na2SeO4: !increases! Monogalactosyl-diacylglycerol/Phospholipid fractions
Na2SeO4: !decreases! Fatty acid saturation
Na2SeO4: !increases! Membrane fluidity