Traditional methods to localize beta-glycosidase activity in tissue sections have been based on incubation with the general substrate 6-bromo-2-naphthyl-beta-d-glucopyranoside. When hydrolysed in the presence of salt zinc compounds, 6-bromo-2-naphthyl-beta-d-glucopyranoside affords the formation of an insoluble coloured product. This technique does not distinguish between different beta-glycosidases present in the tissue. To be able to monitor the occurrence of individual beta-glycosidases in different tissues and cell types, we have developed a versatile histochemical method that can be used for localization of any beta-glycosidase that upon incubation with its specific substrate releases a reducing sugar. Experimentally, the method is based on hydrolysis of the specific substrate followed by oxidation of the sugar released by a tetrazolium salt (2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride) that forms a red insoluble product when reduced. The applicability of the method was demonstrated by tissue and cellular localization of two beta-glucosidases, amygdalin hydrolase and prunasin hydrolase, in different tissues and cell types of almond. In those cases where the analysed tissue had a high content of reducing sugars, this resulted in strong staining of the background. This interfering staining of the background was avoided by prior incubation with sodium borohydride. The specificity of the devised method was demonstrated in a parallel localization study using a specific antibody towards prunasin hydrolase.

beta-glycosidase: !localizes to! tissue sections 
6-bromo-2-naphthyl-beta-d-glucopyranoside: !affords! formation of an insoluble coloured product 
specific substrate: !releases! reducing sugar 
tetrazolium salt: !forms! red insoluble product when reduced 
amygdalin hydrolase: !localized in! different tissues and cell types 
prunasin hydrolase: !localized in! different tissues and cell types 
sodium borohydride: !avoids! interfering staining of the background 
specific antibody: !used for! localization of prunasin hydrolase