['19694617', 'GCPs (glycoproteases) are members of the HSP70 (heat-shock protein 70)/actin  ATPase superfamily that are highly conserved in taxonomically diverse species  from bacteria to man, suggesting an essential physiological role. Although  originally identified and annotated as putative endopeptidases, a proteolytic  activity could not be confirmed for these proteins. Our survey of genome  databases revealed that all eukaryotic organisms contain two GCP genes [called  GCP1 and GCP2/Kae1 (kinase-associated endopeptidase 1)], whereas prokaryotes have  only one, either of the GCP1- (Bacteria) or the GCP2/Kae1- (Archaea) type.  GCP2/Kae1 is essential for telomere elongation and transcription of essential  genes, although little is known about the localization, expression and  physiological role of GCP1. In the present study on GCP1-type proteins from  eukaryotic organisms we demonstrated that GCP1 is a mitochondrial protein in Homo  sapiens [called here GCP1/OSGEPL1 (O-sialoglycoprotein endopeptidase)] and  Arabidopsis thaliana, which is located/anchored to the mitochondrial inner  membrane. Analysis of mRNA and protein levels revealed that the expression of  GCP1/OSGEPL1 in A. thaliana and H. sapiens is tissue- and organ-specific and  depends on the developmental stage, suggesting a more specialized function for  this protein. We showed that homozygous A. thaliana GCP1 T-DNA (transferred DNA)  insertion lines were embryonic lethal. Embryos in homozygous seeds were arrested  at the globular stage and failed to undergo the transition into the heart stage.  On the basis of these data we propose that the mitochondrial GCP1 is essential  for embryonic development in plants.', '2009 Oct 12', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BJ20091023', 'Adamska']

GCPs: !highly conserved in! taxonomically diverse species 
GCP1/2: !found in! eukaryotic organisms 
GCP2/Kae1: !essential for! telomere elongation and transcription of essential genes 
GCP1: !localizes to! mitochondrial inner membrane 
GCP1: !expression depends on! tissue, organ, and developmental stage 
GCP1: !essential for! embryonic development in plants