['19691674', '* In plants, UDP-glucuronic acid is synthesized by the oxidation of UDP-glucose  by UDP-glucose dehydrogenase or the oxygenation of free myo-inositol by  myo-inositol oxygenase (MIOX). In Arabidopsis, myo-inositol oxygenase is encoded  by four genes. Transcriptome analysis of syncytia induced by the cyst nematode  Heterodera schachtii in Arabidopsis roots revealed that MIOX genes are among the  most strongly upregulated genes. * We have used beta-glucuronidase (GUS)  analysis, in situ reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and  real-time RT-PCR to study the expression of all four MIOX genes in syncytia  induced by H. schachtii in Arabidopsis roots. All these methods showed that MIOX  genes are strongly induced in syncytia. GeneChip data were analysed for the  expression of genes related to the MIOX pathway (mapman). * Two complementary  double mutants were used to study the importance of MIOX genes. Results of the  infection assay with double mutants in two combinations (Deltamiox1+2,  Deltamiox4+5) showed a significant reduction (P < 0.05) in the number of females  per plant when compared with the wild-type. Furthermore, syncytia in double  mutants were significantly smaller than in wild-type plants. * Our data  demonstrate an important role of the MIOX genes for syncytium development and for  the development of female nematodes.', '2009 Oct', 'New Phytol', '10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.02981.x', 'Bohlmann']

UDP-glucose dehydrogenase: !synthesizes! UDP-glucuronic acid 
myo-inositol oxygenase: !synthesizes! UDP-glucuronic acid 
MIOX genes: !encodes! myo-inositol oxygenase 
Heterodera schachtii: !induces! syncytia in Arabidopsis roots 
MIOX genes: !upregulated by! Heterodera schachtii 
GUS analysis, RT-PCR, real-time RT-PCR: !show! MIOX genes are strongly induced in syncytia 
GeneChip data: !analyzed for! expression of genes related to MIOX pathway 
double mutants: !reduce! number of females per plant 
double mutants: !smaller! syncytia than wild-type plants 
MIOX genes: !important for! syncytium development and female nematode development