The response to drought at the physiological and molecular levels was studied in two common bean varieties with contrasting susceptibility to drought stress. A number of genes were found to be upregulated in the tolerant variety Pinto Villa relative to the susceptible cultivar, Carioca. The products of these genes fell in different functional categories. Further analyses of selected genes, consisting of their spatial differential expression and in situ mRNA accumulation patterns displayed interesting profiles. The drought-tolerant variety displayed a more developed root vasculature in drought conditions, when compared to the susceptible tropical bean Carioca. The in situ localization of three selected genes indicated the accumulation of their corresponding mRNAs in companion cells, sieve tubes and in developing phloem, suggesting that these, and/or the encoded proteins could constitute phloem-mobile signals. Indeed, a number of transcripts that are induced in response to water deficit accumulate in the phloem in other plant species, suggesting a general phenomenon. Moreover, the analysis of drought stress in plant varieties with contrasting tolerance to such stimulus will help to determine the role of differential expression of specific genes in response to such phenomenon, as well as other biochemical, morphological and physiological features in both cultivars.Drought-tolerant plants likely evolved a system that would allow them to maintain its vascular tissue integrity under stress. A functional phloem would then still function in the transmission of long-range signals, important for the systemic adaptation to the stress. It is expected that plants showing increased tolerance to abiotic stress, such as drought, are able to better protect their conductive tissues. This general strategy might help such plants evolve under stress conditions and colonize successfully new habitats.

Gene: !upregulates! Tolerant Variety 
Gene: !accumulates in! Companion Cells 
Gene: !accumulates in! Sieve Tubes 
Gene: !accumulates in! Developing Phloem 
Gene: !protects! Vascular Tissue 
Gene: !transmits! Long-Range Signals