The growth of plants under stable light quality induces long-term acclimation responses of the photosynthetic apparatus. Light can even cause variations depending on the tissue location, as in Arum italicum leaf, where chloroplasts are developed in the lamina and in the entire thickness of the petiole. We addressed the question whether differences in plastids can be characterised in terms of protein-protein interactions in the thylakoid membranes. Thylakoid assembly was studied in the palisade and spongy tissue of the lamina and in the outer parenchyma and inner aerenchyma of the petiole of the mature winter leaf of Arum italicum. The chlorophyll-protein complexes were analysed by means of blue-native-PAGE and fluorescence emission spectra. The petiole chloroplasts differ from those in the lamina in thylakoid composition: (1) reaction centres are scarce, especially photosystem (PS) I in the inner aerenchyma; (2) light-harvesting complex (LHC) II is abundant, (3) the relative amount of LHCII trimers increases, but this is not accompanied by increased levels of PSII-LHCII supercomplexes. Nevertheless, the intrinsic PSII functionality is comparable in all tissues. In Arum italicum leaf, the gradient in thylakoid organisation, which occurs from the palisade tissue to the inner aerenchyma of the petiole, is typical for photosynthetic acclimation to low-light intensity with a high enrichment of far-red light. The results obtained demonstrate a high plasticity of chloroplasts even in an individual plant. The mutual interaction of thylakoid protein complexes is discussed in relation to the photosynthetic efficiency of the leaf parts and to the ecodevelopmental role of light.

Light: !induces! Acclimation Responses
Thylakoid Assembly: !studied in! Palisade & Spongy Tissue
Chlorophyll-Protein Complexes: !analysed by! Blue-Native-PAGE & Fluorescence Emission Spectra
Reaction Centres: !scarce in! Inner Aerenchyma
LHCII: !abundant in! Petiole
LHCII Trimers: !increase in! Petiole
PSII-LHCII Supercomplexes: !not increased in! Petiole
PSII Functionality: !comparable in! All Tissues
Thylakoid Organisation: !gradual from! Palisade to Inner Aerenchyma
Photosynthetic Efficiency: !related to! Mutual Interaction of Thylakoid Protein Complexes