['19703694', 'Myrosinases (EC 3.2.1.147) are beta-thioglucoside glucosidases present in  Brassicaceae plants. These enzymes serve to protect plants against pathogens and  insect pests by initiating breakdown of the secondary metabolites glucosinolates  into toxic products. Several forms of myrosinases are present in plants but the  properties and role of different isoenzymes are not well understood. The dicot  plant model organism Arabidopsis thaliana seems to contain six myrosinase genes  (TGG1-TGG6). In order to compare the different myrosinases, cDNAs corresponding  to TGG1 from leaves and TGG4 and TGG5 from roots were cloned and overexpressed in  Pichia pastoris. The His-tagged recombinant proteins were purified using affinity  chromatography and the preparations were homogenous according to SDS-PAGE  analysis. Myrosinase activity was confirmed for all forms and compared with  respect to catalytic activity towards the allyl-glucosinolate sinigrin. There was  a 22-fold difference in basal activity among the myrosinases. The enzymes were  active in a broad pH range, are rather thermostable and active in a wide range of  salt concentrations but sensitive to high salt concentrations. The myrosinases  showed different activation-inhibition responses towards ascorbic acid with  maximal activity around 0.7-1 mM. No activity was registered towards  desulphosinigrin and this compound did not inhibit myrosinase activity towards  sinigrin. All myrosinases also displayed O-beta-glucosidase activity, although  with lower efficiency compared to the myrosinase activity. The differences in  catalytic properties among myrosinase isozymes for function in planta are  discussed.', '2009 Jul-Aug', 'Phytochemistry', '10.1016/j.phytochem.2009.07.036', 'Meijer']

Myrosinases: !initiate breakdown of! glucosinolates 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !contains! six myrosinase genes 
TGG1, TGG4, TGG5: !overexpressed in! Pichia pastoris 
His-tagged recombinant proteins: !purified using! affinity chromatography 
Myrosinase activity: !confirmed for! all forms 
Myrosinases: !active in! broad pH range 
Myrosinases: !thermostable and active in! wide range of salt concentrations 
Myrosinases: !sensitive to! high salt concentrations 
Myrosinases: !show different activation-inhibition responses towards! ascorbic acid 
Myrosinases: !no activity towards! desulphosinigrin 
Myrosinases: !display O-beta-glucosidase activity! with lower efficiency