Plant basal resistance is activated by virulent pathogens in susceptible host plants. A Colletotrichum orbiculare fungal mutant defective in the SSD1 gene, which regulates cell wall composition, is restricted by host basal resistance responses. Here, we identified the Nicotiana benthamiana signaling pathway involved in basal resistance by silencing the defense-related genes required for restricting the growth of the C. orbiculare mutant. Only silencing of MAP Kinase Kinase2 or of both Salicylic Acid Induced Protein Kinase (SIPK) and Wound Induced Protein Kinase (WIPK), two mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, allowed the mutant to infect and produce necrotic lesions similar to those of the wild type on inoculated leaves. The fungal mutant penetrated host cells to produce infection hyphae at a higher frequency in SIPK WIPK-silenced plants than in nonsilenced plants, without inducing host cellular defense responses. Immunocomplex kinase assays revealed that SIPK and WIPK were more active in leaves inoculated with mutant fungus than with the wild type, suggesting that induced resistance correlates with MAP kinase activity. Infiltration of heat-inactivated mutant conidia induced both SIPK and WIPK more strongly than did those of the wild type, while conidial exudates of the wild type did not suppress MAP kinase induction by mutant conidia. Therefore, activation of a specific MAP kinase pathway by fungal cell surface components determines the effective level of basal plant resistance.

SSD1 gene: !regulates! Cell wall composition
Colletotrichum orbiculare mutant: !restricted by! Host basal resistance responses
MAP Kinase Kinase2: !silenced to! Allow C. orbiculare mutant to infect
SIPK and WIPK: !silenced to! Allow C. orbiculare mutant to infect
Fungal mutant: !penetrates! Host cells
SIPK and WIPK: !more active in! Leaves inoculated with mutant fungus
Heat-inactivated mutant conidia: !induce! SIPK and WIPK
Fungal cell surface components: !determine! Effective level of basal plant resistance