The plant ribosome is composed of 80 distinct ribosomal (r)-proteins. In Arabidopsis thaliana, each r-protein is encoded by two or more highly similar paralogous genes, although only one copy of each r-protein is incorporated into the ribosome. Brassica napus is especially suited to the comparative study of r-protein gene paralogs due to its documented history of genome duplication as well as the recent availability of large EST data sets. We have identified 996 putative r-protein genes spanning 79 distinct r-proteins in B. napus using EST data from 16 tissue collections. A total of 23,408 tissue-specific r-protein ESTs are associated with this gene set. Comparative analysis of the transcript levels for these unigenes reveals that a large fraction of r-protein genes are differentially expressed and that the number of paralogs expressed for each r-protein varies extensively with tissue type in B. napus. In addition, in many cases the paralogous genes for a specific r-protein are not transcribed in concert and have highly contrasting expression patterns among tissues. Thus, each tissue examined has a novel r-protein transcript population. Furthermore, hierarchical clustering reveals that particular paralogs for nonhomologous r-protein genes cluster together, suggesting that r-protein paralog combinations are associated with specific tissues in B. napus and, thus, may contribute to tissue differentiation and/or specialization. Altogether, the data suggest that duplicated r-protein genes undergo functional divergence into highly specialized paralogs and coexpression networks and that, similar to recent reports for yeast, these are likely actively involved in differentiation, development, and/or tissue-specific processes.

r-protein: !encoded by! two or more paralogous genes
r-protein: !differentially expressed in! B. napus
r-protein: !associated with! tissue-specific ESTs
r-protein: !cluster together! nonhomologous r-protein genes
r-protein: !contribute to! tissue differentiation/specialization
r-protein: !actively involved in! differentiation, development, and/or tissue-specific processes