Low temperature is one of the most severe environmental factors that impair plant growth and agricultural production. To investigate how Thellungiella halophila, an Arabidopsis-like extremophile, adapts to cold stress, a comparative proteomic approach based on two-dimensional electrophoresis was adopted to identify proteins that changed in abundance in Thellungiella rosette leaves during short term (6 h, 2 and 5 days) and long term (24 days) exposure to cold stress. Sixty-six protein spots exhibited significant change at least at one time point and maximal cold stress induced-proteome change was found in long-term cold stress group while the minimal change was found in 6-h cold treatment group. Fifty protein spots were identified by mass spectrometry analysis. The identified proteins mainly participate in photosynthesis, RNA metabolism, defense response, energy pathway, protein synthesis, folding and degradation, cell wall and cytoskeleton and signal transduction. These proteins might work cooperatively to establish a new homeostasis under cold stress. Nearly half of the identified cold-responsive proteins were associated with various aspects of chloroplast physiology suggesting that the cold stress tolerance of T. halophila is achieved, at least partly, by regulation of chloroplast function. All protein spots involved in RNA metabolism, defense response, protein synthesis, folding and degradation were found to be upregulated markedly by cold treatment, indicating enhanced RNA metabolism, defense and protein metabolism may play crucial roles in cold tolerance mechanism in T. halophila.

Low temperature: !impairs! Plant growth
Thellungiella halophila: !adapts to! Cold stress
Proteins: !change in abundance! Cold stress
Photosynthesis: !participates in! RNA metabolism
Defense response: !participates in! Energy pathway
Protein synthesis: !participates in! Cell wall
RNA metabolism: !upregulated by! Cold treatment
Defense response: !upregulated by! Cold treatment
Protein metabolism: !plays role in! Cold tolerance