Plants have evolved mechanisms to avoid and repair UV radiation damage, and the free radicals caused by UV tend to be involved in the induction of antioxidant defense systems. In this study, changes in resveratrol and antioxidant enzymes were investigated in relation to UV damage in peanut seedlings. Accumulation of endogenous resveratrol and stilbene synthase mRNA occurred rapidly and significantly in response to UV-C irradiation. Applying resveratrol before UV-C irradiation mitigated rusty spots and wilting of peanut leaves, and inhibition of resveratrol by applying 3,4-methylenedioxycinnamic acid worsened UV-C damage, an effect that was found to be concentration dependent. Correspondingly, the effect of resveratrol on malondialdehyde was similar to changes in the apparent morphology of seedling leaves. Changes in H(2)O(2), O(2)(-), and antioxidant enzymes showed some similarities after either UV-C irradiation or resveratrol treatment. Activities of superoxide dismutases, glutathione reductase, and catalase were more than 2-fold higher during the first 1h after treatments. Ascorbate peroxidase activity increased to more than 3-fold higher 24h after irradiation, whereas it was more than 2-fold higher 8h after resveratrol treatment. Activities of dehydroascorbate reductase and monodehydroascorbate reductase increased by 40% during 8-24h after treatments. Consequently, we proposed that changes in endogenous resveratrol and in antioxidant enzymes may have been involved in oxidative stress induced by UV-C exposure in peanut seedlings.

UV-C: !induces! Resveratrol
Resveratrol: !mitigates! UV-C damage
3,4-methylenedioxycinnamic acid: !inhibits! Resveratrol
Resveratrol: !affects! Malondialdehyde
UV-C: !induces! H2O2
UV-C: !induces! O2-
UV-C: !induces! Antioxidant enzymes
Resveratrol: !induces! Antioxidant enzymes
Superoxide dismutases: !increases! 2-fold after treatments
Glutathione reductase: !increases! 2-fold after treatments
Catalase: !increases! 2-fold after treatments
Ascorbate peroxidase: !increases! 3-fold after 24h of irradiation
Dehydroascorbate reductase: !increases! 40% after 8-24h of treatments
Monodehydroascorbate reductase: !increases! 40% after 8-24h of treatments