['19710229', 'A prominent enzyme in organellar RNA metabolism is the exoribonuclease  polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase), whose reversible activity is governed by  the nucleotide diphosphate-inorganic phosphate ratio. In Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii, PNPase regulates chloroplast transcript accumulation in response to  phosphorus (P) starvation, and PNPase expression is repressed by the response  regulator PSR1 (for PHOSPHORUS STARVATION RESPONSE1) under these conditions.  Here, we investigated the role of PNPase in the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) P deprivation response by comparing wild-type and pnp mutant plants  with respect to their morphology, metabolite profiles, and transcriptomes. We  found that P-deprived pnp mutants develop aborted clusters of lateral roots,  which are characterized by decreased auxin responsiveness and cell division, and  exhibit cell death at the root tips. Electron microscopy revealed that the  collapse of root organelles is enhanced in the pnp mutant under P deprivation and  occurred with low frequency under P-replete conditions. Global analyses of  metabolites and transcripts were carried out to understand the molecular bases of  these altered P deprivation responses. We found that the pnp mutant expresses  some elements of the deprivation response even when grown on a full nutrient  medium, including altered transcript accumulation, although its total and  inorganic P contents are not reduced. The pnp mutation also confers P  status-independent responses, including but not limited to stress responses.  Taken together, our data support the hypothesis that the activity of the  chloroplast PNPase is involved in plant acclimation to P availability and that it  may help maintain an appropriate balance of P metabolites even under normal  growth conditions.', '2009 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.145144', 'Stern']

PNPase: !regulates! chloroplast transcript accumulation 
PSR1: !represses! PNPase expression 
pnp mutant: !develops! aborted clusters of lateral roots 
pnp mutant: !exhibits! cell death at root tips 
pnp mutation: !confers! P status-independent responses