['19717618', 'The phytohormone gibberellic acid (GA) regulates diverse aspects of plant growth  and development. GA responses are triggered by the degradation of DELLA proteins,  which function as repressors in GA signaling pathways. Recent studies in  Arabidopsis thaliana and rice (Oryza sativa) have implied that the degradation of  DELLA proteins occurred via the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Here, we developed  an Arabidopsis cell-free system to recapitulate DELLA protein degradation in  vitro. Using this cell-free system, we documented that Lys-29 of ubiquitin is the  major site for ubiquitin chain formation to mediate DELLA protein degradation. We  also confirmed the specific roles of GA receptors and multisubunit E3 ligase  components in regulating DELLA protein degradation. In addition, blocking DELLA  degradation with a PP1/PP2A phosphatase inhibitor in our cell-free assay  suggested that degradation of DELLA proteins required protein Ser/Thr  dephosphorylation activity. Furthermore, our data revealed that the LZ domain of  Arabidopsis DELLA proteins is essential for both their stability and activity.  Thus, our in vitro degradation system provides biochemical insights into the  regulation of DELLA protein degradation. This in vitro assay system could be  widely adapted for dissecting cellular signaling pathways in which regulated  proteolysis is a key recurrent theme.', '2009 Aug', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.108.065433', 'Deng']

GA: !regulates! Plant growth and development
DELLA proteins: !function as! Repressors
Ubiquitin-proteasome system: !mediates! DELLA protein degradation
Lys-29 of ubiquitin: !major site for! Ubiquitin chain formation
GA receptors: !specific roles in! Regulating DELLA protein degradation
Multisubunit E3 ligase components: !specific roles in! Regulating DELLA protein degradation
PP1/PP2A phosphatase inhibitor: !blocks! DELLA protein degradation
Protein Ser/Thr dephosphorylation activity: !required for! DELLA protein degradation
LZ domain of Arabidopsis DELLA proteins: !essential for! Stability and activity