['19714218', 'Pollen tubes extend through pistil tissues and are guided to ovules where they  release sperm for fertilization. Although pollen tubes can germinate and elongate  in a synthetic medium, their trajectory is random and their growth rates are  slower compared to growth in pistil tissues. Furthermore, interaction with the  pistil renders pollen tubes competent to respond to guidance cues secreted by  specialized cells within the ovule. The molecular basis for this potentiation of  the pollen tube by the pistil remains uncharacterized. Using microarray analysis  in Arabidopsis, we show that pollen tubes that have grown through stigma and  style tissues of a pistil have a distinct gene expression profile and express a  substantially larger fraction of the Arabidopsis genome than pollen grains or  pollen tubes grown in vitro. Genes involved in signal transduction,  transcription, and pollen tube growth are overrepresented in the subset of the  Arabidopsis genome that is enriched in pistil-interacted pollen tubes, suggesting  the possibility of a regulatory network that orchestrates gene expression as  pollen tubes migrate through the pistil. Reverse genetic analysis of genes  induced during pollen tube growth identified seven that had not previously been  implicated in pollen tube growth. Two genes are required for pollen tube  navigation through the pistil, and five genes are required for optimal pollen  tube elongation in vitro. Our studies form the foundation for functional genomic  analysis of the interactions between the pollen tube and the pistil, which is an  excellent system for elucidation of novel modes of cell-cell interaction.', '2009 Aug', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1000621', 'Palanivelu']

Pollen tubes: !extend through! pistil tissues 
pollen tubes: !respond to! guidance cues 
microarray analysis: !shows! distinct gene expression profile 
signal transduction, transcription, pollen tube growth: !overrepresented in! subset of Arabidopsis genome 
reverse genetic analysis: !identifies! seven genes 
two genes: !required for! pollen tube navigation 
five genes: !required for! optimal pollen tube elongation