['19710230', "Selenium-Binding Protein1 (SBP1) gene expression was studied in Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings challenged with several stresses, including  cadmium (Cd), selenium selenate [Se(VI)] and selenite [Se(IV)], copper (Cu),  zinc (Zn), and hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) using transgenic lines expressing the  luciferase (LUC) reporter gene under the control of the SBP1 promoter. In roots  and shoots of SBP1LUC lines, LUC activity increased in response to Cd, Se(VI),  Cu, and H(2)O(2) but not in response to Se(IV) or Zn. The pattern of expression  of SBP1 was similar to that of PRH43, which encodes the 5'-Adenylylphosphosulfate  Reductase2, a marker for the induction of the sulfur assimilation pathway,  suggesting that an enhanced sulfur demand triggers SBP1 up-regulation. Correlated  to these results, SBP1 promoter showed enhanced activity in response to sulfur  starvation. The sulfur starvation induction of SBP1 was abolished by feeding the  plants with glutathione (GSH) and was enhanced when seedlings were treated  simultaneously with buthionine sulfoxide, which inhibits GSH synthesis,  indicating that GSH level participates in the regulation of SBP1 expression.  Changes in total GSH level were observed in seedlings challenged with Cd, Se(VI),  and H(2)O(2). Accordingly, cad2-1 seedlings, affected in GSH synthesis, were more  sensitive than wild-type plants to these three stresses. Moreover, wild-type and  cad2-1 seedlings overexpressing SBP1 showed a significant enhanced tolerance to  Se(VI) and H(2)O(2) in addition to the previously described resistance to Cd,  highlighting that SBP1 expression decreases sensitivity to stress requiring GSH  for tolerance. These results are discussed with regard to the potential  regulation and function of SBP1 in plants.", '2009 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.144808', 'Bourguignon']

SBP1: !enhances! Tolerance to Cd, Se(VI), and H(2)O(2)
SBP1: !up-regulated by! Sulfur Demand
SBP1: !inhibited by! GSH
PRH43: !induces! Sulfur Assimilation Pathway
GSH: !regulates! SBP1 Expression
Cad2-1: !more sensitive to! Cd, Se(VI), and H(2)O(2)