After the imposition of soil drying treatments, an elevation of xylem sap pH is one of the earliest observable responses in many herbaceous model plant species. It is theorized that alkalization of sap results in a concurrent elevation in abscisic acid (ABA) concentration delivered to transpiring tissues by preventing Henderson-Hasselbalch-regulated partitioning between the apoplast and symplast. However, here it is demonstrated that the sap alkalzation response to soil drying is far from universal in higher plant species. Tests were conducted to determine how universal the pH response to drying soil was in a range of perennial species from a diverse range of plant families. The response was not found in the majority of the 22 species tested. Four species exhibited significant increases in pH, but the majority showed no significant change in xylem sap pH. There was no evolutionary relationship between the species that showed alkalization under drought stress. However, the species that alkalized sap also exhibited good control over internal water status and were the most isohydric species of those tested. None of the species exhibiting anisohydric responses alkalized xylem sap under drought stress. Regardless of alkalization response, plants still retain the ability to respond to changes in xylem sap pH when manipulated by alkaline buffer foliar sprays. This finding indicates that plants have conserved the ability to respond to changes in xylem pH and redistribute ABA, even if they do not currently utilize the mechanism when exposed to drought stress. It was found in Buddleja davidii, Euonymus fortunei, and Hydrangea serrata that the xylem sap pH response to water deficits mirrored the natural pH changes that occur as sap is transported to the leaves, indicating that plants need to be able to have naturally occurring alkalization processes in place for them to be up-regulated under drought stress.

soil drying: !causes! elevation of xylem sap pH
drought stress: !not universal in! higher plant species
drought stress: !alkalizes sap in! 4 species
drought stress: !no evolutionary relationship between! species that alkalized sap
drought stress: !none of! anisohydric species alkalized sap
foliar sprays: !manipulate! xylem sap pH
Buddleja davidii, Euonymus fortunei, Hydrangea serrata: !mirror! natural pH changes