Nucleosome loss and histone modifications are important mechanisms for transcriptional regulation. Concomitant changes in chromatin structures of two peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) oleosin genes, AhOleo17.8 and AhOleo18.5, were examined in relation to transcriptional activity. Spatial and temporal expression analyses showed that both AhOleo17.8 and AhOleo18.5 promoters can adopt three conformational states, an inactive state (in vegetative tissues), a basal activated state (in early maturation embryos), and a fully activated state (in late maturation embryos). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed an increase of histone H3 acetylation levels at the proximal promoters and coding regions of AhOleo17.8 and AhOleo18.5 associated with basal transcription in early maturation embryos. Meanwhile, a decrease of histone H3K9 dimethylation levels at coding regions of oleosins was observed in early maturation embryos. However, a dramatic decrease in the histone acetylation signal was observed at the core promoters and the coding regions of the two oleosins in the fully activated condition in late maturation embryos. Although a small decrease of histone H3 levels of oleosins chromatin was detected in early maturation embryos, a significant loss of histone H3 levels occurred in late maturation embryos. These analyses indicate that the histone eviction from the proximal promoters and coding regions is associated with the high expression of oleosin genes during late embryos maturation. Moreover, the basal expression of oleosins in early maturation embryos is accompanied by the increase of histone H3 acetylation and decrease of histone H3K9me2.

Nucleosome: !loss of! transcriptional regulation
Histone modifications: !affects! transcriptional activity
AhOleo17.8 and AhOleo18.5 promoters: !adopt! three conformational states
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays: !reveal! increase of histone H3 acetylation levels
AhOleo17.8 and AhOleo18.5 coding regions: !decrease! histone H3K9 dimethylation levels
Core promoters and coding regions: !dramatically decrease! histone acetylation signal
Histone eviction: !associated with! high expression of oleosin genes
Basal expression of oleosins: !accompanied by! increase of histone H3 acetylation and decrease of histone H3K9me2