['19734265', 'Morphogenesis requires the coordination of cell growth, division, and cell  differentiation. Female gametogenesis in flowering plants, where a single haploid  spore undergoes continuous growth and nuclear division without cytokinesis to  form an eight-nucleate coenocytic embryo sac before cellularization, provides a  good system to study the genetic control of such processes in multicellular  organisms. Here, we report the characterization of an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) female gametophyte mutant, slow walker2 (swa2), in which the  progression of the mitotic cycles and the synchrony of female gametophyte  development were impaired, causing an arrest of female gametophytes at the two-,  four-, or eight-nucleate stage. Delayed pollination test showed that a portion of  the mutant ovules were able to develop into functional embryo sacs and could be  fertilized. SWA2 encodes a nucleolar protein homologous to yeast NUCLEOLAR  COMPLEX ASSOCIATED PROTEIN1 (NOC1)/MAINTENANCE OF KILLER21 that, together with  NOC2, is involved in preribosome export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.  Similarly, SWA2 can physically interact with a putative Arabidopsis NOC2  homologue. SWA2 is expressed ubiquitously throughout the plant, at high levels in  actively dividing tissues and gametophytes. Therefore, we conclude that SWA2 most  likely plays a role in ribosome biogenesis that is essential for the coordinated  mitotic progression of the female gametophyte.', '2009 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.142414', 'Yang']

Morphogenesis: !requires! Coordination 
Cell growth: !coordinates with! Cell division 
Cell differentiation: !coordinates with! Cell growth 
Female gametophyte: !arrests at! Two-nucleate/Four-nucleate/Eight-nucleate stage 
SWA2: !encodes! Nucleolar protein 
Yeast NUCLEOLAR COMPLEX ASSOCIATED PROTEIN1 (NOC1)/MAINTENANCE OF KILLER21: !interacts with! SWA2 
Putative Arabidopsis NOC2 homologue: !interacts with! SWA2 
SWA2: !expresses! Ubiquitously 
Ribosome biogenesis: !essential for! Coordinated mitotic progression of female gametophyte