The decline of take-all disease (Gaeumannomyces graminis var. tritici), which may take place during wheat monocropping, involves plant-protecting, root-colonizing microorganisms. So far, however, most work has focused on antagonistic fluorescent pseudomonads. Our objective was to assess the changes in rhizobacterial community composition during take-all decline of field-grown wheat. The study was based on the development and utilization of a taxonomic 16S rRNA-based microarray of 575 probes, coupled with cloning-sequencing and quantitative PCR. Plots from one experimental field grown with wheat for 1 yr (low level of disease), 5 yr (high level of disease) or 10 yr (low level of disease, suppressiveness reached) were used. Microarray data discriminated between the three stages. The outbreak stage (5 yr) was mainly characterized by the prevalence of Proteobacteria, notably Pseudomonas (Gammaproteobacteria), Nitrosospira (Betaproteobacteria), Rhizobacteriaceae, Sphingomonadaceae, Phyllobacteriaceae (Alphaproteobacteria), as well as Bacteroidetes and Verrucomicrobia. By contrast, suppressiveness (10 yr) correlated with the prevalence of a broader range of taxa, which belonged mainly to Acidobacteria, Planctomycetes, Nitrospira, Chloroflexi, Alphaproteobacteria (notably Azospirillum) and Firmicutes (notably Thermoanaerobacter). In conclusion, take-all decline correlated with multiple changes in rhizobacterial community composition, far beyond the sole case of pseudomonads.

Pseudomonas: !prevails in! outbreak stage
Nitrosospira: !prevails in! outbreak stage
Rhizobacteriaceae: !prevails in! outbreak stage
Sphingomonadaceae: !prevails in! outbreak stage
Phyllobacteriaceae: !prevails in! outbreak stage
Bacteroidetes: !prevails in! outbreak stage
Verrucomicrobia: !prevails in! outbreak stage
Acidobacteria: !prevails in! suppressiveness
Planctomycetes: !prevails in! suppressiveness
Nitrospira: !prevails in! suppressiveness
Chloroflexi: !prevails in! suppressiveness
Azospirillum: !prevails in! suppressiveness
Thermoanaerobacter: !prevails in! suppressiveness