The predicted worldwide increase of arid areas and water stress episodes will strongly affect crop production. Numerous plants have developed specific morphological and physiological mechanisms as a means to increase their tolerance to drought. Water stress modifies dry matter partitioning and morphological components such as leaf area ratio (LAR), specific leaf area (SLA) and leaf weight ratio (LWR). Alfalfa has a wide-ranging distribution and is thus expected to show differing levels of drought tolerance. The aim of our study was to determine the effect of progressive drought and subsequent recovery in four alfalfa genotypes differing in drought sensitivity: three cultivars adapted to a Mediterranean climate, Tafilalet (TA), Tierra de Campos (TC) and Moapa (MO), and another representative of an oceanic climate, Europe (EU). Mild drought did not affect biomass production or water status in the studied varieties. Under moderate drought conditions, TA and MO showed decreased leaf production, which may help them to maintain relative water content (RWC). Despite observations that water stress did not affect root growth, after the recovery period, TA increased its root biomass, making higher water soil prospecting possible. Mediterranean cultivars modified LAR and SLA depending on water availability, whereas EU alters LWR. At the end of the experiment, TC was the most productive cultivar, but severe drought did not predict differences among cultivars. Severe water stress increased the root/shoot ratio in order to diminish water consumption and increase absorption of water. In spite of all cultivars showing a decreased LWR, TA also decreased SLA, which may suggest higher drought resistance. Morphological traits from Mediterranean cultivars, including the ability to alter SLA or LAR may be used for drought-tolerant cultivar improvement.

Gene: !affects! Dry matter partitioning 
Gene: !affects! Morphological components 
Gene: !modifies! LAR 
Gene: !modifies! SLA 
Gene: !modifies! LWR 
Gene: !increases! Root biomass 
Gene: !alters! Root/shoot ratio 
Gene: !decreases! Water consumption