Induction of terpene synthase (TPS) gene expression and enzyme activity is known to occur in response to various chemical and biological stimuli in several species of spruce (genus Picea). However, high sequence identity between TPS family members has made it difficult to determine the induction patterns of individual TPS at the protein and transcript levels and whether specific TPS enzymes respond differentially to treatment. In the present study we used a multi-level approach to measure the induction and activity of TPS enzymes in protein extracts of Norway spruce (Picea abies) bark tissue following treatment with methyl jasmonate (MeJA). Measurements were made on the transcript, protein, enzyme activity and metabolite levels. Using a relatively new proteomics application, selective reaction monitoring (SRM), it was possible to differentiate and quantitatively measure the abundance of several known TPS proteins and three 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase (DXS) isoforms in Norway spruce. Protein levels of individual TPS and DXS enzymes were differentially induced upon MeJA treatment and good correlation was generally observed between induction of transcripts, proteins, and enzyme activities. Most of the mono- and diterpenoid metabolites accumulated with similar temporal patterns of induction as part of the coordinated multi-compound chemical defense response. Protein and enzyme activity levels of the monoTPS (+)-3-carene synthase and the corresponding accumulation of (+)-3-carene was induced to a higher fold change than any other TPS or metabolite measured, indicating an important role in the induced terpenoid defense response in Norway spruce.

Induction of terpene synthase (TPS) gene expression: !occurs in response to! various chemical and biological stimuli 
TPS family members: !have high sequence identity! making it difficult to determine induction patterns 
Multi-level approach: !used to measure! induction and activity of TPS enzymes 
Selective reaction monitoring (SRM): !used to differentiate and quantitatively measure! abundance of several known TPS proteins 
Protein levels of individual TPS: !differentially induced upon MeJA treatment! 
Transcripts, proteins, enzyme activities: !generally observed with good correlation! 
Mono- and diterpenoid metabolites: !accumulated with similar temporal patterns! 
+)-3-carene synthase: !induced to higher fold change than any other TPS or metabolite!