The amylose extender (ae(-)) mutant of maize lacks starch branching enzyme IIb (SBEIIb) activity, resulting in amylopectin with reduced branch point frequency, and longer glucan chains. Recent studies indicate isozymes of soluble starch synthases form high molecular weight complexes with SBEII isoforms. This study investigated the effect of the loss of SBEIIb activity on interactions between starch biosynthetic enzymes in maize endosperm amyloplasts. Results show distinct patterns of protein-protein interactions in amyloplasts of ae(-) mutants compared with the wild type, suggesting functional complementation for loss of SBEIIb by SBEI, SBEIIa, and SP. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments and affinity chromatography using recombinant proteins showed that, in amyloplasts from normal endosperm, protein-protein interactions involving starch synthase I (SSI), SSIIa, and SBEIIb could be detected. By contrast, in ae(-) amyloplasts, SSI and SSIIa interacted with SBEI, SBEIIa, and SP. All interactions in the wild-type were strongly enhanced by ATP, and broken by alkaline phosphatase, indicating a role for protein phosphorylation in their assembly. Whilst ATP and alkaline phosphatase had no effect on the stability of the protein complexes from ae(-) endosperm, radiolabelling experiments showed SP and SBEI were both phosphorylated within the mutant protein complex. It is proposed that, during amylopectin biosynthesis, SSI and SSIIa form the core of a phosphorylation-dependent glucan-synthesizing protein complex which, in normal endosperm, recruits SBEIIb, but when SBEIIb is absent (ae(-)), recruits SBEI, SBEIIa, and SP. Differences in stromal protein complexes are mirrored in the complement of the starch synthesizing enzymes detected in the starch granules of each genotype, reinforcing the hypothesis that the complexes play a functional role in starch biosynthesis.

SBEIIb: !lacks activity in! ae(-) mutant
SBEI, SBEIIa, SP: !complement for loss of! SBEIIb
SSI, SSIIa: !form core of! phosphorylation-dependent glucan-synthesizing protein complex
SBEIIb: !recruits in normal endosperm! SSI, SSIIa
SBEI, SBEIIa, SP: !recruits in ae(-) endosperm! SSI, SSIIa
ATP: !enhances! protein-protein interactions
alkaline phosphatase: !breaks! protein-protein interactions
SP, SBEI: !phosphorylated within! ae(-) mutant protein complex