Non-pathogenic rhizobacteria Pseudomonas spp. can reduce disease in plant tissues through induction of a defence state known as induced systemic resistance (ISR). This resistance is based on multiple bacterial determinants, but nothing is known about the mechanisms underlying rhizobacteria-induced resistance in grapevine. In this study, the ability of Pseudomonas fluorescens CHA0 and Pseudomonas aeruginosa 7NSK2 to induce resistance in grapevine against Botrytis cinerea is demonstrated. Both strains also triggered an oxidative burst and phytoalexin (i.e. resveratrol and viniferin) accumulation in grape cells and primed leaves for accelerated phytoalexin production upon challenge with B. cinerea. Treatment of cell cultures with crude cell extracts of bacteria strongly enhanced oxidative burst, but resulted in comparable amounts of phytoalexins and resistance to B. cinerea to those induced by living bacteria. This suggests the production of bacterial compounds serving as inducers of disease resistance. Using other strains with different characteristics, it is shown that P. fluorescens WCS417 (Pch-deficient), P. putida WCS358 (Pch- and SA-deficient) and P. fluorescens Q2-87 (a DAPG producer) were all capable of inducing resistance to an extent similar to that induced by CHA0. However, in response to WCS417 (Pch-negative) the amount of H2O2 induced is less than for the CHA0. WCS417 induced low phytoalexin levels in cells and lost the capacity to prime for phytoalexins in the leaves. This suggests that, depending on the strain, SA, pyochelin, and DAPG are potentially effective in inducing or priming defence responses. The 7NSK2 mutants, KMPCH (Pch- and Pvd-negative) and KMPCH-567 (Pch-, Pvd-, and SA-negative) induced only partial resistance to B. cinerea. However, the amount of H2O2 triggered by KMPCH and KMPCH-567 was similar to that induced by 7NSK2. Both mutants also led to a low level of phytoalexins in grapevine cells, while KMPCH slightly primed grapevine leaves for enhanced phytoalexins. This highlights the importance of SA, pyochelin, and/or pyoverdin in priming phytoalexin responses and induced grapevine resistance by 7NSK2 against B. cinerea.

Pseudomonas spp.: !induces! ISR
Pseudomonas fluorescens CHA0/P. aeruginosa 7NSK2: !triggers! oxidative burst/phytoalexin accumulation
Crude cell extracts of bacteria: !enhances! oxidative burst
P. fluorescens WCS417/P. putida WCS358/P. fluorescens Q2-87: !induces! resistance
WCS417: !induces! low phytoalexin levels
7NSK2 mutants KMPCH/KMPCH-567: !induces! partial resistance
KMPCH/KMPCH-567: !triggers! similar H2O2 levels to 7NSK2
KMPCH: !induces! low phytoalexin levels/!primes! leaves for enhanced phytoalexins
SA/pyochelin/pyoverdin: !priming! phytoalexin responses/!inducing! grapevine resistance