Gibberellins (GAs) cause dramatic increases in plant height and a genetic block in the synthesis of GA(1) explains the dwarfing of Mendel's pea. For flowering, it is GA(5) which is important in the long-day (LD) responsive grass, Lolium. As we show here, GA(1) and GA(4) are restricted in their effectiveness for flowering because they are deactivated by C-2 hydroxylation below the shoot apex. In contrast, GA(5) is effective because of its structural protection at C-2. Excised vegetative shoot tips rapidly degrade [14C]GA(1), [14C]GA(4), and [14C]GA(20) (>80% in 6 h), but not [14C]GA(5). Coincidentally, genes encoding two 2beta-oxidases and a putative 16-17-epoxidase were most expressed just below the shoot apex (<3 mm). Further down the immature stem (>4 mm), expression of these GA deactivation genes is reduced, so allowing GA(1) and GA(4) to promote sub-apical stem elongation. Subsequently, GA degradation declines in florally induced shoot tips and these GAs can become active for floral development. Structural changes which stabilize GA(4) confirm the link between florigenicity and restricted GA 2beta-hydroxylation (e.g. 2alpha-hydroxylation and C-2 di-methylation). Additionally, a 2-oxidase inhibitor (Trinexapac Ethyl) enhanced the activity of applied GA(4), as did limiting C-16,17 epoxidation in 16,17-dihydro GAs or after C-13 hydroxylation. Overall, deactivation of GA(1) and GA(4) just below the shoot apex effectively restricts their florigenicity in Lolium and, conversely, with GA(5), C-2 and C-13 protection against deactivation allows its high florigenicity. Speculatively, such differences in GA access to the shoot apex of grasses may be important for separating floral induction from inflorescence emergence and thus could influence their survival under conditions of herbivore predation.

Gibberellins (GAs): !cause! dramatic increases in plant height
GA(1): !explains! dwarfing of Mendel's pea
GA(5): !important for! flowering in long-day responsive grass
GA(1) and GA(4): !deactivated by! C-2 hydroxylation
GA(5): !structurally protected at! C-2
2beta-oxidases: !most expressed! just below shoot apex
GA deactivation genes: !reduced! further down immature stem
GA degradation: !declines! in florally induced shoot tips
GA(4): !stabilized by! structural changes
2-oxidase inhibitor: !enhances! activity of applied GA(4)
C-16,17 epoxidation: !limits! florigenicity in Lolium