['19828672', 'The cuticle covering every plant aerial organ is largely made of cutin that  consists of fatty acids, glycerol, and aromatic monomers. Despite the huge  importance of the cuticle to plant development and fitness, our knowledge  regarding the assembly of the cutin polymer and its integration in the complete  cuticle structure is limited. Cutin composition implies the action of  acyltransferase-type enzymes that mediate polymer construction through ester bond  formation. Here, we show that a member of the BAHD family of acyltransferases  (DEFECTIVE IN CUTICULAR RIDGES [DCR]) is required for incorporation of the most  abundant monomer into the polymeric structure of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) flower cutin. DCR-deficient plants display phenotypes that are  typically associated with a defective cuticle, including altered epidermal cell  differentiation and postgenital organ fusion. Moreover, levels of the major cutin  monomer in flowers, 9(10),16-dihydroxy-hexadecanoic acid, decreased to an almost  undetectable amount in the mutants. Interestingly, dcr mutants exhibit changes in  the decoration of petal conical cells and mucilage extrusion in the seed coat,  both phenotypes formerly not associated with cutin polymer assembly. Excessive  root branching displayed by dcr mutants and the DCR expression pattern in roots  pointed to the function of DCR belowground, in shaping root architecture by  influencing lateral root emergence and growth. In addition, the dcr mutants were  more susceptible to salinity, osmotic, and water deprivation stress conditions.  Finally, the analysis of DCR protein localization suggested that cutin  polymerization, possibly the oligomerization step, is partially carried out in  the cytoplasmic space. Therefore, this study extends our knowledge regarding the  functionality of the cuticular layer and the formation of its major constituent  the polymer cutin.', '2009 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.143388', 'Aharoni']

DCR: !affects! Cutin composition 
DCR: !localizes to! Cytoplasmic space 
DCR: !interacts with! 9(10),16-dihydroxy-hexadecanoic acid 
DCR: !enhances! Petal conical cell decoration 
DCR: !represses! Postgenital organ fusion 
DCR: !synthesizes! Polymeric structure of cuticle