Glutaredoxins (GRXs) are ubiquitous oxidoreductases that play a crucial role in response to oxidative stress by reducing disulfides in various organisms. In planta, three different GRX classes have been identified according to their active site motifs. CPYC and CGFS classes are found in all organisms, whereas the CC-type class is specific for higher land plants. Recently, two Arabidopsis CC-type GRXs, ROXY1 and ROXY2, were shown to exert crucial functions in petal and anther initiation and differentiation. To analyze the function of CC-type GRXs in the distantly related monocots, we isolated and characterized OsROXY1 and OsROXY2-two rice homologs of ROXY1. Both genes are expressed in vegetative and reproductive stages. Although rice flower morphology is distinct from eudicots, OsROXY1/2 floral expression patterns are similar to their Arabidopsis counterparts ROXY1/2. Complementation experiments demonstrate that OsROXY1 and OsROXY2 can fully rescue the roxy1 floral mutant phenotype. Overexpression of OsROXY1, OsROXY2, and ROXY1 in Arabidopsis causes similar vegetative and reproductive plant developmental defects. ROXY1 and its rice homologs thus exert a conserved function during eudicot and monocot flower development. Strikingly, overexpression of these CC-type GRXs also leads to an increased accumulation of hydrogen peroxide levels and hyper-susceptibility to infection from the necrotrophic pathogen Botrytis cinerea, revealing the importance of balanced redox processes in flower organ development and pathogen defence.

CPYC/CGFS classes: !found in! all organisms
CC-type class: !specific to! higher land plants
ROXY1/2: !exert crucial functions in! petal and anther initiation and differentiation
OsROXY1/2: !homologs of! ROXY1
OsROXY1/2: !expressed in! vegetative and reproductive stages
OsROXY1/2: !similar expression patterns to! ROXY1/2
OsROXY1/2: !can rescue! roxy1 floral mutant phenotype
OsROXY1/2: !overexpression causes! similar plant developmental defects
ROXY1/2: !conserved function during! eudicot and monocot flower development
ROXY1/2: !overexpression leads to! increased H2O2 levels and hyper-susceptibility to Botrytis cinerea