['19825634', 'Heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins, which consist of Galpha, Gbeta, and Ggamma  subunits, play important roles in transducing extracellular signals perceived by  cell surface receptors into intracellular physiological responses. In addition to  a single prototypical Galpha protein (GPA1), Arabidopsis has three unique  Galpha-like proteins, known as XLG1, XLG2, and XLG3, that have been found to be  localized in nuclei, although their functions and mode of action remain largely  unknown. Through a transcriptomic analysis, we found that XLG2 and XLG3 were  rapidly induced by infection with the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae,  whereas the XLG1 transcript level was not affected by pathogen infection. A  reverse genetic screen revealed that the xlg2 loss-of-function mutation causes  enhanced susceptibility to P. syringae. Transcriptome profiling revealed that the  xlg2 mutation affects pathogen-triggered induction of a small set of  defense-related genes. However, xlg1 and xlg3 mutants showed no difference from  wild-type plants in resistance to P. syringae. In addition, the xlg2 xlg3 double  mutant and the xlg1 xlg2 xlg3 triple mutant were not significantly different from  the xlg2 single mutant in the disease resistance phenotype, suggesting that the  roles of XLG1 and XLG3 in defense, if any, are less significant than for XLG2.  Constitutive overexpression of XLG2 leads to the accumulation of abnormal  transcripts from multiple defense-related genes. Through co-immunoprecipitation  assays, XLG2 was found to interact with AGB1, the sole Gbeta subunit in  Arabidopsis, which has previously been found to be a positive regulator in  resistance to necrotrophic fungal pathogens. However, no significant difference  was found between three xlg single mutants, the xlg2 xlg3 double mutant, the xlg  triple mutant, and wild-type plants in resistance to the necrotrophic fungal  pathogens Botrytis cinerea or Alternaria brassicicola. These results suggest that  XLG2 and AGB1 are components of a G-protein complex different from the  prototypical heterotrimeric G-protein and may have distinct functions in  modulating defense responses.', '2009 May', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/ssp001', 'Xia']

XLG2: !induces! defense-related genes
XLG2: !interacts with! AGB1
XLG2: !enhances! resistance to P. syringae
XLG1/XLG3: !no effect on! resistance to P. syringae
XLG2/AGB1: !modulates! defense responses