Pollen allergens are among the most abundantly transcribed and translated products in the life history of plants, and particularly grasses. To identify different pollen allergens in rice, putative allergens were identified in the rice genome and their expression characterized using the Affymetrix 57K rice GeneChip microarray. Among the most abundant pollen-specific candidate transcripts were Ory s 1 beta-expansin, Ory s 2, Ory s 7 EF hand, Ory s 11, Ory s 12 profilin A, Ory s 23, glycosyl hydrolase family 28 (polygalacturonase), and FAD binding proteins. Highly expressed pollen proteins are frequently present in multiple copy numbers, sometimes with mirror images located on nearby regions of the opposite DNA strand. Many of these are intronless and inserted as copies that retain nearly exact copies of their regulatory elements. Ory s 23 reflects low variability and high copy number, suggesting recent gene amplification. Some copies contain pseudogenes, which may reflect their origin through activity of retrotransposition; some putative allergenic sequences bear fusion products with repeat sequences of transposable elements (LTRs). The abundance of nearby repetitive sequences, activation of transposable elements, and high production of mRNA transcripts appear to coincide in pollen and may contribute to a syndrome in which highly transcribed proteins may be copied and inserted with streamlined features for translation, including grouping and removal of introns.

Ory s 1 beta-expansin: !synthesizes! mRNA transcripts 
Ory s 2: !synthesizes! mRNA transcripts 
Ory s 7 EF hand: !synthesizes! mRNA transcripts 
Ory s 11: !synthesizes! mRNA transcripts 
Ory s 12 profilin A: !synthesizes! mRNA transcripts 
Ory s 23: !synthesizes! mRNA transcripts 
glycosyl hydrolase family 28 (polygalacturonase): !synthesizes! mRNA transcripts 
FAD binding proteins: !synthesizes! mRNA transcripts 
pollen proteins: !present in! multiple copy numbers 
DNA strand: !contains! mirror images 
regulatory elements: !retain! nearly exact copies 
Ory s 23: !reflects! low variability 
Ory s 23: !reflects! high copy number 
putative allergenic sequences: !bear! fusion products 
repeat sequences of transposable elements (LTRs): !fuse with! putative allergenic sequences 
nearby repetitive sequences: !abundant! in pollen