Storage protein activator (SPA) is a key regulator of the transcription of wheat (Triticum aestivum) grain storage protein genes and belongs to the Opaque2 transcription factor subfamily. We analyzed the sequence polymorphism of the three homoeologous Spa genes in hexaploid wheat. The level of polymorphism in these genes was high particularly in the promoter. The deduced protein sequences of each homoeolog and haplotype show greater than 93% identity. Two major haplotypes were studied for each Spa gene. The three Spa homoeologs have similar patterns of expression during grain development, with a peak in expression around 300 degree days after anthesis. On average, Spa-B is 10 and seven times more strongly expressed than Spa-A and Spa-D, respectively. The haplotypes are associated with significant quantitative differences in Spa expression, especially for Spa-A and Spa-D. Significant differences were found in the quantity of total grain nitrogen allocated to the gliadin protein fractions for the Spa-A haplotypes, whereas the synthesis of glutenins is not modified. Genetic association analysis between Spa and dough viscoelasticity revealed that Spa polymorphisms are associated with dough tenacity, extensibility, and strength. Except for Spa-A, these associations can be explained by differences in grain hardness. No association was found between Spa markers and the average single grain dry mass or grain protein concentration. These results demonstrate that in planta Spa is involved in the regulation of grain storage protein synthesis. The associations between Spa and dough viscoelasticity and grain hardness strongly suggest that Spa has complex pleiotropic functions during grain development.

Storage protein activator (SPA): !regulates! transcription of wheat grain storage protein genes
SPA: !has high polymorphism in! promoter
SPA: !has similar expression patterns during! grain development
SPA: !associated with significant quantitative differences in! Spa expression
SPA: !associated with! total grain nitrogen allocated to gliadin protein fractions
SPA: !associated with! dough viscoelasticity
SPA: !associated with! grain hardness
SPA: !involved in regulation of! grain storage protein synthesis