Various biochemical signals are implicated in Arabidopsis wound signalling, including jasmonic acid (JA), salicylic acid, auxin, and Ca2+. Here, we report on cross-talk of phytohormones with phosphoinositide signals not previously implicated in plant wound responses. Within 30 min of mechanical wounding of Arabidopsis rosette-leaves, the levels of the lipid-derived soluble inositolpolyphosphate, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP(3)), increased four to five-fold. Concomitantly, the precursor lipids, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate and phosphatidylinositol transiently depleted, followed by re-synthesis after 30-60 min of stimulation. Increased InsP(3) levels with wounding coincided with JA increases over the first hours of stimulation. In dde2-2-mutant plants deficient in JA biosynthesis, no InsP(3) increase was observed upon wounding, indicating that JA was required for InsP(3) formation, and InsP(3) levels increased in wild-type plants challenged with sorbitol, increasing endogenous JA levels. In InsP 5-ptase plants with attenuated phosphoinositide signalling, the induction of wounding-inducible genes was diminished compared with wild-type plants, suggesting a role for phosphoinositide signalling in mediating plant wound responses. The gene-expression patterns suggest that phosphoinositides contribute to both JA-dependent and JA-independent aspects of wound signalling. Weight gain of Plutella xylostella caterpillars feeding on InsP 5-ptase plants was increased compared with that of caterpillars feeding on wild-type plants. The ecophysiological relevance of phosphoinositide signals in plant defense responses to herbivory is discussed in light of recent findings of inositolpolyphosphate involvement in phytohormone-receptor function.

JA: !increases! InsP(3)
dde2-2-mutant: !lacks! InsP(3) increase
sorbitol: !increases! JA
InsP 5-ptase: !attenuates! wounding-inducible gene expression
Plutella xylostella caterpillars: !gain more weight on! InsP 5-ptase plants
inositolpolyphosphate: !involved in! phytohormone-receptor function