Work with cereals (barley and wheat) and a legume (Medicago truncatula) has established thioredoxin h (Trx h) as a central regulatory protein of seeds. Trx h acts by reducing disulfide (S-S) groups of diverse seed proteins (storage proteins, enzymes, and enzyme inhibitors), thereby facilitating germination. Early in vitro protein studies were complemented with experiments in which barley seeds with Trx h overexpressed in the endosperm showed accelerated germination and early or enhanced expression of associated enzymes (alpha-amylase and pullulanase). The current study extends the transgenic work to wheat. Two approaches were followed to alter the expression of Trx h genes in the endosperm: (1) a hordein promoter and its protein body targeting sequence led to overexpression of Trx h5, and (2) an antisense construct of Trx h9 resulted in cytosolic underexpression of that gene (Arabidopsis designation). Underexpression of Trx h9 led to effects opposite to those observed for overexpression Trx h5 in barley-retardation of germination and delayed or reduced expression of associated enzymes. Similar enzyme changes were observed in developing seeds. The wheat lines with underexpressed Trx showed delayed preharvest sprouting when grown in the greenhouse or field without a decrease in final yield. Wheat with overexpressed Trx h5 showed changes commensurate with earlier in vitro work: increased solubility of disulfide proteins and lower allergenicity of the gliadin fraction. The results are further evidence that the level of Trx h in cereal endosperm determines fundamental properties as well as potential applications of the seed.

Trx h: !acts by reducing! disulfide groups 
Trx h5: !overexpressed in! endosperm 
Trx h9: !underexpressed in! endosperm 
Overexpression Trx h5: !accelerates! germination 
Underexpression Trx h9: !retards! germination 
Overexpression Trx h5: !increases solubility! of disulfide proteins 
Underexpression Trx h9: !lowers allergenicity! of gliadin fraction