Alternative oxidase (AOX) is a mitochondrial protein encoded by the nuclear genome. In higher plants AOX genes form a small multigene family mostly consisting of the two subfamilies AOX1 and AOX2. Daucus carota L. is characterized by a unique extension pattern of AOX genes. Different from other plant species studied so far it contains two genes in both subfamilies. Therefore, carrot was recently highlighted as an important model in AOX stress research to understand the evolutionary importance of both AOX subfamilies. Here we report on the expression patterns of DcAOX1a, DcAOX1b and DcAOX2a and DcAOX2b. Our results demonstrate that all of the four carrot AOX genes are expressed. Differential expression was observed in organs, tissues and during de novo induction of secondary root phloem explants to growth and development. DcAOX1a and DcAOX2a indicated a differential transcript accumulation but a similar co-expression pattern. The genes of each carrot AOX sub-family revealed a differential regulation and responsiveness. DcAOX2a indicated high inducibility in contrast to DcAOX2b, which generally revealed low transcript abundance and rather weak responses. In search for within-gene sequence differences between both genes as a potential reason for the differential expression patterns, the structural organization of the two genes was compared. DcAOX2a and DcAOX2b showed high sequence similarity in their open reading frames (ORFs). However, length variability was observed in the N-terminal exon1 region. The predicted cleavage site of the mitochondrial targeting sequence in this locus is untypical small for both genes and consists of 35 amino acids for DcAOX2a and of 21 amino acids for DcAOX2b. The importance of structural gene organization and the relevancy of within-gene sequence variations are discussed. Our results strengthen the value of carrot as a model plant for future studies on the importance of AOX sub family evolution.

AOX: !encoded by! nuclear genome
AOX: !forms! multigene family
Daucus carota L.: !contains! two genes in both subfamilies
DcAOX1a, DcAOX1b, DcAOX2a, DcAOX2b: !expressed! differently
DcAOX2a: !indicates! high inducibility
DcAOX2b: !reveals! low transcript abundance
DcAOX2a, DcAOX2b: !show! sequence similarity in ORFs
N-terminal exon1 region: !length variability! observed
mitochondrial targeting sequence: !consists of! 35 amino acids for DcAOX2a and 21 amino acids for DcAOX2b