Neotropical rainforests have a very poor fossil record, making hypotheses concerning their origins difficult to evaluate. Nevertheless, some of their most important characteristics can be preserved in the fossil record: high plant diversity, dominance by a distinctive combination of angiosperm families, a preponderance of plant species with large, smooth-margined leaves, and evidence for a high diversity of herbivorous insects. Here, we report on an approximately 58-my-old flora from the Cerrejón Formation of Colombia (paleolatitude approximately 5 degrees N) that is the earliest megafossil record of Neotropical rainforest. The flora has abundant, diverse palms and legumes and similar family composition to extant Neotropical rainforest. Three-quarters of the leaf types are large and entire-margined, indicating rainfall >2,500 mm/year and mean annual temperature >25 degrees C. Despite modern family composition and tropical paleoclimate, the diversity of fossil pollen and leaf samples is 60-80% that of comparable samples from extant and Quaternary Neotropical rainforest from similar climates. Insect feeding damage on Cerrejón fossil leaves, representing primary consumers, is abundant, but also of low diversity, and overwhelmingly made by generalist feeders rather than specialized herbivores. Cerrejón megafossils provide strong evidence that the same Neotropical rainforest families have characterized the biome since the Paleocene, maintaining their importance through climatic phases warmer and cooler than present. The low diversity of both plants and herbivorous insects in this Paleocene Neotropical rainforest may reflect an early stage in the diversification of the lineages that inhabit this biome, and/or a long recovery period from the terminal Cretaceous extinction.

Neotropical rainforest: !has! high plant diversity 
Neotropical rainforest: !is dominated by! angiosperm families 
Neotropical rainforest: !has! large, smooth-margined leaves 
Neotropical rainforest: !has evidence of! high diversity of herbivorous insects 
Cerrejón Formation: !has! abundant, diverse palms and legumes 
Cerrejón Formation: !has similar family composition to! extant Neotropical rainforest 
Cerrejón Formation: !indicates! rainfall >2,500 mm/year & mean annual temperature >25 degrees C 
Cerrejón Formation: !has! 60-80% diversity of comparable samples from extant & Quaternary Neotropical rainforest 
Cerrejón fossil leaves: !have! insect feeding damage 
Cerrejón fossil leaves: !are made by! generalist feeders