The activation of Rubisco in vivo requires the presence of the regulatory protein Rubisco activase. To elucidate its role in maintaining CO(2) assimilation rate at high temperature, we examined the temperature response of CO(2) assimilation rate at 380 microL L(-1) CO(2) concentration (A(380)) and Rubisco activation state in wild-type and transgenic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) with reduced Rubisco activase content grown at either 20 degrees C or 30 degrees C. Analyses of gas exchange and chlorophyll fluorescence showed that in the wild type, A(380) was limited by ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate regeneration at lower temperatures, whereas at higher temperatures, A(380) was limited by ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylation irrespective of growth temperatures. Growth temperature induced modest differences in Rubisco activation state that declined with measuring temperature, from mean values of 76% at 15 degrees C to 63% at 40 degrees C in wild-type plants. At measuring temperatures of 25 degrees C and below, an 80% reduction in Rubisco activase content was required before Rubisco activation state was decreased. Above 35 degrees C, Rubisco activation state decreased slightly with more modest decreases in Rubisco activase content, but the extent of the reductions in Rubisco activation state were small, such that a 55% reduction in Rubisco activase content did not alter the temperature sensitivity of Rubisco activation and had no effect on in vivo catalytic turnover rates of Rubisco. There was a strong correlation between Rubisco activase content and Rubisco activation state once Rubisco activase content was less that 20% of wild type at all measuring temperatures. We conclude that reduction in Rubisco activase content does not lead to an increase in the temperature sensitivity of Rubisco activation state in tobacco.

Rubisco activase: !activates! Rubisco 
Rubisco activase: !regulates! CO(2) assimilation rate 
Growth temperature: !affects! Rubisco activation state 
Reduced Rubisco activase content: !decreases! Rubisco activation state 
Rubisco activase content: !correlates with! Rubisco activation state