The plant hormone cytokinins regulate diverse aspects of plant growth and development. In Arabidopsis, a multi-step TCS system similar to bacterial and yeast TCS is used for cytokinin signaling. In a TCS system, a His sensor kinase perceives the signal by auto-phosphorylating on a His residue in response to an output signal, and the phosphate group is transferred to a conserved Asp residue in the receiver domain of the response regulator. The response regulator then modulates downstream signaling. Cytokinin multi-step TCS system utilizes an additional component, histidine-containing phosphotransfer domain protein (HPT) to transfer the phosphate group from a sensor kinase to a response regulator in the nucleus. The typical response regulators are classified into either type A or B. The type-B ARRs are transcription activators that act as positive regulators of cytokinin signaling, whereas most of the type-A ARRs are negative regulators of cytokinin signaling. Histidyl-aspartidyl phosphorelays are presumed to be essential for this cytokinin signal transduction in plants. Our studies have shown that ARR7, an A-type response regulator, negatively regulates cytokinin signaling in various aspects by acting as a transcriptional repressor and that the phosphorylation of ARR7 is required for these ARR7-regulated cytokinin-responses. Here I propose potential mechanisms by which the phosphorylation of ARRs is involved in regulating cytokinin- mediated gene expression, mainly based on biochemical and structural studies of bacterial response regulators. Protein-protein interaction and DNA-binding studies using the phosphorylated and the un-phosphorylated forms of the ARR proteins with their structural determination will provide molecular understanding of cytokinin-responsive gene regulation by ARRs.

His sensor kinase: !transfers phosphate group to! response regulator
HPT: !transfers phosphate group from! sensor kinase
Type-B ARRs: !act as! positive regulators of cytokinin signaling
Type-A ARRs: !act as! negative regulators of cytokinin signaling
ARR7: !negatively regulates! cytokinin signaling