['19854857', 'Root exudates influence the surrounding soil microbial community, and recent  evidence demonstrates the involvement of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters  in root secretion of phytochemicals. In this study, we examined effects of seven  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ABC transporter mutants on the microbial  community in native soils. After two generations, only the Arabidopsis abcg30  (Atpdr2) mutant had significantly altered both the fungal and bacterial  communities compared with the wild type using automated ribosomal intergenic  spacer analysis. Similarly, root exudate profiles differed between the mutants;  however, the largest variance from the wild type (Columbia-0) was observed in  abcg30, which showed increased phenolics and decreased sugars. In support of this  biochemical observation, whole-genome expression analyses of abcg30 roots  revealed that some genes involved in biosynthesis and transport of secondary  metabolites were up-regulated, while some sugar transporters were down-regulated  compared with genome expression in wild-type roots. Microbial taxa associated  with Columbia-0 and abcg30 cultured soils determined by pyrosequencing revealed  that exudates from abcg30 cultivated a microbial community with a relatively  greater abundance of potentially beneficial bacteria (i.e. plant-growth-promoting  rhizobacteria and nitrogen fixers) and were specifically enriched in bacteria  involved in heavy metal remediation. In summary, we report how a single gene  mutation from a functional plant mutant influences the surrounding community of  soil organisms, showing that genes are not only important for intrinsic plant  physiology but also for the interactions with the surrounding community of  organisms as well.', '2009 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.147462', 'Vivanco']

Root exudates: !influence! Soil microbial community 
ABC transporter mutants: !alter! Fungal and bacterial communities 
abcg30 (Atpdr2): !differs from! Wild type 
abcg30: !increases! Phenolics 
abcg30: !decreases! Sugars 
Genes: !up-regulate! Biosynthesis and transport of secondary metabolites 
Genes: !down-regulate! Sugar transporters 
abcg30 cultivated soils: !enrich in! Bacteria involved in heavy metal remediation