['19861655', 'To date, no genes have been reported to directly affect the de novo production of  floral nectar. In an effort to identify genes involved in nectar production, the  Affymetrix((R)) ATH1 GeneChip was previously used to examine global gene  expression profiles in Arabidopsis thaliana nectaries. One of the genes  displaying highly enriched expression in nectaries was CELL WALL INVERTASE 4  (AtCWINV4, At2g36190), which encodes an enzyme that putatively catalyses the  hydrolysis of sucrose into glucose and fructose. RT-PCR was used to confirm the  nectary-enriched expression of AtCWINV4, as well as an orthologue from Brassica  rapa. To probe biological function, two independent Arabidopsis cwinv4 T-DNA  mutants were isolated. Unlike wild-type plants, cwinv4 lines did not produce  nectar. While overall nectary morphology appeared to be normal, cwinv4 flowers  accumulated higher than normal levels of starch in the receptacle, but not within  the nectaries themselves. Conversely, wild-type, but not cwinv4, nectarial  stomata stained intensely for starch. Cell wall extracts prepared from mutant  flowers displayed greatly reduced invertase activity when compared with wild-type  plants, and cwinv4 flowers also accumulated significantly lower levels of total  soluble sugar. Cumulatively, these results implicate CWINV4 as an absolutely  required factor for nectar production in the Brassicaceae, specifically by  maintaining constant sink status within nectaries, thus allowing them to  accumulate the sugars necessary for nectar production. In addition, CWINV4 is  probably responsible for the hexose-rich composition observed for many  Brassicaceae nectars.', '2010', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erp309', 'Carter']

AtCWINV4: !encodes! enzyme 
enzyme: !catalyses! hydrolysis of sucrose 
RT-PCR: !confirms! nectary-enriched expression of AtCWINV4 
cwinv4 T-DNA mutants: !do not produce! nectar 
wild-type plants: !accumulate! higher than normal levels of starch in receptacle 
cell wall extracts: !display! reduced invertase activity 
cwinv4 flowers: !accumulate! lower levels of total soluble sugar 
CWINV4: !maintains constant sink status! within nectaries 
CWINV4: !responsible for! hexose-rich composition of Brassicaceae nectars