['19889874', 'Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is a posttranslational protein modification in which  ADP-ribose (ADP-Rib) units derived from NAD(+) are attached to proteins by  poly(ADP-Rib) polymerase (PARP) enzymes. ADP-Rib groups are removed from these  polymer chains by the enzyme poly(ADP-Rib) glycohydrolase (PARG). In animals,  poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is associated with DNA damage responses and programmed  cell death. Previously, we hypothesized a role for poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in  plant defense responses when we detected defense-associated expression of the  poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation-related genes PARG2 and NUDT7 and observed altered callose  deposition in the presence of a chemical PARP inhibitor. The role of  poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in plant defenses was more extensively investigated in  this study, using Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Pharmacological inhibition  of PARP using 3-aminobenzamide perturbs certain innate immune responses to  microbe-associated molecular patterns (flg22 and elf18), including callose  deposition, lignin deposition, pigment accumulation, and phenylalanine ammonia  lyase activity, but does not disrupt other responses, such as the initial  oxidative burst and expression of some early defense-associated genes. Mutant  parg1 seedlings exhibit exaggerated seedling growth inhibition and pigment  accumulation in response to elf18 and are hypersensitive to the DNA-damaging  agent mitomycin C. Both parg1 and parg2 knockout plants show accelerated onset of  disease symptoms when infected with Botrytis cinerea. Cellular levels of ADP-Rib  polymer increase after infection with avirulent Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato  DC3000 avrRpt2(+), and pathogen-dependent changes in the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation  of discrete proteins were also observed. We conclude that poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation  is a functional component in plant responses to biotic stress.', '2010 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.148049', 'Bent']

PARP: !synthesizes! ADP-Rib 
PARG: !removes! ADP-Rib 
PARG2/NUDT7: !expressed in! defense responses 
3-aminobenzamide: !perturbs! innate immune responses 
parg1: !exaggerates! seedling growth inhibition 
parg1/parg2: !hypersensitive to! DNA-damaging agent 
ADP-Rib polymer: !increases after! infection with avirulent Pseudomonas syringae