To predict the effects of temperature changes on plant growth and performance, it is crucial to understand the impact of thermal history on leaf morphology, anatomy and physiology. Here, we document a comprehensive range of leaf phenotypes in 25/20 degrees C-grown Arabidopsis thaliana plants that were shifted to 5 degrees C for up to 2 months. When warm-grown, pre-existing (PE) leaves were exposed to cold, leaf thickness increased due to an increase in mesophyll cell size. Leaves that were entirely cold-developed (CD) were twice as thick (eight cell layers) as their warm-developed (WD) counterparts (six layers), and also had higher epidermal and stomatal cell densities. After 4 d of cold, PE leaves accumulated high levels of total non-structural carbohydrates (TNC). However, glucose and starch levels declined thereafter, and after 45 d in the cold, PE leaves exhibited similar TNC to CD leaves. A similar phenomenon was observed in delta(13)C and a range of photosynthetic parameters. In cold-treated PE leaves, an increase in respiration (R(dark)) with cold exposure time was evident when measured at 25 degrees C but not 5 degrees C. Cold acclimation was associated with a large increase in the ratio of leaf R(dark) to photosynthesis. The data highlight the importance of understanding developmental thermal history in determining individual phenotypic traits.

Temperature: !affects! Leaf Morphology 
Temperature: !affects! Anatomy 
Temperature: !affects! Physiology 
Mesophyll Cell Size: !increases with! Cold Exposure 
Epidermal Cell Density: !increases with! Cold Exposure 
Stomatal Cell Density: !increases with! Cold Exposure 
Total Non-Structural Carbohydrates: !accumulates with! Cold Exposure 
Glucose Levels: !declines with! Cold Exposure 
Starch Levels: !declines with! Cold Exposure 
Delta(13)C: !affected by! Cold Exposure 
Photosynthetic Parameters: !affected by! Cold Exposure 
Respiration (R(dark)): !increases with! Cold Exposure 
Leaf R(dark): !increases with! Cold Exposure 
Photosynthesis: !ratio to! Leaf R(dark) increases with Cold Exposure