['19923426', 'Phosphate is an essential nutrient for plant viability. It is well-established  that phosphate starvation triggers membrane lipid remodeling, a process that  converts significant portion of phospholipids to non-phosphorus-containing  galactolipids. This remodeling is mediated by either phospholipase C (PLC) or  phospholipase D (PLD) in combination with phosphatidate phosphatase (PAP). Two  PLC genes, NPC4 and NPC5, and PLD genes, PLDzeta1 and PLDzeta2, are shown to be  involved in the remodeling. However, gene knockout studies show that none of them  plays decisive roles in the remodeling. Thus, although this phenomenon is widely  observed among plants, the key enzyme(s) responsible for the lipid remodeling in  a whole plant body is unknown; therefore, the physiological significance of this  conversion process has remained to be elucidated. We herein focused on PAP as a  key enzyme for this adaptation, and identified Arabidopsis lipin homologs, AtPAH1  and AtPAH2, that encode the PAPs involved in galactolipid biosynthesis. Double  mutant pah1pah2 plants had decreased phosphatidic acid hydrolysis, thus affecting  the eukaryotic pathway of galactolipid synthesis. Upon phosphate starvation,  pah1pah2 plants were severely impaired in growth and membrane lipid remodeling.  These results indicate that PAH1 and PAH2 are the PAP responsible for the  eukaryotic pathway of galactolipid synthesis, and the membrane lipid remodeling  mediated by these two enzymes is an essential adaptation mechanism to cope with  phosphate starvation.', '2009 Dec 8', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0907173106', 'Ohta']

Phosphate: !triggers! Membrane lipid remodeling 
PLC genes: !involved in! Remodeling 
PLD genes: !involved in! Remodeling 
PAP: !mediates! Remodeling 
AtPAH1/AtPAH2: !encode! PAPs 
pah1pah2 plants: !had decreased! Phosphatidic acid hydrolysis 
PAH1/PAH2: !are the! PAP responsible 
Membrane lipid remodeling: !is an essential adaptation! To cope with phosphate starvation