['19929881', "S-adenosyl-L-methionine-dependent rRNA dimethylases mediate the methylation of  two conserved adenosines near the 3' end of the rRNA in the small ribosomal  subunits of bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. Proteins related to this family of  dimethylases play an essential role as transcription factors (mtTFBs) in fungal  and animal mitochondria. Human mitochondrial rRNA is methylated and human  mitochondria contain two related mtTFBs, one proposed to act as rRNA dimethylase,  the other as transcription factor. The nuclear genome of Arabidopsis thaliana  encodes three dimethylase/mtTFB-like proteins, one of which, Dim1B, is shown here  to be imported into mitochondria. Transcription initiation by mitochondrial RNA  polymerases appears not to be stimulated by Dim1B in vitro. In line with this  finding, phylogenetic analyses revealed Dim1B to be more closely related to a  group of eukaryotic non-mitochondrial rRNA dimethylases (Dim1s) than to fungal  and animal mtTFBs. We found that Dim1B was capable of substituting the E. coli  rRNA dimethylase activity of KsgA. Moreover, we observed methylation of the  conserved adenines in the 18S rRNA of Arabidopsis mitochondria; this modification  was not detectable in a mutant lacking Dim1B. These data provide evidence: (i)  for rRNA methylation in Arabidopsis mitochondria; and (ii) that Dim1B is the  enzyme catalyzing this process.", '2010 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04079.x', 'Borner']

S-adenosyl-L-methionine-dependent rRNA dimethylases: !mediate! methylation 
Proteins related to this family: !play role as! transcription factors 
Human mitochondria: !contain! two related mtTFBs 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !encodes! three dimethylase/mtTFB-like proteins 
Dim1B: !imported into! mitochondria 
Transcription initiation: !not stimulated by! Dim1B in vitro 
Phylogenetic analyses: !reveal! Dim1B more closely related to non-mitochondrial rRNA dimethylases 
KsgA: !substituted by! Dim1B 
Methylation of conserved adenines: !observed in! Arabidopsis mitochondria 
Mutant lacking Dim1B: !methylation not detectable!