['19924544', 'Complex II plays a central role in mitochondrial metabolism as a component of  both the electron transport chain and the tricarboxylic acid cycle. However, the  composition and function of the plant enzyme has been elusive and differs from  the well-characterised enzymes in mammals and bacteria. Herewith, we demonstrate  that mitochondrial Complex II from Arabidopsis and rice differ significantly in  several aspects: (1) Stability-Rice complex II in contrast to Arabidopsis is not  stable when resolved by native electrophoresis and activity staining. (2)  Composition-Arabidopsis complex II contains 8 subunits, only 7 of which have  homologs in the rice genome. SDH 1 and 2 subunits display high levels of amino  acid identity between two species, while the remainder of the subunits are not  well conserved at a sequence level, indicating significant divergence. (3) Gene  expression-the pairs of orthologous SDH1 and SDH2 subunits were universally  expressed in both Arabidopsis and rice. The very divergent genes for SDH3 and  SDH4 were co-expressed in both species, consistent with their functional  co-ordination to form the membrane anchor. The plant-specific SDH5, 6 and 7  subunits with unknown functions appeared to be differentially expressed in both  species. (4) Biochemical regulation -succinate-dependent O(2) consumption and SDH  activity of isolated Arabidopsis mitochondria were substantially stimulated by  ATP, but a much more minor effect of ATP was observed for the rice enzyme. The  ATP activation of succinate-dependent reduction of DCPIP in frozen-thawed and  digitonin-solubilised mitochondrial samples, and with or without the uncoupler  CCCP, indicate that the differential ATP effect on SDH is not via the  protonmotive force but likely due to an allosteric effect on the plant SDH enzyme  itself, in contrast to the enzyme in other organisms.', '2010 Feb', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-009-9573-z', 'Millar']

Complex II: !plays a central role in! mitochondrial metabolism 
Arabidopsis Complex II: !differs from! rice Complex II 
SDH1 and 2 subunits: !display high levels of amino acid identity between! Arabidopsis and rice 
SDH3 and 4 subunits: !not well conserved at a sequence level! 
SDH1 and 2 subunits: !universally expressed in! Arabidopsis and rice 
SDH5, 6 and 7 subunits: !differentially expressed in! Arabidopsis and rice 
ATP: !stimulates! succinate-dependent O(2) consumption and SDH activity of isolated Arabidopsis mitochondria 
ATP: !has a much more minor effect on! rice enzyme