Waterlogging stress causes yield reduction in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.). A major component of waterlogging stress is the lack of oxygen available to submerged tissues. While changes in expressed protein, gene transcription and metabolite levels have been studied in response to low oxygen stress, little research has been done on molecular responses to waterlogging in cotton. We assessed cotton growth responses to waterlogging and assayed global gene transcription responses in root and leaf cotton tissues of partially submerged plants. Waterlogging caused significant reductions in stem elongation, shoot mass, root mass and leaf number, and altered the expression of 1,012 genes (4% of genes assayed) in root tissue as early as 4 h after flooding. Many of these genes were associated with cell wall modification and growth pathways, glycolysis, fermentation, mitochondrial electron transport and nitrogen metabolism. Waterlogging of plant roots also altered global gene expression in leaf tissues, significantly changing the expression of 1,305 genes (5% of genes assayed) after 24 h of flooding. Genes affected were associated with cell wall growth and modification, tetrapyrrole synthesis, hormone response, starch metabolism and nitrogen metabolism The implications of these results for the development of waterlogging-tolerant cotton are discussed.

waterlogging: !causes! yield reduction
waterlogging: !alters expression of! 1,012 genes in root tissue
waterlogging: !alters expression of! 1,305 genes in leaf tissue
cell wall modification: !associated with! waterlogging response
glycolysis: !associated with! waterlogging response
fermentation: !associated with! waterlogging response
mitochondrial electron transport: !associated with! waterlogging response
nitrogen metabolism: !associated with! waterlogging response
tetrapyrrole synthesis: !associated with! waterlogging response
hormone response: !associated with! waterlogging response
starch metabolism: !associated with! waterlogging response