Low positive temperature (chilling) is frequently linked to the promotion of oxidative stress conditions, and is of particular importance in the coffee plant due to its severe impact on growth, development, photosynthesis and production. Nevertheless, some acclimation ability has been reported within the Coffea genus, and is possibly related to oxidative stress control. Using an integrated biochemical and molecular approach, the characterization of the antioxidative system of genotypes with different cold acclimation abilities was performed. Experiments were carried out using 1.5-year-old coffee seedlings of Coffea canephora cv. Apoatã, C. arabica cv. Catuaí, C. dewevrei and 2 hybrids, Icatu (C. arabicaxC. canephora) and Piatã (C. dewevreixC. arabica) subjected to a gradual cold treatment and a recovery period. Icatu showed the greatest ability to control oxidative stress, as reflected by the enhancement of several antioxidative components (Cu,Zn-SOD and APX activities; ascorbate, alpha-tocopherol and chlorogenic acids (CGAs) contents) and lower reactive oxygen species contents (H(2)O(2) and OH). Gene expression studies show that GRed, DHAR and class III and IV chitinases might also be involved in the cold acclimation ability of Icatu. Catuaí showed intermediate acclimation ability through the reinforcement of some antioxidative molecules, usually to a lesser extent than that observed in Icatu. On the other hand, C. dewevrei showed the poorest response in terms of antioxidant accumulation, and also showed the greatest increase in OH values. The difference in the triggering of antioxidative traits supports the hypothesis of its importance to cold (and photoinhibition) tolerance in Coffea sp. and could provide a useful probe to identify tolerant genotypes.

GRed: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
DHAR: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
class III chitinase: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
class IV chitinase: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
Cu,Zn-SOD: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
APX: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
ascorbate: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
alpha-tocopherol: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
CGAs: !enhances! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
H2O2: !represses! Icatu's cold acclimation ability
OH: !represses! Icatu's cold acclimation ability