Phosphorus (P), an important plant macronutrient, is a component of key molecules such as nucleic acids, phospholipids and ATP. P is often the limiting nutrient for crop yield potential because of the low concentration of soluble P that can be absorbed directly by plant. Plants have evolved a series of molecular and morphological adaptations to cope with P limitation. However, the molecular bases of these responses to P deficiency have not been thoroughly elucidated. In this report, the gene expression profiles of low-P-tolerant rice Zhongzao 18 (Oryza sativa ssp. Indica) and not-low-P-tolerant rice Lagrue (Oryza sativa ssp. Indica) roots at 6 h, 24 h and 72 h under low P stress were investigated and compared with a control (normal P conditions) profile, using a DNA chip of 60,000 oligos (70 mer) that represented all putative genes of the rice genome. A total of 1,518 and 2,358 genes exhibited alterations in expression in response to low P stress in at least one of the three time points in rice Zhongzao 18 and rice Lagrue, respectively. The differentially expressed genes included those involved in phosphate (Pi) transportation, transportations except for Pi transportation, phosphatase, enzymes other than phosphatase, primary metabolism, secondary metabolism and so on. Several genes involved in glycolysis and TCA cycle were up-regulated during the early stages of low P treatment in rice Zhongzao 18 roots, but not in rice Lagrue roots. The results may provide useful information to further studies of the molecular mechanism of plant adaptation to low P and thus facilitate research in improving P utilization in crop species.

Phosphorus: !limits! Crop Yield
Plants: !evolved! Adaptations
Gene Expression Profiles: !compared! Low-P-tolerant Rice & Not-Low-P-tolerant Rice
1,518 & 2,358 Genes: !exhibited alterations in expression! Low P Stress
Genes: !involved in! Phosphate Transportation, Transportations Except for Pi Transportation, Phosphatase, Enzymes Other Than Phosphatase, Primary Metabolism, Secondary Metabolism
Glycolysis & TCA Cycle Genes: !up-regulated! Early Stages of Low P Treatment in Rice Zhongzao 18 Roots