['19946617', 'In most plants, a large fraction of photo-assimilated carbon is stored in the  chloroplasts during the day as starch and remobilized during the subsequent night  to support metabolism. Mutations blocking either starch synthesis or starch  breakdown in Arabidopsis thaliana reduce plant growth. Maltose is the major  product of starch breakdown exported from the chloroplast at night. The maltose  excess 1 mutant (mex1), which lacks the chloroplast envelope maltose transporter,  accumulates high levels of maltose and starch in chloroplasts and develops a  distinctive but previously unexplained chlorotic phenotype as leaves mature. The  introduction of additional mutations that prevent starch synthesis, or that block  maltose production from starch, also prevent chlorosis of mex1. In contrast,  introduction of mutations in disproportionating enzyme (DPE1) results in the  accumulation of maltotriose in addition to maltose, and greatly increases  chlorosis. These data suggest a link between maltose accumulation and chloroplast  homeostasis. Microscopic analyses show that the mesophyll cells in chlorotic mex1  leaves have fewer than half the number of chloroplasts than wild-type cells.  Transmission electron microscopy reveals autophagy-like chloroplast degradation  in both mex1 and the dpe1/mex1 double mutant. Microarray analyses reveal  substantial reprogramming of metabolic and cellular processes, suggesting that  organellar protein turnover is increased in mex1, though leaf senescence and  senescence-related chlorophyll catabolism are not induced. We propose that the  accumulation of maltose and malto-oligosaccharides causes chloroplast  dysfunction, which may by signaled via a form of retrograde signaling and trigger  chloroplast degradation.', '2009 Nov', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/ssp093', 'Zeeman']

starch synthesis: !affects! plant growth
maltose excess 1 mutant: !accumulates! maltose and starch
additional mutations: !prevent! chlorosis of mex1
disproportionating enzyme: !increases! chlorosis
mesophyll cells: !have fewer! chloroplasts
autophagy-like chloroplast degradation: !occurs in! mex1 and dpe1/mex1 double mutant
metabolic and cellular processes: !reprogrammed in! mex1
maltose and malto-oligosaccharides: !cause! chloroplast dysfunction
retrograde signaling: !triggers! chloroplast degradation