The ability to switch from skotomorphogenesis to photomorphogenesis is essential for seedling development and plant survival. Recent studies revealed that COP1 and phytochrome-interacting factors (PIFs) are key regulators of this transition by repressing the photomorphogenic responses and/or maintaining the skotomorphogenic state of etiolated seedlings. Here we report that the plant hormone ethylene plays a crucial role in the transition from skotomorphogenesis to photomorphogenesis by facilitating greening of etiolated seedlings upon light irradiation. Activation of EIN3/EIL1 is both necessary and sufficient for ethylene-induced enhancement of seedling greening, as well as repression of the accumulation of protochlorophyllide, a phototoxic intermediate of chlorophyll synthesis. EIN3/EIL1 were found to induce gene expression of two key enzymes in the chlorophyll synthesis pathway, protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase A and B (PORA/B). ChIP and EMSA assays demonstrated that EIN3 directly binds to the specific elements present in the PORA and PORB promoters. Genetic studies revealed that EIN3/EIL1 function in cooperation with PIF1 in preventing photo-oxidative damage and promoting cotyledon greening. Moreover, activation of EIN3 reverses the blockage of greening triggered by cop1 mutation or far-red light irradiation. Consistently, EIN3 acts downstream of COP1 and its protein accumulation is enhanced by COP1 but decreased by light. Taken together, EIN3/EIL1 represent a new class of transcriptional regulators along with PIF1 to optimize de-etiolation of Arabidopsis seedlings. Our study highlights the essential role of ethylene in enhancing seedling development and survival through protecting etiolated seedlings against photo-oxidative damage.

COP1: !represses! photomorphogenic responses
PIFs: !maintain! skotomorphogenic state
ethylene: !facilitates! greening of etiolated seedlings
EIN3/EIL1: !induce! PORA/B gene expression
EIN3: !directly binds! PORA/B promoters
EIN3/EIL1: !cooperate with! PIF1
COP1: !enhances! EIN3 protein accumulation
light: !decreases! EIN3 protein accumulation