['19947982', 'Cold signals interact with other environmental cues to modulate plant  developmental processes. Recent studies have shown that many Pathogenesis-Related  (PR) genes are induced and disease resistance is enhanced after exposure to low  temperatures, linking cold signals with pathogenesis in plants. However, the  underlying molecular mechanisms and signaling schemes are largely unknown. Here,  we demonstrate that cold stimulates proteolytic activation of a plasma  membrane-tethered NAC (NAM/ATAF1/2/CUC2) transcription factor NTL6. The  transcriptionally active NTL6 protein enters the nucleus, where it induces a  subset of PR genes by directly binding to a conserved sequence in the promoters  of cold-responsive PR genes, such as PR1, PR2, and PR5. While transgenic plants  overexpressing an active NTL6 form exhibited enhanced disease resistance, RNAi  plants with reduced NTL6 activity were more susceptible to pathogen infection at  low temperatures. Accordingly, cold induction of PR1 disappeared in the RNAi  plants. Consistent with the close relationship between cold and pathogenesis,  cold-acclimated plants showed enhanced resistance to pathogen infection. In this  signaling cascade, controlled activation of the membrane-tethered, dormant NTL6  transcription factor serves as a molecular link that incorporates cold signals  into pathogen resistance responses. However, the NTL6-mediated cold induction of  the PR genes is independent of salicylic acid (SA). The PR genes were still  induced by SA in the NTL6 RNAi plants. Cold regulation of the PR genes through  the membrane-mediated transcriptional control is thought to be an adaptive  process that ensures quick plant responses to incoming pathogens that frequently  occur during cold seasons.', '2010 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04091.x', 'Park']

Cold: !interacts with! other environmental cues 
NTL6: !proteolytically activated by! cold 
NTL6: !induces! subset of PR genes 
Overexpression of active NTL6: !enhances! disease resistance 
Reduced NTL6 activity: !increases! susceptibility to pathogen infection 
Cold: !incorporates into! pathogen resistance responses 
Cold: !independent of! SA