['19956626', "BACKGROUND: Poly(A) polymerase is a key enzyme in the machinery that mediates  mRNA 3' end formation in eukaryotes. In plants, poly(A) polymerases are encoded  by modest gene families. To better understand this multiplicity of genes, poly(A)  polymerase-encoding genes from several other plants, as well as from Selaginella,  Physcomitrella, and Chlamydomonas, were studied. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS:  Using bioinformatics tools, poly(A) polymerase-encoding genes were identified in  the genomes of eight species in the plant lineage. Whereas Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii was found to possess a single poly(A) polymerase gene, other species  possessed between two and six possible poly(A) polymerase genes. With the  exception of four intron-lacking genes, all of the plant poly(A) polymerase genes  (but not the C. reinhardtii gene) possessed almost identical intron positions  within the poly(A) polymerase coding sequences, suggesting that all plant poly(A)  polymerase genes derive from a single ancestral gene. The four Arabidopsis  poly(A) polymerase genes were found to be essential, based on genetic analysis of  T-DNA insertion mutants. GFP fusion proteins containing three of the four  Arabidopsis poly(A) polymerases localized to the nucleus, while one such fusion  protein was localized in the cytoplasm. The fact that this latter protein is  largely pollen-specific suggests that it has important roles in male  gametogenesis. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that poly(A)  polymerase genes have expanded from a single ancestral gene by a series of  duplication events during the evolution of higher plants, and that individual  members have undergone sorts of functional specialization so as to render them  essential for plant growth and development. Perhaps the most interesting of the  plant poly(A) polymerases is a novel cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase that is  expressed in pollen in Arabidopsis; this is reminiscent of spermatocyte-specific  cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerases in mammals.", '2009 Nov 26', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0008082', 'Hunt']

poly(A) polymerase: !expanded from! single ancestral gene
poly(A) polymerase: !specialized for! plant growth and development
poly(A) polymerase: !localizes to! nucleus
poly(A) polymerase: !localizes to! cytoplasm
poly(A) polymerase: !expressed in! pollen
poly(A) polymerase: !essential for! plant growth