Purple acid phosphatases (PAPs) play diverse physiological roles in plants. In this study, we purified a novel PAP, PvPAP3, from the roots of common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) grown under phosphate (Pi) starvation. PvPAP3 was identified as a 34-kD monomer acting on the specific substrate, ATP, with a broad pH range and a high heat stability. The activity of PvPAP3 was insensitive to tartrate, indicating that PvPAP3 is a PAP-like protein. Amino acid sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis suggest that PvPAP3 belongs to the group of plant PAPs with low molecular mass. Transient expression of 35S:PvPAP3-green fluorescent protein in onion (Allium cepa) epidermal cells verified that it might anchor on plasma membrane and be secreted into apoplast. Pi starvation led to induction of PvPAP3 expression in both leaves and roots of common bean, and expression of PvPAP3 was strictly dependent on phosphorus (P) availability and duration of Pi starvation. Furthermore, induction of PvPAP3 expression was more rapid and higher in a P-efficient genotype, G19833, than in a P-inefficient genotype, DOR364, suggesting possible roles of PvPAP3 in P efficiency in bean. In vivo analysis using a transgenic hairy root system of common bean showed that both growth and P uptake of bean hairy roots from the PvPAP3 overexpression transgenic lines were significantly enhanced when ATP was supplied as the sole external P source. Taken together, our results suggest that PvPAP3 is a novel PAP that might function in the adaptation of common bean to P deficiency, possibly through enhancing utilization of extracellular ATP as a P source.

PvPAP3: !acts on! ATP 
PvPAP3: !belongs to! group of plant PAPs 
35S:PvPAP3-green fluorescent protein: !anchors on! plasma membrane 
Pi starvation: !induces! PvPAP3 expression 
G19833: !induces more rapidly and higher! PvPAP3 expression 
DOR364: !induces less rapidly and lower! PvPAP3 expression 
PvPAP3 overexpression transgenic lines: !enhances! growth and P uptake 
PvPAP3: !functions in! adaptation of common bean to P deficiency