['19955263', 'Cysteine (Cys) occupies a central position in plant metabolism due to its  biochemical functions. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) cells contain different  O-acetylserine(thiol)lyase (OASTL) enzymes that catalyze the biosynthesis of Cys.  Because they are localized in the cytosol, plastids, and mitochondria, this  results in multiple subcellular Cys pools. Much progress has been made on the  most abundant OASTL enzymes; however, information on the less abundant OASTL-like  proteins has been scarce. To unequivocally establish the enzymatic reaction  catalyzed by the minor cytosolic OASTL isoform CS-LIKE (for Cys synthase-like;  At5g28030), we expressed this enzyme in bacteria and characterized the purified  recombinant protein. Our results demonstrate that CS-LIKE catalyzes the  desulfuration of L-Cys to sulfide plus ammonia and pyruvate. Thus, CS-LIKE is a  novel L-Cys desulfhydrase (EC 4.4.1.1), and we propose to designate it DES1. The  impact and functionality of DES1 in Cys metabolism was revealed by the phenotype  of the T-DNA insertion mutants des1-1 and des1-2. Mutation of the DES1 gene leads  to premature leaf senescence, as demonstrated by the increased expression of  senescence-associated genes and transcription factors. Also, the absence of DES1  significantly reduces the total Cys desulfuration activity in leaves, and there  is a concomitant increase in the total Cys content. As a consequence, the  expression levels of sulfur-responsive genes are deregulated, and the mutant  plants show enhanced antioxidant defenses and tolerance to conditions that  promote oxidative stress. Our results suggest that DES1 from Arabidopsis is an  L-Cys desulfhydrase involved in maintaining Cys homeostasis, mainly at late  developmental stages or under environmental perturbations.', '2010 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.147975', 'Gotor']

OASTL: !catalyzes! biosynthesis of Cys 
CS-LIKE: !catalyzes! desulfuration of L-Cys 
DES1: !involved in! maintaining Cys homeostasis 
Mutation of DES1: !leads to! premature leaf senescence 
DES1: !reduces! total Cys desulfuration activity 
Mutant plants: !show enhanced! antioxidant defenses