The N-end rule relates the in vivo half-life of a protein to the identity of its N-terminal amino acid residue. While some N-terminal residues result in metabolically stable proteins, other, so-called destabilizing residues, lead to rapid protein turnover. The N-end rule pathway, which mediates the recognition and degradation of proteins with N-terminal destabilizing residues, is present in all organisms examined, including prokaryotes. This protein degradation pathway has a hierarchical organization in which some N-terminal residues, called primary destabilizing residues, are directly recognized by specific ubiquitin ligases. Other destabilizing residues, termed secondary and tertiary destabilizing residues, require modifications before the corresponding proteins can be targeted for degradation by ubiquitin ligases. In eukaryotes, the N-end rule pathway is a part of the ubiquitin/proteasome system and is known to play essential roles in a broad range of biological processes in fungi, animals and plants. While the structure of the N-end rule pathway has been extensively studied in yeast and mammals, knowledge of its organization in plants is limited. Using both tobacco and Arabidopsis, we identified the complete sets destabilizing and stabilizing N-terminal residues. We also characterized the hierarchical organization of the plant N-end rule by identifying and determining the specificity of two distinct N-terminal amidohydrolases (Nt-amidases) of Arabidopsis that are essential for the destabilizing activity of the tertiary destabilizing residues Asn and Gln. Our results indicate that both the N-end rule itself and mechanistic aspects of the N-end rule pathway in angiosperms are very similar to those of mammals.

N-end rule: !relates! half-life of protein 
N-terminal amino acid residue: !determines! stability of protein 
Ubiquitin ligases: !recognize! primary destabilizing residues 
Modifications: !required for! secondary and tertiary destabilizing residues 
Ubiquitin/proteasome system: !plays essential roles in! biological processes 
Yeast and mammals: !structure of! N-end rule pathway extensively studied 
Tobacco and Arabidopsis: !identified! complete sets of destabilizing and stabilizing N-terminal residues 
Two distinct N-terminal amidohydrolases: !characterized! hierarchical organization of plant N-end rule 
Arabidopsis Nt-amidases: !essential for! destabilizing activity of Asn and Gln 
Mammals: !very similar to! N-end rule pathway in angiosperms