We understand few details about how the arrangement and interactions of cell wall polymers produce the mechanical properties of primary cell walls. Consequently, we cannot quantitatively assess if proposed wall structures are mechanically reasonable or assess the effectiveness of proposed mechanisms to change mechanical properties. As a step to remedying this, we developed WallGen, a Fortran program (available on request) building virtual cellulose-hemicellulose networks by stochastic self-assembly whose mechanical properties can be predicted by finite element analysis. The thousands of mechanical elements in the virtual wall are intended to have one-to-one spatial and mechanical correspondence with their real wall counterparts of cellulose microfibrils and hemicellulose chains. User-defined inputs set the properties of the two polymer types (elastic moduli, dimensions of microfibrils and hemicellulose chains, hemicellulose molecular weight) and their population properties (microfibril alignment and volume fraction, polymer weight percentages in the network). This allows exploration of the mechanical consequences of variations in nanostructure that might occur in vivo and provides estimates of how uncertainties regarding certain inputs will affect WallGen's mechanical predictions. We summarize WallGen's operation and the choice of values for user-defined inputs and show that predicted values for the elastic moduli of multinet walls subject to small displacements overlap measured values. "Design of experiment" methods provide systematic exploration of how changed input values affect mechanical properties and suggest that changing microfibril orientation and/or the number of hemicellulose cross-bridges could change wall mechanical anisotropy.

WallGen: !builds! virtual cellulose-hemicellulose networks
User-defined inputs: !set! properties of two polymer types
WallGen: !predicts! mechanical properties of virtual wall
WallGen: !overlaps with! measured values for elastic moduli
Design of experiment: !explores! how changed input values affect mechanical properties