['20007451', 'Multimeric protein complexes are required during development to regulate  transcription and orchestrate cellular proliferation and differentiation. The  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) SEUSS (SEU) gene encodes a transcriptional  adaptor that shares sequence similarity with metazoan Lim domain-binding  transcriptional adaptors. In Arabidopsis, SEU forms a physical complex with the  LEUNIG transcriptional coregulator. This complex regulates a number of diverse  developmental events, including proper specification of floral organ identity and  number and the development of female reproductive tissues derived from the carpel  margin meristem. In addition to SEU, there are three Arabidopsis SEUSS-LIKE (SLK)  genes that encode putative transcriptional adaptors. To determine the functions  of the SLK genes and to investigate the degree of functional redundancy between  SEU and SLK genes, we characterized available slk mutant lines in Arabidopsis.  Here, we show that mutations in any single SLK gene failed to condition an  obvious morphological abnormality. However, by generating higher order mutant  plants, we uncovered a degree of redundancy between the SLK genes and between SLK  genes and SEU. We report a novel role for SEU and the SLK genes during embryonic  development and show that the concomitant loss of both SEU and SLK2 activities  conditions severe embryonic and seedling defects characterized by a loss of the  shoot apical meristem. Furthermore, we demonstrate that SLK gene function is  required for proper development of vital female reproductive tissues derived from  the carpel margin. We propose a model that posits that SEU and SLK genes support  organ development from meristematic regions through two different pathways: one  that facilitates auxin response and thus organ initiation and a second that  sustains meristematic potential through the maintenance of SHOOTMERISTEM-LESS and  PHABULOSA expression.', '2010 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.146183', 'Franks']

SEU: !forms complex with! LEUNIG
SEU: !regulates! developmental events
SLK: !redundant with! SEU
SEU/SLK: !required for! embryonic development
SEU/SLK: !required for! female reproductive tissue development
SEU/SLK: !facilitates! auxin response
SEU/SLK: !sustains! meristematic potential