['20007779', 'Recognition of microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs), conserved  structures typical of a microbial class, triggers immune responses in eukaryotes.  This is accompanied by a diverse set of physiological responses that are thought  to enhance defense activity in plants. However, the extent and mechanisms by  which MAMP-induced events contribute to host immunity are poorly understood. Here  we reveal Arabidopsis priority in sweet life4 (psl4) and psl5 mutants that are  insensitive to the bacterial elongation factor (EF)-Tu epitope elf18 but  responsive to flagellin epitope flg22. PSL4 and PSL5, respectively, identify  beta- and alpha-subunits of endoplasmic reticulum-resident glucosidase II, which  is essential for stable accumulation and quality control of the elf18 receptor  EFR but not the flg22 receptor FLS2. We notice that EFR signaling is partially  and differentially impaired without a significant decrease of the receptor  steady-state levels in 2 weakly dysfunctional gIIalpha alleles, designated psl5-1  and rsw3. Remarkably, rsw3 plants exhibit marked supersusceptibility against a  virulent bacterial phytopathogen despite nearly intact coactivation of MAPKs,  reactive oxygen species, ethylene biosynthesis, and callose deposition in  response to elf18, demonstrating that these signaling outputs alone are  insufficient to mount effective immunity. However, rsw3 plants fail to maintain  high transcript levels of defense-promoting WRKY, PR1, and PR2 genes at late time  points (4 to 24 h) after elf18 elicitation. This points to an unexpected  separation between initial and sustained activation of EFR-mediated signaling in  the absence of proper glucosidase II-mediated endoplasmic reticulum quality  control. Our findings strongly suggest the importance of sustained MAMP receptor  signaling as a key step in the establishment of robust immunity.', '2009 Dec 29', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0907711106', 'Saijo']

PSL4: !identifies! beta-subunit of endoplasmic reticulum-resident glucosidase II 
PSL5: !identifies! alpha-subunit of endoplasmic reticulum-resident glucosidase II 
EFR: !signaling is impaired by! PSL4 and PSL5 
RSW3: !exhibits supersusceptibility to! virulent bacterial phytopathogen 
EFR: !separates initial and sustained activation of! MAMP receptor signaling 
Glucosidase II: !essential for stable accumulation and quality control of! EFR 
WRKY, PR1, PR2 genes: !maintained at low levels in! RSW3 plants