When plants are damaged by herbivorous insects they emit a blend of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) which include a range or terpenoids and green leaf volatiles (GLVs) formed via different metabolic pathways. The precise timing of these emissions upon the onset of herbivore feeding has not been fully elucidated, and the information that is available has been mainly obtained through laboratory based studies. We investigated emissions of VOCs from Populus tremula L. xP. tremuloides Michx. during the first 20 h of feeding by Epirrita autumnata (autumnal moth) larvae in a field site. The study was conducted using Proton Transfer Reaction-Mass Spectrometry (PTR-MS) to measure emissions online, with samples collected for subsequent analysis by complementary gas chromatography-mass spectrometry for purposes of compound identification. GLV emission peaks occurred sporadically from the outset, indicating herbivore activity, while terpene emissions were induced within 16 h. We present data detailing the patterns of monoterpene (MT), GLV and sesquiterpene (SQT) emissions during the early stages of herbivore feeding showing diurnal MT and SQT emission that is correlated more with temperature than light. Peculiarities in the timing of SQT emissions prompted us to conduct a thorough characterization of the equipment used to collect VOCs and thus corroborate the accuracy of results. A laboratory based analysis of the throughput of known GLV, MT and SQT standards at different temperatures was made with PTR-MS. Enclosure temperatures of 12, 20 and 25 degrees C had little influence on the response time for dynamic measurements of a GLV or MT. However, there was a clear effect on SQT measurements. Elucidation of emission patterns in real-time is dependent upon the dynamics of cuvettes at different temperatures.

Gene: !affects! VOC emission
VOC: !emitted by! Populus tremula L. xP. tremuloides Michx.
Herbivore: !induces! terpene emissions
Temperature: !correlated with! diurnal MT and SQT emissions
PTR-MS: !measures! VOC emissions
GC-MS: !identifies! compounds
GLV: !emitted sporadically! upon herbivore feeding
SQT: !enhanced by! enclosure temperature