['20011053', "BACKGROUND: Although cytokinins have been known for decades to play important  roles in the regulation of plant growth and development, our knowledge of the  regulatory mechanism of endogenous content of specific cytokinins remains  limited. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we characterized two SOB five-like  (SOFL) genes, AtSOFL1 and AtSOFL2, in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and  showed that they acted redundantly in regulating specific cytokinin levels.  Analysis of the translational fusion AtSOFL1:AtSOFL1-GUS and AtSOFL2:AtSOFL2-GUS  indicated that AtSOFL1 and AtSOFL2 exhibited similar expression patterns. Both  proteins were predominantly expressed in the vascular tissues of developing  leaves, flowers and siliques, but barely detectable in roots and stems.  Overexpression of either AtSOFL1 or AtSOFL2 led to increased cytokinin content  and obvious corresponding mutant phenotypes for both transgenic seedlings and  adult plants. In addition, overexpression and site-directed mutagenesis  experiments demonstrated that the SOFL domains are necessary for AtSOFL2's  overexpression phenotypes. Silencing or disrupting either AtSOFL1 or AtSOFL2  caused no obvious developmental defects. Endogenous cytokinin analysis, however,  revealed that compared to the wild type control, the SOFL1-RNAi62 sofl2-1 double  mutant accumulated lower levels of trans-zeatin riboside monophosphate (tZRMP)  and N(6)-(Delta(2)-isopentenyl)adenosine monophosphate (iPRMP), which are  biosynthetic intermediates of bioactive cytokinins. The double mutant also  displayed decreased response to exogenous cytokinin in both callus-formation and  inhibition-of-hypocotyl-elongation assays. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken  together, our data suggest that in plants AtSOFL1 and AtSOFL2 work redundantly as  positive modulators in the fine-tuning of specific cytokinin levels as well as  responsiveness.", '2009 Dec 9', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0008236', 'Neff']

AtSOFL1: !acts redundantly with! AtSOFL2
AtSOFL1: !localizes to! vascular tissues of developing leaves, flowers and siliques
AtSOFL1: !enhances! cytokinin content
AtSOFL1: !synthesizes! tZRMP and iPRMP
AtSOFL2: !acts redundantly with! AtSOFL1
AtSOFL2: !localizes to! vascular tissues of developing leaves, flowers and siliques
AtSOFL2: !enhances! cytokinin content
AtSOFL2: !synthesizes! tZRMP and iPRMP