['20018591', 'Understanding the metal ion content of plant mitochondria and metal ion  interactions with the proteome are vital for insights into both normal  respiratory function and the process of protein damage during oxidative stress.  We have analyzed the metal content of isolated Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  mitochondria, revealing a 26:8:6:1 molar ratio for iron:zinc:copper:manganese and  trace amounts of cobalt and molybdenum. We show that selective changes occur in  mitochondrial copper and iron content following in vivo and in vitro oxidative  stresses. Immobilized metal affinity chromatography charged with Cu(2+), Zn(2+),  and Co(2+) was used to identify over 100 mitochondrial proteins with  metal-binding properties. There were strong correlations between the sets of  immobilized metal affinity chromatography-interacting proteins, proteins  predicted to contain metal-binding motifs, and protein sets known to be oxidized  or degraded during abiotic stress. Mitochondrial respiratory chain pathways and  matrix enzymes varied widely in their susceptibility to metal-induced loss of  function, showing the selectivity of the process. A detailed study of oxidized  residues and predicted metal interaction sites in the tricarboxylic acid cycle  enzyme aconitase identified selective oxidation of residues in the active site  and showed an approach for broader screening of functionally significant  oxidation events in the mitochondrial proteome.', '2010 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.147942', 'Millar']

Iron: !localizes to! Arabidopsis mitochondria 
Zinc: !localizes to! Arabidopsis mitochondria 
Copper: !localizes to! Arabidopsis mitochondria 
Manganese: !localizes to! Arabidopsis mitochondria 
Cobalt: !localizes to! Arabidopsis mitochondria 
Molybdenum: !localizes to! Arabidopsis mitochondria 
Oxidative stress: !affects! Copper and Iron content of mitochondria 
Immobilized metal affinity chromatography: !identifies! Over 100 mitochondrial proteins with metal-binding properties 
Metal-binding motifs: !correlates with! Immobilized metal affinity chromatography-interacting proteins 
Oxidative stress: !degrades! Protein sets 
Respiratory chain pathways: !vary in! Susceptibility to metal-induced loss of function 
Aconitase: !selectively oxidizes! Residues in active site