['20010603', 'Stomata in the epidermal tissues of leaves are valves through which passes CO(2),  and as such they influence the global carbon cycle. The two-dimensional pattern  and density of stomata in the leaf epidermis are genetically and environmentally  regulated to optimize gas exchange. Two putative intercellular signalling  factors, EPF1 and EPF2, function as negative regulators of stomatal development  in Arabidopsis, possibly by interacting with the receptor-like protein TMM. One  or more positive intercellular signalling factors are assumed to be involved in  stomatal development, but their identities are unknown. Here we show that a novel  secretory peptide, which we designate as stomagen, is a positive intercellular  signalling factor that is conserved among vascular plants. Stomagen is a  45-amino-rich peptide that is generated from a 102-amino-acid precursor protein  designated as STOMAGEN. Both an in planta analysis and a semi-in-vitro analysis  with recombinant and chemically synthesized stomagen peptides showed that  stomagen has stomata-inducing activity in a dose-dependent manner. A genetic  analysis showed that TMM is epistatic to STOMAGEN (At4g12970), suggesting that  stomatal development is finely regulated by competitive binding of positive and  negative regulators to the same receptor. Notably, STOMAGEN is expressed in inner  tissues (the mesophyll) of immature leaves but not in the epidermal tissues where  stomata develop. This study provides evidence of a mesophyll-derived positive  regulator of stomatal density. Our findings provide a conceptual advancement in  understanding stomatal development: inner photosynthetic tissues optimize their  function by regulating stomatal density in the epidermis for efficient uptake of  CO(2).', '2010 Jan 14', 'Nature', '10.1038/nature08682', 'Hara-Nishimura']

EPF1: !represses! stomatal development 
EPF2: !represses! stomatal development 
TMM: !interacts with! EPF1 & EPF2 
STOMAGEN: !enhances! stomatal development 
STOMAGEN: !interacts with! TMM 
STOMAGEN: !synthesizes! in mesophyll tissues