['20018592', 'We investigated the roles of cortical microtubules in gravity-induced  modifications to the development of stem organs by analyzing morphology and  orientation of cortical microtubule arrays in hypocotyls of Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) tubulin mutants, tua3(D205N), tua4(S178Delta), and  tua6(A281T), cultivated under 1g and hypergravity (300g) conditions. Hypocotyls  of tubulin mutants were shorter and thicker than the wild type even at 1g, and  hypergravity further suppressed elongation and stimulated expansion. The degree  of such changes was clearly smaller in tubulin mutants, in particular in tua6.  Hypocotyls of tubulin mutants also showed either left-handed or right-handed  helical growth at 1g, and the degree of twisting phenotype was intensified under  hypergravity conditions, especially in tua6. Hypergravity induced reorientation  of cortical microtubules from transverse to longitudinal directions in epidermal  cells of wild-type hypocotyls. In tubulin mutants, especially in tua6, the  percentage of cells with longitudinal microtubules was high even at 1g, and it  was further increased by hypergravity. The twisting phenotype was most obvious at  cells 10 to 12 from the top, where reorientation of cortical microtubules from  transverse to longitudinal directions occurred. Moreover, the left-handed helical  growth mutants (tua3 and tua4) had right-handed microtubule arrays, whereas the  right-handed mutant (tua6) had left-handed arrays. There was a close correlation  between the alignment angle of epidermal cell files and the alignment of cortical  microtubules. Gadolinium ions, blockers of mechanosensitive ion channels  (mechanoreceptors), suppressed the twisting phenotype in tubulin mutants under  both 1g and 300 g conditions. Microtubule arrays in tubulin mutants were oriented  more transversely by gadolinium treatment, irrespective of gravity conditions.  These results support the hypothesis that cortical microtubules play an essential  role in maintenance of normal growth phenotype against the gravitational force,  and suggest that mechanoreceptors are involved in modifications to morphology and  orientation of microtubule arrays by 1g gravity and hypergravity in tubulin  mutants.', '2010 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.147330', 'Hoson']

gene: tua3(D205N)!affects!morphology 
gene: tua4(S178Delta)!affects!morphology 
gene: tua6(A281T)!affects!morphology 
gene: hypergravity!enhances!twisting phenotype 
gene: microtubules!localizes to!epidermal cells 
gene: microtubules!reorientates to!longitudinal direction 
gene: alignment angle!correlates with!microtubule alignment 
gene: mechanoreceptors!interacts with!microtubule arrays 
gene: gadolinium ions!represses!twisting phenotype