Chalcone synthase (CHS) catalyzes the first reaction specific for flavonoid and isoflavonoid biosynthesis. The soybean genome consists of nine copies of CHS genes (CHS1-CHS9) and a duplicate copy of CHS1. Even though the soybean CHS gene family members share a high degree of sequence similarity, they play different roles during plant development or in response to environmental stimuli. Our previous work on the comparison of a global gene expression in two soybean cultivars that differ in the level of total isoflavonoid accumulation has denoted the involvement of CHS7 and CHS8 genes in isoflavonoid synthesis. We have extended our effort to understand expression patterns of these two genes in soybean and in transgenic Arabidopsis. Promoter regions of CHS7 and CHS8 genes were isolated and in silico analysis performed to investigate potential transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs). The TFBSs were verified by DNase I footprint analysis. Some unique and several common TFBSs were identified in CHS7 and CHS8 promoters. We cloned beta-glucuronidase (GUS) under CHS7 and CHS8 promoters and monitored the tissue-specific GUS expression in transformed Arabidopsis. Differential GUS activity was observed in young leaves, roots, and mature pod walls of transgenic CHS7 promoter-GUS and CHS8 promoter-GUS plants. The tissue-specific expression patterns of CHS7 and CHS8 genes were determined in soybean by quantitative RT-PCR. Both CHS7 and CHS8 genes were expressed at higher levels in roots; however, overall expression pattern of these genes varied in different tissues. The results suggest that the structural diversity within CHS7 and CHS8 promoters may lead into differential activation of these genes by different inducers as well as developmental stage- and tissue-specific differences in gene expression.

CHS7: !synthesizes! Isoflavonoid 
CHS8: !synthesizes! Isoflavonoid 
CHS7: !localizes to! Young leaves 
CHS8: !localizes to! Young leaves 
CHS7: !localizes to! Roots 
CHS8: !localizes to! Roots 
CHS7: !localizes to! Mature pod walls 
CHS8: !localizes to! Mature pod walls 
CHS7: !enhances! GUS activity 
CHS8: !enhances! GUS activity 
CHS7: !interacts with! TFBSs 
CHS8: !interacts with! TFBSs