['20023151', 'Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genes MILDEW RESISTANCE LOCUS O2 (MLO2), MLO6,  and MLO12 exhibit unequal genetic redundancy with respect to the modulation of  defense responses against powdery mildew fungi and the control of developmental  phenotypes such as premature leaf decay. We show that early chlorosis and  necrosis of rosette leaves in mlo2 mlo6 mlo12 mutants reflects an authentic but  untimely leaf senescence program. Comparative transcriptional profiling revealed  that transcripts of several genes encoding tryptophan biosynthetic and metabolic  enzymes hyperaccumulate during vegetative development in the mlo2 mlo6 mlo12  mutant. Elevated expression levels of these genes correlate with altered  steady-state levels of several indolic metabolites, including the phytoalexin  camalexin and indolic glucosinolates, during development in the mlo2 single  mutant and the mlo2 mlo6 mlo12 triple mutant. Results of genetic epistasis  analysis suggest a decisive role for indolic metabolites in mlo2-conditioned  antifungal defense against both biotrophic powdery mildews and a  camalexin-sensitive strain of the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis cinerea. The  wound- and pathogen-responsive callose synthase POWDERY MILDEW RESISTANCE4/GLUCAN  SYNTHASE-LIKE5 was found to be responsible for the spontaneous callose deposits  in mlo2 mutant plants but dispensable for mlo2-conditioned penetration  resistance. Our data strengthen the notion that powdery mildew resistance of mlo2  genotypes is based on the same defense execution machinery as innate antifungal  immune responses that restrict the invasion of nonadapted fungal pathogens.', '2010 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.147660', 'Panstruga']

MLO2: !modulates! defense responses
MLO2: !controls! developmental phenotypes
MLO2: !hyperaccumulates! tryptophan biosynthetic/metabolic enzyme transcripts
MLO2: !alters! indolic metabolite levels
MLO2: !mediates! antifungal defense
POWDERY MILDEW RESISTANCE4/GLUCAN SYNTHASE-LIKE5: !responsible for! spontaneous callose deposits in mlo2 mutant plants