The haploid microspore division during pollen development in flowering plants is an intrinsically asymmetric division which establishes the male germline for sexual reproduction. Arabidopsis gem1 mutants lack the male germline as a result of disturbed microspore polarity, division asymmetry, and cytokinesis and represent loss-of-function mutants in MOR1/GEM1, a plant orthologue of the conserved MAP215/Dis1 microtubule associated protein (MAP) family. This provides genetic evidence for the role of MAP215/Dis1 in the organization of gametophytic microtubule arrays, but it has remained unknown how microtubule arrays are affected in gem1 mutant microspores. Here, novel male gametophytic microtubule-reporter Nicotiana tabacum plants were constructed, expressing a green fluorescent protein-alpha-TUBULIN fusion protein (GFP-TUA6) under the control of a microspore-specific promoter. These plants allow effective visualization of all major male gametophytic microtubule arrays and provide useful tools to study the regulation of microtubule arrays by MAPs and other effectors. Depletion of TMBP200, a tobacco homologue of MOR1/GEM1 in gametophytic microtubule-reporter plants using microspore-targeted RNA interference, induced defects in microspore polarity, division asymmetry and cytokinesis that were associated with striking defects in phragmoplast position, orientation, and structure. Our observations further reveal a requirement for TMBP200 in gametophytic spindle organization and a novel role in spindle position and orientation in polarized microspores. These results provide direct evidence for the function of MAP215/Dis1 family protein TMBP200 in the organization of microtubule arrays critical for male germline formation in plants.

MOR1/GEM1: !affects! microspore polarity
MOR1/GEM1: !affects! division asymmetry
MOR1/GEM1: !affects! cytokinesis
GFP-TUA6: !visualizes! male gametophytic microtubule arrays
TMBP200: !regulates! microtubule arrays
TMBP200: !affects! phragmoplast position
TMBP200: !affects! spindle organization
TMBP200: !affects! spindle position
TMBP200: !affects! spindle orientation