Application of norflurazon (NF) damages plastids, induces photobleaching and represses expression of the nuclear LHCB1.2 gene encoding a light-harvesting protein. In genomes uncoupled (gun) mutants, LHCB1.2 expression is maintained in the presence of NF. The mutants gun2, gun4 and gun5 exhibit perturbations in tetrapyrrole biosynthesis, but gun1 is defective in organellar gene expression (OGE). How gun mutations affect nuclear gene expression (NGE) and why the signals elicited by the two types evoke the same response remains unknown. Here we show that the carotenoid biosynthesis inhibitors amitrole and flurochloridone can replace NF in gun assays, whereas novel tetrapyrrole pathway mutations do not provoke a gun phenotype. Changes in haem levels also do not account for LHCB1.2 derepression in NF-treated gun mutants. Pigment measurements indicated that gun mutants are not resistant to NF, but gun2, gun4 and gun5 retain low levels of lutein, as well as of neoxanthin and violaxanthin, the precursors of abscisic acid (ABA). This might explain the enhanced ABA sensitivity of gun4 and gun5 plants found in germination assays. Metabolite profiling and analyses of reactive oxygen species and cellular redox state failed to suggest a link between gun mutations and altered LHCB1.2 expression. However, in contrast to NF-treated wild-type plants, gun mutants retain to a marked extent the capability to express the plastome-encoded proteins AtpB and RbcL. This, together with the finding that application of ABA can partially restore LHCB1.2 expression in NF-treated wild-type plants, supports the view that tetrapyrrole, OGE and ABA signalling are interconnected.

Application of norflurazon (NF) !represses! expression of the nuclear LHCB1.2 gene. gun mutations !maintain! LHCB1.2 expression in the presence of NF. carotenoid biosynthesis inhibitors !replace! NF in gun assays. Changes in haem levels !do not account for! LHCB1.2 derepression in NF-treated gun mutants. gun mutants !retain! low levels of lutein, neoxanthin and violaxanthin. Metabolite profiling !fails to suggest! a link between gun mutations and altered LHCB1.2 expression. gun mutants !retain! capability to express plastome-encoded proteins AtpB and RbcL. ABA !can partially restore! LHCB1.2 expression in NF-treated wild-type plants. tetrapyrrole, OGE and ABA signalling !are interconnected!