['20031918', 'Phototropin 1 (phot1) is a photoreceptor for phototropism, chloroplast movement,  stomatal opening, leaf expansion, and solar tracking in response to blue light.  Following earlier work with PHOT1::GFP (Sakamoto and Briggs, 2002), we  investigated the pattern of cellular and subcellular localization of phot1 in 3-  4-d-old etiolated seedlings of Arabidopsis thalinana. As expressed from native  upstream sequences, the PHOT1::GFP fusion protein is expressed strongly in the  abaxial tissues of the cotyledons and in the elongating regions of the hypocotyl.  It is moderately expressed in the shoot/root transition zone and in cells near  the root apex. A fluorescence signal is undetectable in the root epidermis, root  cap, and root apical meristem itself. The plasma membranes of mesophyll cells  near the cotyledon margin appear labeled uniformly but cross-walls created by  recent cell divisions are more strongly labeled. The pattern of labeling of  individual cell types varies with cell type and developmental stage. Blue-light  treatment causes PHOT1::GFP, initially relatively evenly distributed at the  plasma membrane, to become reorganized into a distinct mosaic with strongly  labeled punctate areas and other areas completely devoid of fluorescence--a  phenomenon best observed in cortical cells in the hypocotyl elongation region.  Concomitant with or following this reorganization, PHOT1::GFP moves into the  cytoplasm in all cell types investigated except for guard cells. It disappears  from the cytoplasm by an unidentified mechanism after several hours in darkness.  Neither its appearance in the cytoplasm nor its eventual disappearance in  darkness is prevented by the translation inhibitor cycloheximide, although the  latter process is retarded. We hypothesize that blue-light-induced phot1  re-localization modulates blue-light-activated signal transduction.', '2008 Jan', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/ssm011', 'Briggs']

Phot1: !localizes to! abaxial tissues of cotyledons and hypocotyl 
Phot1: !reorganizes in! response to blue light 
Phot1: !moves into! cytoplasm 
Phot1: !disappears from! cytoplasm in darkness 
Phot1: !modulates! blue-light-activated signal transduction