['20035035', 'Apart from its significance in the protection against stress conditions, the  cuticular cover is essential for proper development of the diverse surface  structures formed on aerial plant organs. This layer mainly consists of a cutin  matrix, embedded and overlaid with cuticular waxes. Following their biosynthesis  in epidermal cells, cutin and waxes were suggested to be exported across the  plasma membrane by ABCG-type transporters such as DSO/ABCG11 to the cell wall and  further to extracellular matrix. Here, additional aspects of DSO/ABCG11 function  were investigated, predominantly in reproductive organs, which were not revealed  in the previous reports. This was facilitated by the generation of a transgenic  DSO/ABCG11 silenced line (dso-4) that displayed relatively subtle morphological  and chemical phenotypes. These included altered petal and silique morphology,  fusion of seeds, and changes in levels of cutin monomers in flowers and siliques.  The dso-4 phenotypes corresponded to the strong DSO/ABCG11 gene expression in the  embryo epidermis as well as in the endosperm tissues of the developing seeds.  Moreover, the DSO/ABCG11 protein displayed polar localization in the embryo  protoderm. Transcriptome analysis of the dso-4 mutant leaves and stems showed  that reduced DSO/ABCG11 activity suppressed the expression of a large number of  cuticle-associated genes, implying that export of cuticular lipids from the  plasma membrane is a rate-limiting step in cuticle metabolism. Surprisingly, root  suberin composition of dso-4 was altered, as well as root expression of two  suberin biosynthetic genes. Taken together, this study provides new insights into  cutin and suberin metabolism and their role in reproductive organs and roots  development.', '2010 May', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/ssp103', 'Aharoni']

DSO/ABCG11: !exports! cutin and waxes 
DSO/ABCG11: !localizes to! embryo protoderm 
DSO/ABCG11: !represses! cuticle-associated genes 
DSO/ABCG11: !alters! petal and silique morphology 
DSO/ABCG11: !changes! levels of cutin monomers 
DSO/ABCG11: !affects! root suberin composition 
DSO/ABCG11: !enhances! expression of suberin biosynthetic genes