Strategic control of mitochondrial movements and cellular distribution is essential for correct cell function and survival. However, despite being a vital process, mitochondrial movement in plant cells is a poorly documented phenomenon. To investigate the roles of actin filaments and microtubules on mitochondrial movements, Picea wilsonii pollen tubes were treated with two microtubule-disrupting drugs, two actin-disrupting drugs and a myosin inhibitor. Following these treatments, mitochondrial movements were characterized by multiangle evanescent wave microscopy and laser-scanning confocal microscopy. The results showed that individual mitochondria underwent three classes of linear movement: high-speed movement (instantaneous velocities >5.0 microm/s), low-speed movement (instantaneous velocities <5.0 microm/s) and variable-speed movement (instantaneous velocities ranging from 0.16 to 10.35 microm/s). 10 nM latrunculin B induced fragmentation of actin filaments and completely inhibited mitochondrial vectorial movement. Jasplakinolide treatment induced a 28% reduction in chondriome motility, and dramatically inhibition of high-speed and variable-speed movements. Treatment with 2,3-butanedione 2-monoxime caused a 61% reduction of chondriome motility, and the complete inhibition of high-speed and low-speed movements. In contrast to actin-disrupting drugs, microtubule-disrupting drugs caused mild effects on mitochondrial movement. Taxol increased the speed of mitochondrial movement in cortical cytoplasm. Oryzalin induced curved mitochondrial trajectories with similar velocities as in the control pollen tubes. These results suggest that mitochondrial movement at low speeds in pollen tubes is driven by myosin, while high-speed and variable-speed movements are powered both by actin filament dynamics and myosin. In addition, microtubule dynamics has profound effects on mitochondrial velocity, trajectory and positioning via its role in directing the arrangement of actin filaments.

myosin: !drives! low-speed mitochondrial movement
actin filaments: !power! high-speed and variable-speed mitochondrial movements
microtubules: !direct! arrangement of actin filaments