Plant peroxidases are involved in numerous cellular processes in plant development and stress responses. Four plasma membrane-bound peroxidases have been identified and characterized in maize (Zea mays L.) roots. In the present study, maize seedlings were treated with different stresses and signal compounds, and a functional analysis of these membrane-bound class III peroxidases (pmPOX1, pmPOX2a, pmPOX2b, and pmPOX3) was carried out. Total guaiacol peroxidase activities from soluble and microsomal fractions of maize roots were compared and showed weak changes. By contrast, total plasma membrane and washed plasma membrane peroxidase activities, representing peripheral and integral membrane proteins, revealed strong changes after all of the stresses applied. A proteomic approach using 2D-PAGE analysis showed that pmPOX3 was the most abundant class III peroxidase at plasma membranes of control plants, followed by pmPOX2a >pmPOX2b >pmPOX1. The molecular mass (63 kDa) and the isoelectric point (9.5) of the pmPOX2a monomer were identified for the first time. The protein levels of all four enzymes changed in response to multiple stresses. While pmPOX2b was the only membrane peroxidase down-regulated by wounding, all four enzymes were differentially but strongly stimulated by methyl jasmonate, salicylic acid, and elicitors (Fusarium graminearum and Fusarium culmorum extracts, and chitosan) indicating their function in pathogen defence. Oxidative stress applied as H(2)O(2) treatment up-regulated pmPOX2b >pmPOX2a, while pmPOX3 was down-regulated. Treatment with the phosphatase inhibitor chantharidin resulted in distinct responses.

pmPOX1: !localizes to! Plasma membrane 
pmPOX2a: !localizes to! Plasma membrane 
pmPOX2b: !localizes to! Plasma membrane 
pmPOX3: !localizes to! Plasma membrane 
pmPOX3: !most abundant! Plasma membrane 
pmPOX2a: !molecular mass! 63 kDa 
pmPOX2a: !isoelectric point! 9.5 
pmPOX2b: !represses! Wounding 
pmPOX1, pmPOX2a, pmPOX2b, pmPOX3: !enhances! Methyl jasmonate, salicylic acid, Fusarium graminearum and Fusarium culmorum extracts, chitosan 
pmPOX2b: !enhances! H2O2 treatment 
pmPOX3: !represses! H2O2 treatment 
pmPOX2b: !enhances! Chantharidin