In higher plants, phosphate (Pi) deficiency induces the replacement of phospholipids with the nonphosphorous glycolipids digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG) and sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol (SQDG). Genes involved in membrane lipid remodeling are coactivated in response to Pi starvation, but the mechanisms that guide this response are largely unknown. Previously, we reported the importance of auxin transport for DGDG accumulation during Pi starvation. To understand the role of auxin signaling in Arabidopsis membrane lipid remodeling, we analyzed slr-1, a gain-of-function mutant of IAA14 (a repressor of auxin signaling), and arf7arf19, a loss-of-function mutant of auxin response factors ARF7 and ARF19. In slr-1 and arf7arf19, Pi stress-induced accumulation of DGDG and SQDG was suppressed. Reduced upregulation of glycolipid synthase and phospholipase genes in these mutants under Pi-deficient conditions indicates that IAA14 and ARF7/19 affect membrane lipid remodeling at the level of transcription. Pi stress-dependent induction of a non-protein-coding gene, IPS1, was also lower in slr-1 and arf7arf19, whereas expression of At4 (another Pi stress-inducible non-protein-coding gene), anthocyanin accumulation, and phosphodiesterase induction were not reduced in the shoot. High free Pi content was observed in slr-1 and arf7arf19 even under Pi-deficient conditions, suggesting that Pi homeostasis during Pi starvation is altered in these mutants. These results demonstrate a requirement of auxin signaling mediated by IAA14 and ARF7/19 for low-Pi adaptation in Arabidopsis.

IAA14: !represses! auxin signaling
ARF7/19: !represses! auxin signaling
Pi starvation: !induces! DGDG and SQDG accumulation
Pi starvation: !induces! glycolipid synthase and phospholipase genes
Pi starvation: !induces! IPS1
IAA14: !affects! membrane lipid remodeling
ARF7/19: !affects! membrane lipid remodeling
slr-1: !suppresses! Pi stress-induced accumulation of DGDG and SQDG
arf7arf19: !suppresses! Pi stress-induced accumulation of DGDG and SQDG
slr-1: !alters! Pi homeostasis during Pi starvation
arf7arf19: !alters! Pi homeostasis during Pi starvation