Root inoculation of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) plants with a Bacillus subtilis strain BEB-DN (BsDN) isolated from the rhizosphere of cultivated potato plants was able to promote growth and to generate an induced systemic resistance (ISR) response against virus-free Bemisia tabaci. Growth promotion was evident 3 weeks after inoculation. No changes in oviposition density, preference and nymphal number in the early stages of B. tabaci development were observed between BsDN-treated plants and control plants inoculated with a non-growth promoting Bs strain (PY-79), growth medium or water. However, a long-term ISR response was manifested by a significantly reduced number of B. tabaci pupae developing into adults in BsDN-treated plants. The observed resistance response appeared to be a combination of jasmonic acid (JA) dependent and JA-independent responses, since the BsDN-related retardation effect on B. tabaci development was still effective in the highly susceptible spr2 tomato mutants with an impaired capacity for JA biosynthesis. A screening of 244 genes, 169 of which were previously obtained from subtractive-suppressive-hybridization libraries generated from B. tabaci-infested plants suggested that the BsDN JA-dependent ISR depended on an anti-nutritive effect produced by the simultaneous expression of genes coding principally for proteases and proteinase inhibitors, whereas the JA-independent ISR observed in the spr2 background curiously involved the up-regulation of several photosynthetic genes, key components of the phenyl-propanoid and terpenoid biosynthetic pathways and of the Hsp90 chaperonin, which probably mediated pest resistance response(s), in addition to the down-regulation of pathogenesis and hypersensitive response genes.

Bacillus subtilis: !promotes growth of! tomato
Bacillus subtilis: !induces systemic resistance against! Bemisia tabaci
Bemisia tabaci: !reduced by! jasmonic acid-dependent response
Bemisia tabaci: !reduced by! jasmonic acid-independent response
244 genes: !screened for! Bemisia tabaci-infested plants
proteases: !upregulated by! Bacillus subtilis
proteinase inhibitors: !upregulated by! Bacillus subtilis
photosynthetic genes: !upregulated by! Bacillus subtilis
phenyl-propanoid pathway: !upregulated by! Bacillus subtilis
terpenoid biosynthetic pathway: !upregulated by! Bacillus subtilis
Hsp90 chaperonin: !upregulated by! Bacillus subtilis
pathogenesis genes: !downregulated by! Bacillus subtilis
hypersensitive response genes: !downregulated by! Bacillus subtilis