Different parameters which vary during the leaf development in sunflower plants grown with nitrate (2 or 20 mM) for a 42-day period have been determined. The plants grown with 20 mM nitrate (N+) showed greater leaf area and specific leaf mass than the plants grown with 2 mM nitrate (N-). The total chlorophyll content decreased with leaf senescence, like the photosynthetic rate. This decline of photosynthetic activity was greater in plants grown with low nitrogen level (N-), showing more pronounced senescence symptoms than with high nitrogen (N+). In both treatments, soluble sugars increased with aging, while starch content decreased. A significant increase of hexose to sucrose ratio was observed at the beginning of senescence, and this raise was higher in N- plants than in N+ plants. These results show that sugar senescence regulation is dependent on nitrogen, supporting the hypothesis that leaf senescence is regulated by the C/N balance. In N+ and N- plants, ammonium and free amino acid concentrations were high in young leaves and decreased progressively in the senescent leaves. In both treatments, asparagine, and in a lower extent glutamine, increased after senescence start. The drop in the (Glu+Asp)/(Gln+Asn) ratio associated with the leaf development level suggests a greater nitrogen mobilization. Besides, the decline in this ratio occurred earlier and more rapidly in N- plants than in N+ plants, suggesting that the N- remobilization rate correlates with leaf senescence severity. In both N+ and N- plants, an important oxidative stress was generated in vivo during sunflower leaf senescence, as revealed by lipid peroxidation and hydrogen peroxide accumulation. In senescent leaves, the increase in hydrogen peroxide levels occurred in parallel with a decline in the activity of antioxidant enzymes. In N+ plants, the activities of catalase and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) increased to reach their highest values at 28 days, and later decreased during senescence, whereas in N- plants these activities started to decrease earlier, APX after 16 days and catalase after 22 days, suggesting that senescence is accelerated in N-leaves. It is probable that systemic signals, such as a deficit in amino acids or other metabolites associated with the nitrogen metabolism produced in plants grown with low nitrogen, lead to an early senescence and a higher oxidation state of the cells of these plant leaves.

Nitrate: !affects! Leaf senescence
Chlorophyll: !decreases with! Leaf senescence
Photosynthetic rate: !declines with! Leaf senescence
Soluble sugars: !increase with! Aging
Starch content: !decreases with! Aging
Hexose: !increases relative to! Sucrose
Ammonium: !decreases with! Leaf development
Free amino acids: !decrease with! Leaf development
Asparagine: !increases with! Senescence start
Glutamine: !increases with! Senescence start
Glu+Asp: !decreases with! Leaf development level
Gln+Asn: !decreases with! Leaf development level
Lipid peroxidation: !increases with! Oxidative stress
Hydrogen peroxide: !accumulates with! Oxidative stress
Catalase: !increases then decreases with! Leaf senescence
Ascorbate peroxidase: !increases then decreases with! Leaf senescence