A 4.5-kb genomic DNA containing a Monilinia fructicola cutinase gene, MfCUT1, and its flanking regions were isolated and characterized. Sequence analysis revealed that the genomic MfCUT1 carries a 63-bp intron and a promoter region with several transcription factor binding sites that may confer redox regulation of MfCUT1 expression. Redox regulation is indicated by the effect of antioxidants, shown previously to inhibit MfCUT1 gene expression in cutin-induced cultures, and in the present study, where H(2)O(2) enhanced MfCUT1 gene expression. A beta-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene (gusA) was fused to MfCUT1 under the control of the MfCUT1 promoter, and this construct was then used to generate an MfCUT1-GUS strain by Agrobacterium spp.-mediated transformation. The appearance of GUS activity in response to cutin and suppression of GUS activity by glucose in cutinase-inducing medium verified that the MfCUT1-GUS fusion protein was expressed correctly under the control of the MfCUT1 promoter. MfCUT1-GUS expression was detected following inoculation of peach and apple fruit, peach flower petals, and onion epidermis, and during brown rot symptom development on nectarine fruit at a relatively late stage of infection (24 h postinoculation). However, semiquantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction provided sensitive detection of MfCUT1 expression within 5 h of inoculation in both almond and peach petals. MfCUT1-GUS transformants expressed MfCUT1 transcripts at twice the level as the wild type and caused more severe symptoms on Prunus flower petals, consistent with MfCUT1 contributing to the virulence of M. fructicola.

MfCUT1: !carries! 63-bp intron 
MfCUT1: !promoter region contains! transcription factor binding sites 
antioxidants: !inhibit! MfCUT1 gene expression 
H2O2: !enhances! MfCUT1 gene expression 
gusA: !fused to! MfCUT1 
Agrobacterium spp.: !mediates transformation of! MfCUT1-GUS strain 
cutin: !induces! GUS activity 
glucose: !suppresses! GUS activity 
MfCUT1-GUS transformants: !express! MfCUT1 transcripts 
wild type: !expresses! MfCUT1 transcripts 
MfCUT1: !contributes to! virulence of M. fructicola