['20071375', 'In Arabidopsis thaliana, there exist many typical responses to low phosphate (LP)  stress, such as inhibition of primary root elongation, proliferation of lateral  roots and accumulation of anthocyanin in leaves. The physiological, genetic and  molecular mechanisms of these developmental responses remain undefined. We have  isolated a phosphorus starvation-insensitive (psi) mutant. The mutant shows  impaired inhibition of primary root growth, reduction of root hair growth and  reduction of anthocyanin accumulation compared with the wild-type (WT) plants  under an LP level. CycB1;1::GUS (cyclin B1;1::beta-glucuronidase) staining  suggests that the mutant has a higher ability to maintain cell elongation and  cell division than the WT. The genetic analysis and gene cloning indicate that  psi is a new allele of lpr1 and that an AC-repeat element in the promoter plays  important roles in controlling the expression of LPR1. The psi mutant also shows  less sensitivity to auxin treatment compared with the WT and the mutant has an  enhanced higher ability to maintain the auxin response in the root tip under LP.  However, enhancing the auxin response in the quiescent center cannot mimic the  mutant phenotype. These observations suggest that LPR1 is involved in the  regulation of the auxin response to Pi starvation and auxin is probably not the  only factor affected for maintaining the long-root phenotype under LP stress. Our  results also indicate that the function of LPR1 is probably independent of SUMO  E3 ligase SIZ1 in response to Pi starvation. The insensitive response of the psi  mutant to brefeldin A suggests that LPR1 and PDR2 (Pi Deficiency Response 2)  function in opposite ways in regulating the root growth response to Pi starvation  in the endoplamic reticulum.', '2010 Mar', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcq004', 'Yi']

LP: !inhibits! Primary Root Elongation 
psi mutant: !impaired inhibition of! Primary Root Growth 
CycB1;1::GUS: !suggests higher ability to maintain! Cell Elongation & Division 
LPR1: !controls expression of! AC-repeat element 
psi mutant: !less sensitive to! Auxin Treatment 
LPR1: !involved in regulation of! Auxin Response 
LPR1: !independent of! SUMO E3 ligase SIZ1 
LPR1 & PDR2: !function in opposite ways to regulate! Root Growth Response