The growth of the wild-type and three salt tolerant mutants of barnyard grass (Echinochloa crusgalli L.) under salt stress was investigated in relation to oxidative stress and activities of the antioxidant enzymes superoxide dismutase (SOD: EC 1.15.1.1), catalase (CAT: EC 1.11.1.6), phenol peroxidase (POD: EC 1.11.1.7), glutathione reductase (GR: EC 1.8.1.7) and ascorbate peroxidase (APX: EC 1.11.1.1). The three mutants (fows B17, B19 and B21) grew significantly better than the wild-type under salt stress (200 mM NaCl) but some salt sensitive individuals were still detectable in the populations of the mutants though in smaller numbers compared with the wild-type. The salt sensitive plants had slower growth rates, higher rates of lipid peroxidation and higher levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in their leaves compared with the more tolerant plants from the same genotype. These sensitivity responses were maximized when the plants were grown under high light intensity suggesting that the chloroplast could be a main source of ROS under salt stress. However, the salt sensitivity did not correlate with reduced K(+)/Na(+) ratios or enhanced Na(+) uptake indicating that the sensitivity responses may be mainly because of accumulation of ROS rather than ion toxicity. SOD activities did not correlate to salt tolerance. Salt stress resulted in up to 10-fold increase in CAT activity in the sensitive plants but lower activities were found in the tolerant ones. In contrast, the activities of POD, APX and GR were down regulated in the sensitive plants compared with the tolerant ones. A correlation between plant growth, accumulation of ROS and differential modulation of antioxidant enzymes is discussed. We conclude that loss of activities of POD, APX and GR causes loss of fine regulation of ROS levels and hence the plants experience oxidative stress although they have high CAT activities.

SOD: !does not correlate with! salt tolerance
CAT: !increases in! salt sensitive plants
POD: !down regulated in! salt sensitive plants
APX: !down regulated in! salt sensitive plants
GR: !down regulated in! salt sensitive plants
ROS: !accumulates in! salt sensitive plants