['20080816', 'Sugar signaling is a mechanism that plants use to integrate various internal and  external cues to achieve nutrient homeostasis, mediate developmental programs,  and articulate stress responses. Many bZIP transcription factors are known to be  involved in nutrient and/or stress signaling. An Arabidopsis S1-group bZIP gene,  AtbZIP1, was identified as a sugar-sensitive gene in a previous gene expression  profiling study (Plant Cell. 16, 2128-2150). In this report, we show that the  expression of AtbZIP1 is repressed by sugars in a fast, sensitive, and reversible  way. The sugar repression of AtbZIP1 is affected by a conserved sugar signaling  component, hexokinase. Besides being a sugar-regulated gene, AtbZIP1 can mediate  sugar signaling and affect gene expression, plant growth, and development. When  carbon nutrients are limited, gain or loss of function of AtbZIP1 causes changes  in the rates of early seedling establishment. Results of phenotypic analyses  indicate that AtbZIP1 acts as a negative regulator of early seedling growth.  Using gain- and loss-of-function plants in a microarray analysis, two sets of  putative AtbZIP1-regulated genes have been identified. Among them,  sugar-responsive genes are highly over-represented, implicating a role of AtbZIP1  in sugar-mediated gene expression. Using yeast two-hybrid (Y-2-H) screens and  bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) analyses, we are able to  recapitulate extensive C/S1 AtbZIP protein interacting network in living cells.  Finally, we show that AtbZIP1 can bind ACGT-based motifs in vitro and that the  binding characteristics appear to be affected by the heterodimerization between  AtbZIP1 and the C-group AtbZIPs, including AtbZIP10 and AtbZIP63.', '2010 Mar', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/ssp115', 'Jang']

AtbZIP1: !repressed by! sugars 
sugars: !affects! AtbZIP1 
AtbZIP1: !mediated by! sugar signaling component 
sugar signaling component: !affects! AtbZIP1 
AtbZIP1: !affects! gene expression 
AtbZIP1: !affects! plant growth 
AtbZIP1: !affects! development 
AtbZIP1: !acts as! negative regulator of early seedling growth 
AtbZIP1: !regulates! sugar-responsive genes 
AtbZIP1: !interacts with! C/S1 AtbZIP proteins 
AtbZIP1: !binds! ACGT-based motifs