['20098722', 'Development in multicellular organisms depends on the ability of individual cells  to coordinate their behavior by means of small signaling molecules to form  correctly patterned tissues. In plants, a unique mechanism of directional  transport of the signaling molecule auxin between cells connects cell polarity  and tissue patterning and thus is required for many aspects of plant development.  Direction of auxin flow is determined by polar subcellular localization of PIN  auxin efflux transporters. Dynamic PIN polar localization results from the  constitutive endocytic cycling to and from the plasma membrane, but it is not  well understood how this mechanism connects to regulators of cell polarity. The  Rho family small GTPases ROPs/RACs are master regulators of cell polarity,  however their role in regulating polar protein trafficking and polar auxin  transport has not been established. Here, by analysis of mutants and transgenic  plants, we show that the ROP interactor and polarity regulator scaffold protein  ICR1 is required for recruitment of PIN proteins to the polar domains at the  plasma membrane. icr1 mutant embryos and plants display an a array of severe  developmental aberrations that are caused by compromised differential auxin  distribution. ICR1 functions at the plasma membrane where it is required for  exocytosis but does not recycle together with PINs. ICR1 expression is quickly  induced by auxin but is suppressed at the positions of stable auxin maxima in the  hypophysis and later in the embryonic and mature root meristems. Our results  imply that ICR1 is part of an auxin regulated positive feedback loop realized by  a unique integration of auxin-dependent transcriptional regulation into  ROP-mediated modulation of cell polarity. Thus, ICR1 forms an auxin-modulated  link between cell polarity, exocytosis, and auxin transport-dependent tissue  patterning.', '2010 Jan 19', 'PLoS Biol', '10.1371/journal.pbio.1000282', 'Yalovsky']

PIN: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
ICR1: !recruits! PIN proteins 
Auxin: !induces! ICR1 expression 
ROPs/RACs: !regulate! cell polarity 
ICR1: !integrates! auxin-dependent transcriptional regulation 
Auxin: !modulates! ICR1 link between cell polarity, exocytosis, and tissue patterning