Alkamides belong to a class of small lipid signals of wide distribution in plants, which are structurally related to the bacterial quorum-sensing signals N-acyl-l-homoserine lactones. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings display a number of root developmental responses to alkamides, including primary root growth inhibition and greater formation of lateral roots. To gain insight into the regulatory mechanisms by which these compounds alter plant development, we performed a mutant screen for identifying Arabidopsis mutants that fail to inhibit primary root growth when grown under a high concentration of N-isobutyl decanamide. A recessive N-isobutyl decanamide-resistant mutant (decanamide resistant root [drr1]) was isolated because of its continued primary root growth and reduced lateral root formation in response to this alkamide. Detailed characterization of lateral root primordia development in the wild type and drr1 mutants revealed that DRR1 is required at an early stage of pericycle cell activation to form lateral root primordia in response to both N-isobutyl decanamide and N-decanoyl-l-homoserine lactone, a highly active bacterial quorum-sensing signal. Exogenously supplied auxin similarly inhibited primary root growth and promoted lateral root formation in wild-type and drr1 seedlings, suggesting that alkamides and auxin act by different mechanisms to alter root system architecture. When grown both in vitro and in soil, drr1 mutants showed dramatically increased longevity and reduced hormone- and age-dependent senescence, which were related to reduced lateral root formation when exposed to stimulatory concentrations of jasmonic acid. Taken together, our results provide genetic evidence indicating that alkamides and N-acyl-l-homoserine lactones can be perceived by plants to modulate root architecture and senescence-related processes possibly by interacting with jasmonic acid signaling.

Alkamides: !affect! Root Development 
N-isobutyl decanamide: !resists! Primary Root Growth 
DRR1: !regulates! Lateral Root Primordia Formation 
Alkamides/N-acyl-l-homoserine lactones: !perceived by! Plants 
Auxin: !inhibits! Primary Root Growth 
Jasmonic Acid: !stimulates! Lateral Root Formation 
DRR1: !increases! Longevity 
Jasmonic Acid: !interacts with! Alkamides/N-acyl-l-homoserine lactones