['20107029', 'In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), a family of six genes encodes  acyl-coenzyme A-binding proteins (ACBPs). A member of this family, ACBP1,  contains an amino-terminal transmembrane domain that targets it to the plasma  membrane and the endoplasmic reticulum. To investigate ACBP1 function,  ACBP1-overexpressing transgenic Arabidopsis plants were characterized using lipid  analysis. ACBP1 overexpressors showed reduction in several species of  diunsaturated phosphatidylcholine (PC), prompting us to investigate if they were  altered in response to freezing stress. ACBP1 overexpressors demonstrated  increased freezing sensitivity accompanied by a decrease in PC and an increase in  phosphatidic acid (PA), while acbp1 mutant plants showed enhanced freezing  tolerance associated with PC accumulation and PA reduction. We also showed  binding of a recombinant eukaryotic ACBP (ACBP1) to PA, indicative of the  possibility of enhanced PA interaction in ACBP1 overexpressors. Since  phospholipase Dalpha1 (PLDalpha1) is a major enzyme promoting the hydrolysis of  PC to PA, PLDalpha1 expression was examined and was observed to be higher in  ACBP1 overexpressors than in acbp1 mutant plants. In contrast, the expression of  PLDdelta, which plays a positive role in freezing tolerance, declined in the  ACBP1 overexpressors but increased in acbp1 mutant plants. Given that ACBP1 is  localized to the endoplasmic reticulum and plasma membrane, it may regulate the  expression of PLDalpha1 and PLDdelta by maintaining a membrane-associated PA pool  through its ability to bind PA. Moreover, both genotypes showed no alterations in  proline and soluble sugar content or in cold-regulated (COR6.6 and COR47) gene  expression, suggesting that the ACBP1-mediated response is PLD associated and is  independent of osmolyte accumulation.', '2010 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.147066', 'Chye']

ACBP1: !targets to! plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum 
ACBP1: !binds! phosphatidic acid 
ACBP1: !regulates expression of! PLDalpha1 
ACBP1: !regulates expression of! PLDdelta 
PLDalpha1: !increases in! ACBP1 overexpressors 
PLDdelta: !decreases in! ACBP1 overexpressors 
acbp1 mutant plants: !increase expression of! PLDdelta