['20113440', 'The perception of microbes by plants involves highly conserved molecular  signatures that are absent from the host and that are collectively referred to as  microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs). The Arabidopsis pattern  recognition receptors FLAGELLIN-SENSING 2 (FLS2) and EF-Tu receptor (EFR)  represent genetically well studied paradigms that mediate defense against  bacterial pathogens. Stimulation of these receptors through their cognate  ligands, bacterial flagellin or bacterial elongation factor Tu, leads to a  defense response and ultimately to increased resistance. However, little is known  about the early signaling pathway of these receptors. Here, we characterize this  early response in situ, using an electrophysiological approach. In line with a  release of negatively charged molecules, voltage recordings of  microelectrode-impaled mesophyll cells and root hairs of Col-0 Arabidopsis plants  revealed rapid, dose-dependent membrane potential depolarizations in response to  either flg22 or elf18. Using ion-selective microelectrodes, pronounced anion  currents were recorded upon application of flg22 and elf18, indicating that the  signaling cascades initiated by each of the two receptors converge on the same  plasma membrane ion channels. Combined calcium imaging and electrophysiological  measurements revealed that the depolarization was superimposed by an increase in  cytosolic calcium that was indispensable for depolarization. NADPH oxidase  mutants were still depolarized upon elicitor stimulation, suggesting a reactive  oxygen species-independent membrane potential response. Furthermore, electrical  signaling in response to either flg22 or elf 18 critically depends on the  activity of the FLS2-associated receptor-like kinase BAK1, suggesting that  activation of FLS2 and EFR lead to BAK1-dependent, calcium-associated plasma  membrane anion channel opening as an initial step in the pathogen defense  pathway.', '2010 May', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04155.x', 'Becker']

FLS2: !initiates! defense response 
EFR: !initiates! defense response 
flg22/elf18: !stimulate! FLS2/EFR 
plasma membrane ion channels: !activated by! FLS2/EFR 
calcium imaging/electrophysiological measurements: !reveal! increase in cytosolic calcium 
NADPH oxidase mutants: !still depolarized by! elicitor stimulation 
BAK1: !required for! electrical signaling