Synthesis of 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) represents a rate limiting step in the tetrapyrrole biosynthetic pathway, and is regulated by metabolic feedback control of glutamyl-tRNA reductase (GluTR) activity. The FLU protein has been attributed to this regulation. Later in the biosynthetic pathway, reduction of protochlorophyllide (Pchlide), catalyzed by protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (POR), ensures another important regulatory step in the chlorophyll biosynthesis. In the present work, we investigated the expression and cellular abundance of nuclear-encoded and plastid-encoded proteins involved in ALA synthesis and Pchlide reduction in Norway spruce (Picea abies L. Karst.) as a representative of plant species with high ability to synthesize chlorophyll in the dark. Using dark-grown, light/dark-grown and gabaculine-treated seedlings, we demonstrated that gabaculine-impaired etiochloroplast and chloroplast development has no negative effect on GluTR accumulation in the cotyledons. However, in contrast to control plants, the relative amount of GluTR was similar both in the dark-grown and light/dark-grown gabaculine-treated seedlings. We identified a partial sequence of the FLU-like gene in Norway spruce, and using antibodies against the FLU-like protein (FLP), we showed that FLP accumulated mostly in the dark-grown control seedlings and gabaculine-treated seedlings. In contrast to nuclear-encoded GluTR and FLP, accumulation of plastid-encoded light-independent POR (DPOR) was sensitive to gabaculine treatment. The levels of DPOR subunits were substantially lower in the light/dark-grown control seedlings and gabaculine-treated seedlings, although the corresponding genes chlL, chlN and chlB were expressed. Since we analyzed the samples with different plastid types, plastid ultrastructure and physiological parameters like Pchlide and chlorophyll contents, in vivo chlorophyll fluorescence and photosynthetic efficiency of the seedlings were characterized. Apart from etiochloroplast-specific accumulation of the DPOR subunits, we described, in some detail, additional specific features of chlorophyll biosynthesis in the spruce seedlings that differ from those known in angiosperms.

GluTR: !regulates! ALA synthesis
FLU protein: !attributed to! GluTR regulation
DPOR: !catalyzes! Pchlide reduction
FLP: !accumulates in! dark-grown seedlings
DPOR subunits: !lower in! light/dark-grown seedlings