['20133584', 'Thioredoxins (Trxs) are small ubiquitous regulatory disulfide proteins. Plants  have an unusually complex complement of Trxs composed of six well-defined types  (Trxs f, m, x, y, h, and o) that reside in different cell compartments and  function in an array of processes. The extraplastidic h type consists of multiple  members that in general have resisted isolation of a specific phenotype. In  analyzing mutant lines in Arabidopsis thaliana, we identified a phenotype of  dwarf plants with short roots and small yellowish leaves for AtTrx h9  (henceforth, Trx h9), a member of the Arabidopsis Trx h family. Trx h9 was found  to be associated with the plasma membrane and to move from cell to cell. Controls  conducted in conjunction with the localization of Trx h9 uncovered another h-type  Trx in mitochondria (Trx h2) and a Trx in plastids earlier described as a  cytosolic form in tomato. Analysis of Trx h9 revealed a 17-amino acid N-terminal  extension in which the second Gly (Gly(2)) and fourth cysteine (Cys(4)) were  highly conserved. Mutagenesis experiments demonstrated that Gly(2) was required  for membrane binding, possibly via myristoylation. Both Gly(2) and Cys(4) were  needed for movement, the latter seemingly for protein structure and  palmitoylation. A three-dimensional model was consistent with these predictions  as well as with earlier evidence showing that a poplar ortholog is reduced by a  glutaredoxin rather than NADP-thioredoxin reductase. In demonstrating the  membrane location and intercellular mobility of Trx h9, the present results  extend the known boundaries of Trx and suggest a role in cell-to-cell  communication.', '2010 Feb 23', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.0913759107', 'Buchanan']

Thioredoxins (Trxs): !reside in! different cell compartments 
AtTrx h9: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
AtTrx h9: !moves from! cell to cell 
Gly(2): !required for! membrane binding 
Gly(2) and Cys(4): !needed for! movement 
Trx h9: !suggests a role in! cell-to-cell communication