['20147378', 'Controlling the orientation of cell division is fundamental to the development of  complex body plans. This is particularly apparent in plants, where development is  determined by differential growth that results solely from changes in cell  expansion and orientation of the cell division plane. Despite the fundamental  importance of cell division orientation to plant development, the mechanisms  regulating this process remain almost completely unknown. During vascular  development, the meristematic cambial cells divide down their long axis in a  highly orientated manner to generate clear files of cells. The receptor kinase  PXY has previously be shown to be essential for this orientation. Here, we  demonstrate that the division plane is determined by the interactions of PXY and  its peptide ligand, CLE41. PXY is expressed within dividing meristematic cells of  the procambium, whereas CLE41 localises to the adjacent phloem cells. Altering  the pattern of CLE41 expression leads to a loss of cell division orientation and  a dramatic loss of ordered vascular tissue development. By contrast, increasing  phloem-specific expression of CLE41 results in more cell divisions, but the  orientation of cell division is retained, leading to both increased and  well-ordered vascular development. We demonstrate that PXY signalling is  down-regulated by CLE41. This feedback mechanism is crucial in integrating the  different roles of PXY signalling in controlling xylem differentiation,  regulating the rate of vascular cell division and determining the orientation of  cell division. Parallels with animal systems indicate that localised signalling  from adjacent cells is a general mechanism for defining the plane of cell  division.', '2010 Mar', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.044941', 'Turner']

PXY: !interacts with! CLE41 
CLE41: !localizes to! phloem cells 
PXY: !down-regulated by! CLE41 
PXY: !controls! xylem differentiation 
PXY: !regulates! rate of vascular cell division 
PXY: !determines! orientation of cell division