['20150517', 'Leaf peroxisomes are fragile, low-abundance plant cell organelles that are  difficult to isolate from one of the few plant species whose nuclear genome has  been sequenced. Leaf peroxisomes were enriched at high purity from spinach  (Spinacia oleracea) and approximately 100 protein spots identified from  2-dimensional gels by a combination of liquid chromatography-tandem mass  spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and de novo sequencing. In addition to the predominant  enzymes involved in photorespiration and detoxification, several minor enzymes  were detected, underscoring the high sensitivity of the protein identification.  The tryptic peptides of three unknown proteins shared high sequence similarity  with Arabidopsis proteins that carry putative peroxisomal targeting signals type  1 or 2 (PTS1/2). The apparent Arabidopsis orthologues are a short-chain alcohol  dehydrogenase (SDRa/IBR1, At4g05530, SRL>) and two enoyl-CoA  hydratases/isomerases (ECHIa, At4g16210, SKL>; NS/ECHId, At1g60550, RLx(5)HL).  The peroxisomal localization of the three proteins was confirmed in vivo by  tagging with enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP), and the targeting  signals were identified. The single Arabidopsis isoform of naphthoate synthase  (NS) is orthologous to MenB from cyanobacteria, which catalyses an essential  reaction in phylloquinone biosynthesis, a pathway previously assumed to be  entirely compartmentalized in plastids in higher plants. In an extension of a  previous study, the present in vivo targeting data furthermore demonstrate that  the enzyme upstream of NS, chloroplastic acyl-CoA activating enzyme isoform 14  (AAE14, SSL>), is dually targeted to both plastids and peroxisomes. This  proteomic study, extended by in vivo subcellular localization analyses, indicates  a novel function for plant peroxisomes in phylloquinone biosynthesis.', '2010 Mar', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erq014', 'Reumann']

SDRa/IBR1: !localizes to! peroxisomes 
ECHIa: !localizes to! peroxisomes 
NS/ECHId: !localizes to! peroxisomes 
EYFP: !tags! proteins 
AAE14: !dually targets! plastids and peroxisomes 
phylloquinone biosynthesis: !carried out by! plastids and peroxisomes