The function of the cortical microtubules, composed of alphabeta-tubulin heterodimers, is linked to their organizational state which is subject to spatial and temporal modulation by environmental cues. The role of tubulin posttranslational modifications in these processes is largely unknown. Although antibodies against small tubulin regions represent useful tool for studying molecular configuration of microtubules, data on the exposure of tubulin epitopes on plant microtubules are still limited. Using homology modeling we have generated an Arabidopsis thaliana microtubule protofilament model that served for the prediction of surface exposure of five beta-tubulin epitopes as well as tyrosine residues. Peptide scans newly disclosed the position of epitopes detected by antibodies 18D6 (beta1-10), TUB2.1 (beta426-435) and TU-14 (beta436-445). Experimental verification of the results by immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that the exposure of epitopes depended on the mode of fixation. Moreover, homology modeling showed that only tyrosines in the C-terminal region of beta-tubulins (behind beta425) were exposed on the microtubule external side. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed tyrosine phosphorylation of microtubules in plant cells, implying that beta-tubulins could be one of the targets for tyrosine kinases. We predicted surface exposure of five beta-tubulin epitopes, as well as tyrosine residues, on the surface of A. thaliana microtubule protofilament model, and validated the obtained results by immunofluorescence microscopy on cortical microtubules in cells.The results suggest that prediction of epitope exposure on microtubules by means of homology modeling combined with site-directed antibodies can contribute to a better understanding of the interactions of plant microtubules with associated proteins.

alphabeta-tubulin heterodimers: !compose! cortical microtubules 
environmental cues: !modulate! tubulin posttranslational modifications 
antibodies: !detect! tubulin regions 
homology modeling: !generate! Arabidopsis thaliana microtubule protofilament model 
model: !predict! surface exposure of beta-tubulin epitopes and tyrosine residues 
immunofluorescence microscopy: !verify! epitope exposure 
tyrosine kinases: !target! beta-tubulins 
homology modeling: !contribute to! understanding of interactions of plant microtubules with associated proteins