['20163554', 'In plants, double fertilization requires successful sperm cell delivery into the  female gametophyte followed by migration, recognition and fusion of the two sperm  cells with two female gametes. We isolated a null allele (lre-5) of LORELEI,  which encodes a putative glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein  implicated in reception of the pollen tube by the female gametophyte. Although  most lre-5 female gametophytes do not allow pollen tube reception, in those that  do, early seed development is delayed. A fraction of lre-5/lre-5 seeds underwent  abortion due to defect(s) in the female gametophyte. The aborted seeds contained  endosperm but no zygote/embryo, reminiscent of autonomous endosperm development  in the pollen tube reception mutants scylla and sirene. However, unpollinated  lre-5/lre-5 ovules did not initiate autonomous endosperm development and  endosperm development in aborted seeds began after central cell fertilization.  Thus, the egg cell probably remained unfertilized in aborted lre-5/lre-5 seeds.  The lre-5/lre-5 ovules that remain undeveloped due to defective pollen tube  reception did not induce synergid degeneration and repulsion of supernumerary  pollen tubes. In ovules, LORELEI is expressed during pollen tube reception,  double fertilization and early seed development. Null mutants of  LORELEI-like-GPI-anchored protein 1 (LLG1), the closest relative of LORELEI among  three Arabidopsis LLG genes, are fully fertile and did not enhance reproductive  defects in lre-5/lre-5 pistils, suggesting that LLG1 function is not redundant  with that of LORELEI in the female gametophyte. Our results show that, besides  pollen tube reception, LORELEI also functions during double fertilization and  early seed development.', '2010 May 1', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04177.x', 'Palanivelu']

LORELEI: !implicated in! pollen tube reception 
LORELEI: !functions during! double fertilization 
LORELEI: !functions during! early seed development 
LLG1: !not redundant with! LORELEI