Wild relatives of crop plants may serve as a promising source for screening for new disease resistance genes that can be utilized in breeding programs. Triticum dicoccoides, the wild progenitor of most cultivated wheats, was shown to harbor many resistance genes against the major diseases attacking cultivated wheat. Stripe rust is a devastating fungal disease that attacks wheat in many regions of the world. New races of Puccinia striiformis Westend. f. sp. tritici, the causative agent of stripe rust, have overcome most of the known Yr resistance genes in wheat. Therefore, there is a need to search for new resistance genes in the T. dicoccoides gene pool. A set of 120 T. dicoccoides accessions, collected from 13 populations representing different habitats in Israel and vicinity, was tested for resistance to three prevalent stripe rust races (38E134, 6E16 and 6E0). Of these 120 accessions, 14, 8 and 12% were resistant to races 38E134, 6E16 and 6E0, respectively, while 57, 2 and 4% were moderately resistant to these races, respectively. A unique resistance was found in the population of Mt Hermon where >80% of the accessions showed resistance to all races. Distribution of infection types (ITs) of race 38E134 showed a normal distribution that can fit a quantitative pattern of response, while the distributions of ITs of races 6E16 and 6E0 had excess of extreme values and therefore showing a qualitative pattern of response. anova testing the main factor effects and interaction showed significant effects of population, race and their interaction on IT. Significant positive correlations were obtained between the resistance to races 6E16 and 6E0 and humidity variables of the collections sites, while resistance to race 38E134 was positively correlated with temperature variables. These results show that the pathogen race can determine the type of resistance response, qualitative or quantitative, in the stripe rust-T. dicoccoides pathosystem. The obtained results also reveal that the distribution of resistance to different pathogen races can be affected by different climatic factors.

Triticum dicoccoides: !harbors! resistance genes
Puccinia striiformis Westend. f. sp. tritici: !causes! stripe rust
Mt Hermon population: !shows! unique resistance
Pathogen race: !determines! type of resistance response
Climatic factors: !affects! distribution of resistance