*The fungal richness, diversity and community composition in the Quercus macrocarpa phyllosphere were compared across a growing season in trees located in six stands within and outside a small urban center using 454-sequencing and DNA tagging. The approaches did not differentiate between endophytic and epiphytic fungal communities. *Fungi accumulated in the phyllosphere rapidly and communities were temporally dynamic, with more than a third of the analyzed operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and half of the BLAST-inferred genera showing distinct seasonal patterns. The seasonal patterns could be explained by fungal life cycles or environmental tolerances. *The communities were hyperdiverse and differed between the urban and nonurban stands, albeit not consistently across the growing season. Foliar macronutrients (nitrogen (N), potassium (K) and sulfur (S)), micronutrients (boron (B), manganese (Mn) and selenium (Se)) and trace elements (cadmium (Cd), lead (Pb) and zinc (Zn)) were enriched in the urban trees, probably as a result of anthropogenic activities. Because of correlations with the experimental layout, these chemical elements should not be considered as community drivers without further empirical studies. *We suggest that a combination of mechanisms leads to differences between urban and nonurban communities. Among those are stand isolation and size, nutrient and pollutant accumulation plus stand management, including fertilization and litter removal.

gene: !affects! Fungal richness
gene: !affects! Fungal diversity
gene: !affects! Fungal community composition
gene: !localizes to! Quercus macrocarpa phyllosphere
gene: !interacts with! 454-sequencing
gene: !interacts with! DNA tagging
gene: !enhances! Fungal accumulation
gene: !represses! Temporal dynamics
gene: !synthesizes! Hyperdiverse communities
gene: !affects! Urban/nonurban stands
gene: !affects! Foliar macronutrients
gene: !affects! Foliar micronutrients
gene: !affects! Trace elements
gene: !affects! Anthropogenic activities
gene: !affects! Stand isolation
gene: !affects! Stand size
gene: !affects! Nutrient accumulation
gene: !affects! Pollutant accumulation
gene: !affects! Stand management