Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are expected to have an important role in plant adaptation to high temperatures. The impacts of increasing night-time temperature on daytime terpenoid emissions and related gene expression in silver birch (Betula pendula) and European aspen (Populus tremula) clones were studied. The plants were grown under five different night-time temperatures (6, 10, 14, 18, and 22 degrees C) while daytime temperature was kept at a constant 22 degrees C. VOC emissions were collected during the daytime and analysed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). In birch, emissions per leaf area of the C11 homoterpene 4,8-dimethy1-nona-1,3,7-triene (DMNT) and several sesquiterpenes were consistently increased with increasing night-time temperature. Total sesquiterpene (SQT) emissions showed an increase at higher temperatures. In aspen, emissions of DMNT and beta-ocimene increased from 6 degrees C to 14 degrees C, while several other monoterpenes and the SQTs (Z,E)-alpha-farnesene and (E,E)-alpha-farnesene increased up to 18 degrees C. Total monoterpene and sesquiterpene emission peaked at 18 degrees C, whereas isoprene emissions decreased at 22 degrees C. Leaf area increased across the temperature range of 6-22 degrees C by 32% in birch and by 59% in aspen. Specific leaf area (SLA) was also increased in both species. The genetic regulation of VOC emissions seems to be very complex, as indicated by several inverse relationships between emission profiles and expression of several regulatory genes (DXR, DXS, and IPP). The study indicates that increasing night temperature may strongly affect the quantity and quality of daytime VOC emissions of northern deciduous trees.

VOCs: !have role in! plant adaptation
night-time temperature: !affects! VOC emissions
DMNT/sesquiterpenes: !increase with! increasing night-time temperature
monoterpenes/SQTs: !increase up to! 18 degrees C
isoprene: !decreases at! 22 degrees C
leaf area: !increases across! 6-22 degrees C
SLA: !increased in! both species
genetic regulation: !very complex, indicated by! inverse relationships between emission profiles and expression of regulatory genes