['20181750', 'Here, we investigated the physiological role of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) AtNUDX6, the gene encoding ADP-ribose (Rib)/NADH pyrophosphohydrolase,  using its overexpressor (Pro35S:AtNUDX6) or disruptant (KO-nudx6). The level of  NADH in Pro35S:AtNUDX6 and KO-nudx6 plants was decreased and increased,  respectively, compared with that of the control plants, while the level of  ADP-Rib was not changed in either plant. The activity of pyrophosphohydrolase  toward NADH was enhanced and reduced in the Pro35S:AtNUDX6 and KO-nudx6 plants,  respectively. The decrease in the activity of NADH pyrophosphohydrolase and the  increase in the level of NADH were observed in the rosette and cauline leaves,  but not in the roots, of the KO-nudx6 plants. Notably, the expression level of  AtNUDX6 and the activity of NADH pyrophosphohydrolase in the control plants, but  not in the KO-nudx6 plants, were increased by the treatment with salicylic acid  (SA). The expression of SA-induced genes (PR1, WRKY70, NIMIN1, and NIMIN2)  depending on NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1 (NPR1), a key component  required for pathogen resistance, was significantly suppressed and enhanced in  the KO-nudx6 and Pro35S:AtNUDX6 plants, respectively, under the treatment with  SA. Induction of thioredoxin h5 (TRX-h5) expression, which catalyzes a SA-induced  NPR1 activation, was suppressed and accelerated in the KO-nudx6 and  Pro35S:AtNUDX6 plants, respectively. The expression of isochorismate synthase1,  required for the regulation of SA synthesis through the NPR1-mediated feedback  loop, was decreased and increased in the KO-nudx6 and Pro35S:AtNUDX6 plants,  respectively. Judging from seed germination rates, the KO-nudx6 plants had  enhanced sensitivity to the toxicity of high-level SA. These results indicated  that AtNUDX6 is a modulator of NADH rather than ADP-Rib metabolism and that,  through induction of TRX-h5 expression, AtNUDX6 significantly impacts the plant  immune response as a positive regulator of NPR1-dependent SA signaling pathways.', '2010 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.153569', 'Shigeoka']

AtNUDX6: !affects! NADH metabolism 
AtNUDX6: !enhances! TRX-h5 expression 
AtNUDX6: !represses! SA-induced gene expression 
AtNUDX6: !enhances! Isochorismate synthase1 expression 
AtNUDX6: !enhances! Plant immune response 
KO-nudx6: !increases! NADH level 
KO-nudx6: !reduces! Pyrophosphohydrolase activity 
KO-nudx6: !suppresses! TRX-h5 expression 
KO-nudx6: !enhances! SA-induced gene expression 
KO-nudx6: !decreases! Isochorismate synthase1 expression 
KO-nudx6: !enhances! Sensitivity to SA toxicity