['20181955', 'In animals, protease inhibitors of the serpin family are associated with many  physiological processes, including blood coagulation and innate immunity. Serpins  feature a reactive center loop (RCL), which displays a protease target sequence  as a bait. RCL cleavage results in an irreversible, covalent serpin-protease  complex. AtSerpin1 is an Arabidopsis protease inhibitor that is expressed  ubiquitously throughout the plant. The x-ray crystal structure of recombinant  AtSerpin1 in its native stressed conformation was determined at 2.2 A. The  electrostatic surface potential below the RCL was found to be highly positive,  whereas the breach region critical for RCL insertion is an unusually open  structure. AtSerpin1 accumulates in plants as a full-length and a cleaved form.  Fractionation of seedling extracts by nonreducing SDS-PAGE revealed the presence  of an additional slower migrating complex that was absent when leaves were  treated with the specific cysteine protease inhibitor  L-trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido (4-guanidino)butane. Significantly,  RESPONSIVE TO DESICCATION-21 (RD21) was the major protease labeled with the  L-trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido (4-guanidino)butane derivative DCG-04 in wild  type extracts but not in extracts of mutant plants constitutively overexpressing  AtSerpin1, indicating competition. Fractionation by nonreducing SDS-PAGE followed  by immunoblotting with RD21-specific antibody revealed that the protease  accumulated both as a free enzyme and in a complex with AtSerpin1. Importantly,  both RD21 and AtSerpin1 knock-out mutants lacked the serpin-protease complex. The  results establish that the major Arabidopsis plant serpin interacts with RD21.  This is the first report of the structure and in vivo interaction of a plant  serpin with its target protease.', '2010 Apr 30', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M109.095075', 'Fluhr']

AtSerpin1: !interacts with! RD21 
AtSerpin1: !synthesizes! serpin-protease complex 
RD21: !localizes to! wild type extracts 
RD21: !enhances! AtSerpin1 
RD21: !represses! mutant plants overexpressing AtSerpin1