Environmental controls on leaf NAD status remain poorly understood. Here, we analyzed the effects of two key environmental variables, CO(2) and nitrogen, on leaf metabolite profiles, NAD status and the abundance of key transcripts involved in de novo NAD synthesis in wild-type (WT) Nicotiana sylvestris and the CMSII mutant that lacks respiratory complex I. High CO(2) and increased N supply both significantly enhanced NAD(+) and NADH pools in WT leaves. In nitrogen-sufficient conditions, CMSII leaves were enriched in NAD(+) and NADH compared to the WT, but the differences in NADH were smaller at high CO(2) than in air because high CO(2) increased WT NADH/NAD(+). The CMSII-linked increases in NAD(+) and NADH status were abolished by growth with limited nitrogen, which also depleted the nicotine and nicotinic acid pools in the CMSII leaves. Few statistically significant genotype and N-dependent differences were detected in NAD synthesis transcripts, with effects only on aspartate oxidase and NAD synthetase mRNAs. Non-targeted metabolite profiling as well as quantitative amine analysis showed that NAD(+) and NADH contents correlated tightly with leaf amino acid contents across all samples. The results reveal considerable genotype- and condition-dependent plasticity in leaf NAD(+) and NADH contents that is not linked to modified expression of NAD synthesis genes at the transcript level and show that NAD(+) and NADH contents are tightly integrated with nitrogen metabolism. A regulatory two-way feedback circuit between nitrogen and NAD in the regulation of N assimilation is proposed that potentially links the nutritional status to NAD-dependent signaling pathways.

CO2: !enhances! NAD(+) and NADH pools 
Nitrogen: !enhances! NAD(+) and NADH pools 
CMSII mutant: !enriched in! NAD(+) and NADH 
Nitrogen: !depletes! Nicotine and nicotinic acid pools 
Aspartate oxidase: !modifies expression of! NAD synthetase mRNA 
NAD(+): !correlates with! Leaf amino acid contents 
Nitrogen: !regulates! NAD-dependent signaling pathways