['20181751', 'Galactoglycerolipids are major constituents of photosynthetic membranes in  chloroplasts. At least three parallel sets of enzymes are involved in their  biosynthesis that must be coordinated in response to changing growth conditions.  A potential candidate for a protein affecting the activity of different  galactoglycerolipid pathways is the recently described  digalactosyldiacylglycerol1 (dgd1) SUPPRESSOR1 (DGS1) protein of Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) localized in the mitochondrial outer membrane. It was  discovered based on a specific gain-of-function point mutation allele, dgs1-1,  that causes a partial restoration of chloroplast galactoglycerolipid deficiency  in the dgd1 mutant, which is defective in the lipid galactosyltransferase, DGD1.  The dgs1-1 allele causes the accumulation of hydrogen peroxide that leads to an  activation of an alternative, DGD1-independent galactoglycerolipid biosynthesis  pathway in chloroplasts. Analysis presented here shows that the DGS1 protein is a  component of a large protein complex, which explains the previously observed  dominant negative phenotype following the expression of the dgs1-1 allele. The  dgs1-1 allele causes the loss of mitochondrial alternative oxidase (AOX) protein  that might be related to the accumulation of hydrogen peroxide in the dgs1-1  mutant background. This effect was posttranscriptional because mRNA levels for  the major form of AOX were not affected in dgs1-1 mutant seedlings. Unlike  dgs1-1, a loss-of-function allele, dgs1-2, had no effect on plant growth, AOX,  and lipid composition to the extent tested, leaving the quest for a possible  molecular function of DGS1 open. Apparently, the DGS1 wild-type protein does not  directly affect lipid metabolism in mitochondria or chloroplasts.', '2010 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.153262', 'Benning']

DGS1: !localizes to! mitochondrial outer membrane 
dgs1-1: !enhances! DGD1-independent galactoglycerolipid biosynthesis pathway 
dgs1-1: !causes loss of! mitochondrial alternative oxidase protein 
dgs1-2: !has no effect on! plant growth, AOX, and lipid composition