['20199623', 'Cytosolic NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase (cICDH) produces 2-oxoglutarate  (2-OG) and NADPH, and is encoded by a single gene in Arabidopsis thaliana. Three  allelic lines carrying T-DNA insertions in this gene showed less than 10%  extractable leaf ICDH activity, but only relatively small decreases in growth  compared to wild-type Col0. Metabolite profiling by gas chromatography-time of  flight-mass spectrometry (GC-TOF-MS) and high-performance liquid chromatography  (HPLC) revealed that loss of cICDH function produced only small effects on leaf  compounds involved in carbon and nitrogen assimilation. To analyse whether cICDH  contributes to NADPH production under conditions of oxidative stress, the icdh  mutation was introduced into the cat2 background, in which increased availability  of H(2)O(2) causes perturbed redox homeostasis and induction of stress-related  genes. Accumulation of oxidized glutathione and pathogen-related responses were  enhanced in double cat2 icdh mutants compared to cat2. Single icdh mutants  presented constitutive induction of PR genes, and enhanced resistance to bacteria  in icdh, cat2 and cat2 icdh was quantitatively correlated with PR gene  expression. However, the effect of icdh in both Col0 and cat2 backgrounds was not  associated with enhanced accumulation of salicylic acid (SA). The results suggest  that cICDH, previously considered mainly as an enzyme involved in amino acid  synthesis, plays a role in redox signalling linked to pathogen responses.', '2010 Jul', 'Plant Cell Environ', '10.1111/j.1365-3040.2010.02133.x', 'Noctor']

cICDH: !produces! 2-OG and NADPH 
cICDH: !encoded by! single gene 
T-DNA insertions: !decrease! extractable leaf ICDH activity 
Metabolite profiling: !reveals! small effects on leaf compounds 
cICDH: !contributes to! NADPH production 
cat2 icdh mutants: !enhance! oxidized glutathione accumulation 
cat2 icdh mutants: !induce! PR genes 
cat2 icdh mutants: !enhance! resistance to bacteria 
cICDH: !plays a role in! redox signalling linked to pathogen responses