Six MaMADS-box genes have been cloned from the banana fruit cultivar Grand Nain. The similarity of these genes to tomato LeRIN is low and neither MaMADS2 nor MaMADS1 complement the tomato rin mutation. Nevertheless, the expression patterns, specifically in fruit and the induction during ripening and in response to ethylene and 1-MCP, suggest that some of these genes may participate in ripening. MaMADS1, 2, and 3, are highly expressed in fruit only, while the others are expressed in fruit as well as in other organs. Moreover, the suites of MaMADS-box genes and their temporal expression differ in peel and pulp during ripening. In the pulp, the increase in MaMADS2, 3, 4, and 5 expression preceded an increase in ethylene production, but coincides with the CO(2) peak. However, MaMADS1 expression in pulp coincided with ethylene production, but a massive increase in its expression occurred late during ripening, together with a second wave in the expression of MaMADS2, 3, and 4. In the peel, on the other hand, an increase in expression of MaMADS1, 3, and to a lesser degree also of MaMADS4 and 2 coincided with an increase in ethylene production. Except MaMADS3, which was induced by ethylene in pulp and peel, only MaMADS4, and 5 in pulp and MaMADS1 in peel were induced by ethylene. 1-MCP applied at the onset of the increase in ethylene production, increased the levels of MaMADS4 and MaMADS1 in pulp, while it decreased MaMADS1, 3, 4, and 5 in peel, suggesting that MaMADS4 and MaMADS1 are negatively controlled by ethylene at the onset of ethylene production only in pulp. Only MaMADS2 is neither induced by ethylene nor by 1-MCP, and it is expressed mainly in pulp. Our results suggest that two independent ripening programs are employed in pulp and peel which involve the activation of mainly MaMADS2, 4, and 5 and later on also MaMADS1 in pulp, and mainly MaMADS1, and 3 in peel. Hence, our results are consistent with MaMADS2, a SEP3 homologue, acting in the pulp upstream of the increase in ethylene production similarly to LeMADS-RIN.

MaMADS1: !highly expressed in! fruit 
MaMADS2: !highly expressed in! fruit 
MaMADS3: !highly expressed in! fruit 
MaMADS4: !highly expressed in! fruit & other organs 
MaMADS5: !highly expressed in! fruit & other organs 
MaMADS2: !expressed mainly in! pulp 
MaMADS4: !induced by! ethylene & 1-MCP (pulp) 
MaMADS1: !induced by! ethylene & 1-MCP (peel) 
MaMADS3: !induced by! ethylene (pulp & peel) 
MaMADS4: !negatively controlled by! ethylene (pulp) 
MaMADS1: !negatively controlled by! ethylene (peel) 
MaMADS2: !neither induced by! ethylene nor 1-MCP 
MaMADS2: !acts upstream of! ethylene production (pulp)