TERMINAL FLOWER1 (TFL1)-like genes are highly conserved in plants and are thought to function in the maintenance of meristem indeterminacy. Recently, we described six maize (Zea mays) TFL1-related genes, named ZEA CENTRORADIALIS1 (ZCN1) to ZCN6. To gain insight into their functions, we generated transgenic maize plants overexpressing their respective cDNAs driven by a constitutive promoter. Overall, ectopic expression of the maize TFL1-like genes produced similar phenotypes, including delayed flowering and altered inflorescence architecture. We observed an apparent relationship between the magnitude of the transgenic phenotypes and the degree of homology between the ZCN proteins. ZCN2, -4, and -5 form a monophylogenetic clade, and their overexpression produced the strongest phenotypes. Along with very late flowering, these transgenic plants produced a "bushy" tassel with increased lateral branching and spikelet density compared with nontransgenic siblings. On the other hand, ZCN1, -3, and -6 produced milder effects. Among them, ZCN1 showed moderate effects on flowering time and tassel morphology, whereas ZCN3 and ZCN6 did not change flowering time but still showed effects on tassel morphology. In situ hybridizations of tissue from nontransgenic plants revealed that the expression of all ZCN genes was associated with vascular bundles, but each gene had a specific spatial and temporal pattern. Expression of four ZCN genes localized to the protoxylem, whereas ZCN5 was expressed in the protophloem. Collectively, our findings suggest that ectopic expression of the TFL1-like genes in maize modifies flowering time and inflorescence architecture through maintenance of the indeterminacy of the vegetative and inflorescence meristems.

TFL1: !maintains! Meristem indeterminacy
ZCN2, -4, -5: !produce strongest phenotypes! Transgenic plants
ZCN1, -3, -6: !produce milder effects! Transgenic plants
ZCN genes: !localize to! Vascular bundles
ZCN1: !modifies! Flowering time
ZCN3, -6: !modify! Tassel morphology
ZCN5: !expressed in! Protophloem