['20200070', 'In higher plants, three subfamilies of sucrose nonfermenting-1 (Snf1)-related  protein kinases have evolved. While the Snf1-related protein kinase 1 (SnRK1)  subfamily has been shown to share pivotal roles with the orthologous yeast Snf1  and mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase in modulating energy and metabolic  homeostasis, the functional significance of the two plant-specific subfamilies  SnRK2 and SnRK3 in these critical processes is poorly understood. We show here  that SnRK2.6, previously identified as crucial in the control of stomatal  aperture by abscisic acid (ABA), has a broad expression pattern and participates  in the regulation of plant primary metabolism. Inactivation of this gene reduced  oil synthesis in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seeds, whereas its  overexpression increased Suc synthesis and fatty acid desaturation in the leaves.  Notably, the metabolic alterations in the SnRK2.6 overexpressors were accompanied  by amelioration of those physiological processes that require high levels of  carbon and energy input, such as plant growth and seed production. However, the  mechanisms underlying these functionalities could not be solely attributed to the  role of SnRK2.6 as a positive regulator of ABA signaling, although we demonstrate  that this kinase confers ABA hypersensitivity during seedling growth.  Collectively, our results suggest that SnRK2.6 mediates hormonal and metabolic  regulation of plant growth and development and that, besides the SnRK1 kinases,  SnRK2.6 is also implicated in the regulation of metabolic homeostasis in plants.', '2010 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.109.150789', 'Greene']

SnRK1: !modulates! energy and metabolic homeostasis
SnRK2.6: !controls! stomatal aperture by ABA
SnRK2.6: !regulates! plant primary metabolism
SnRK2.6: !increases! Suc synthesis and fatty acid desaturation
SnRK2.6: !ameliorates! physiological processes requiring carbon and energy input
SnRK2.6: !mediates! hormonal and metabolic regulation of plant growth and development
SnRK2.6: !implicated in! regulation of metabolic homeostasis