['20202172', 'The Arabidopsis genome has two fumarase genes, one of which encodes a protein  with mitochondrial targeting information (FUM1) while the other (FUM2) does not.  We show that a FUM1-green fluorescent protein fusion is directed to mitochondria  while FUM2-red fluorescent protein remains in the cytosol. While mitochondrial  FUM1 is an essential gene, cytosolic FUM2 is not required for plant growth.  However FUM2 is required for the massive accumulation of carbon into fumarate  that occurs in Arabidopsis leaves during the day. In fum2 knock-out mutants,  fumarate levels remain low while malate increases, and these changes can be  reversed with a FUM2 transgene. The fum2 mutant has lower levels of many amino  acids in leaves during the day compared with the wild type, but higher levels at  night, consistent with a link between fumarate and amino acid metabolism. To  further test this relationship we grew plants in the absence or presence of  nitrogen fertilizer. The amount of fumarate in leaves increased several fold in  response to nitrogen in wild-type plants, but not in fum2. Malate increased to a  small extent in the wild type but to a greater extent in fum2. Growth of fum2  plants was similar to that of the wild type in low nitrogen but much slower in  the presence of high nitrogen. Activities of key enzymes of nitrogen assimilation  were similar in both genotypes. We conclude that FUM2 is required for the  accumulation of fumarate in leaves, which is in turn required for rapid nitrogen  assimilation and growth on high nitrogen.', '2010 Jun 1', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04189.x', 'Smith']

FUM1: !encodes! mitochondrial targeting information 
FUM2: !encodes! no mitochondrial targeting information 
FUM1: !essential for! plant growth 
FUM2: !required for! massive accumulation of carbon into fumarate 
FUM2: !linked to! amino acid metabolism 
FUM2: !required for! accumulation of fumarate in leaves 
FUM2: !required for! rapid nitrogen assimilation and growth on high nitrogen