['20207753', 'Stress agents known to elicit the unfolded protein response in Arabidopsis  thaliana upregulate the expression of a constellation of genes dependent on the  membrane-associated basic domain/leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor,  bZIP28. Among the stress-activated genes, a consensus promoter sequence  corresponding to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-responsive element I  (ERSE-I), CCAAT-N10-CACG, was identified. Disruption of either the CCAAT or CACG  subelement in ERSE-I resulted in reduction of the transcriptional response to ER  stress. bZIP28 forms homo- and heterodimers with other bZIP TF family members (in  subgroup D) and interacts with CCAAT box binding factors, heterotrimeric factors  composed of NF-Y subunits. Arabidopsis encodes 36 NF-Y subunits, and it was found  that subunits NF-YB3 and -YC2 interact with bZIP28 and NF-YA4, respectively, in a  yeast three-hybrid system. A transcriptional complex containing bZIP28 and the  above-mentioned three NF-Y subunits was assembled in vitro on DNA containing  ERSE-I. bZIP28, on its own, binds to the CACG subelement in ERSE-I to form a  smaller complex I, and in combination with the NF-Y subunits above, bZIP28  assembles into a larger transcriptional complex (complex II). bZIP28 was shown to  interact with NF-Y subunits in vivo in bimolecular fluorescence complementation  analyses and in coimmunoprecipitation assays. Treatment of seedlings with ER  stress agents led to the upregulation of NF-YC2 and the relocation of NF-YB3 from  the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Thus, in response to ER stress, bZIP28 is mobilized  by proteolysis and recruits NF-Y subunits to form a transcriptional complex that  upregulates the expression of ER stress-induced genes.', '2010 Mar', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.109.072173', 'Howell']

bZIP28: !upregulates! expression of genes 
bZIP28: !interacts with! CCAAT box binding factors 
NF-YB3: !interacts with! bZIP28 
NF-YC2: !interacts with! bZIP28 
NF-YA4: !interacts with! bZIP28 
ER stress agents: !mobilizes! bZIP28 
ER stress agents: !upregulates! NF-YC2 
ER stress agents: !relocates! NF-YB3