['20237894', 'As the outermost layer on aerial tissues of the primary plant body, the cuticle  plays important roles in plant development and physiology. The major components  of the cuticle are cutin and cuticular wax, both of which are composed primarily  of fatty acid derivatives synthesized in the epidermal cells. Long-chain acyl-CoA  synthetases (LACS) catalyze the formation of long-chain acyl-CoAs and the  Arabidopsis genome contains a family of nine genes shown to encode LACS enzymes.  LACS2 is required for cutin biosynthesis, as revealed by previous investigations  on lacs2 mutants. Here, we characterize lacs1 mutants of Arabidopsis that reveals  a role for LACS1 in biosynthesis of cuticular wax components. lacs1 lacs2  double-mutant plants displayed pleiotropic phenotypes including organ fusion,  abnormal flower development and reduced seed set; phenotypes not found in either  of the parental mutants. The leaf cuticular permeability of lacs1 lacs2 was  higher than that of either lacs1 or lacs2 single mutants, as determined by  measurements of chlorophyll leaching from leaves immersed in 80% ethanol,  staining with toluidine blue dye and direct measurements of water loss.  Furthermore, lacs1 lacs2 mutant plants are highly susceptible to drought stress.  Our results indicate that a deficiency in cuticular wax synthesis and a  deficiency in cutin synthesis together have compounding effects on the functional  integrity of the cuticular barrier, compromising the ability of the cuticle to  restrict water movement, protect against drought stress and prevent organ fusion.', '2010 Apr', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-010-1110-4', 'Browse']

LACS2: !synthesizes! cutin 
LACS1: !synthesizes! cuticular wax 
cutin/cuticular wax: !compose! cuticle 
cuticle: !plays role in! plant development/physiology 
LACS1/LACS2: !required for! cutin/cuticular wax biosynthesis 
lacs1 lacs2 double-mutant plants: !display! pleiotropic phenotypes 
lacs1 lacs2 mutant plants: !susceptible to! drought stress 
cuticular wax deficiency/cutin deficiency: !compromise! cuticular barrier