A tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) monodehydroascorbate reductase gene (LeMDAR) was isolated. The LeMDAR-green fluorescence protein (GFP) fusion protein was targeted to chloroplast in Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplast. RNA and protein gel blot analyses confirmed that the sense- and antisense- LeMDAR were integrated into the tomato genome. The MDAR activities and the levels of reduced ascorbate (AsA) were markedly increased in sense transgenic lines and decreased in antisense transgenic lines compared with wild-type (WT) plants. Under low and high temperature stresses, the sense transgenic plants showed lower level of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), lower thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) content, higher net photosynthetic rate (P(n)), higher maximal photochemical efficiency of PSII (F(v)/F(m)) and fresh weight compared with WT plants. The oxidizable P700 decreased more obviously in WT and antisense plants than that in sense plants at chilling temperature under low irradiance. Furthermore, the sense transgenic plants exhibited significantly lower H(2)O(2) level, higher ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity, greater P(n) and F(v)/F(m) under methyl viologen (MV)-mediated oxidative stresses. These results indicated that overexpression of chloroplastic MDAR played an important role in alleviating photoinhibition of PSI and PSII and enhancing the tolerance to various abiotic stresses by elevating AsA level.

LeMDAR: !isolated from! tomato 
LeMDAR-GFP: !targeted to! chloroplast 
LeMDAR: !integrated into! tomato genome 
LeMDAR: !increases! MDAR activities 
LeMDAR: !increases! reduced ascorbate (AsA) 
LeMDAR: !lowers! hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) 
LeMDAR: !lowers! thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) 
LeMDAR: !increases! net photosynthetic rate (P(n)) 
LeMDAR: !increases! maximal photochemical efficiency of PSII (F(v)/F(m)) 
LeMDAR: !increases! fresh weight 
LeMDAR: !decreases! oxidizable P700 
LeMDAR: !lowers! H(2)O(2) level 
LeMDAR: !increases! ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity 
LeMDAR: !enhances! tolerance to abiotic stresses