Fractionation of carbon isotopes by plants during CO(2) uptake and fixation (Delta(leaf)) varies with environmental conditions, but quantitative patterns of Delta(leaf) across environmental gradients at the global scale are lacking. This impedes interpretation of variability in ancient terrestrial organic matter, which encodes climatic and ecological signals. To address this problem, we converted 3,310 published leaf delta(13)C values into mean Delta(leaf) values for 334 woody plant species at 105 locations (yielding 570 species-site combinations) representing a wide range of environmental conditions. Our analyses reveal a strong positive correlation between Delta(leaf) and mean annual precipitation (MAP; R(2) = 0.55), mirroring global trends in gross primary production and indicating stomatal constraints on leaf gas-exchange, mediated by water supply, are the dominant control of Delta(leaf) at large spatial scales. Independent of MAP, we show a lesser, negative effect of altitude on Delta(leaf) and minor effects of temperature and latitude. After accounting for these factors, mean Delta(leaf) of evergreen gymnosperms is lower (by 1-2.7 per thousand) than for other woody plant functional types (PFT), likely due to greater leaf-level water-use efficiency. Together, environmental and PFT effects contribute to differences in mean Delta(leaf) of up to 6 per thousand between biomes. Coupling geologic indicators of ancient precipitation and PFT (or biome) with modern Delta(leaf) patterns has potential to yield more robust reconstructions of atmospheric delta(13)C values, leading to better constraints on past greenhouse-gas perturbations. Accordingly, we estimate a 4.6 per thousand decline in the delta(13)C of atmospheric CO(2) at the onset of the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum, an abrupt global warming event approximately 55.8 Ma.

Delta(leaf): !varies with! environmental conditions 
Delta(leaf): !correlates with! MAP 
Delta(leaf): !affected by! altitude 
Delta(leaf): !affected by! temperature 
Delta(leaf): !affected by! latitude 
Delta(leaf): !lower in! evergreen gymnosperms 
Delta(leaf): !differs between! biomes 
Delta(13)C of CO2: !estimated to have declined by! 4.6 per thousand