['20306306', 'Though shoot apical meristems (SAMs) commonly exhibit low or no competence for  transformation, the potent regeneration of this tissue merits further research.  Especially, when shoot regeneration is recalcitrant using other tissues as  explants, SAM probably is an excellent selection. In cockscomb plants, using SAMs  from seedlings obtained from MS medium with 0.5 mg l(-1) 6-BA as explants, high  frequency of transformation (approximate 20%) is obtained; whereas control SAMs  performed poorly for transformation (approximate 3%). These SAMs are malformed in  morphology compared to control SAMs. Further observation found that, in these  SAMs, cell proliferation and/or TE formation are seen; which are not found in  control SAMs. GUS assays indicated that GUS-positive blue spots at TE zones are  obvious; whereas the case was contrary in control SAMs. All these data suggest  that cell proliferation and/or TE formation might cause high effective  transformation. This transformation system should facilitate the use of this  species for studies on gene manipulation and expression. Therefore, we introduced  35S:ASL11-GFP to cockscomb via Agrobacterium tumefaciens. ASYMMETRIC  LEAVES2-LIKE11 (ASL11) gene of Arabidopsis is a member of the ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2  (AS2)/LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES (LOB) domain gene family, and its function is  largely unclear. By confocal laser scanning microscopy, we found that in most  over 35S:ASL11-GFP cockscomb plants, ASL11-GFP fusion protein was in discrete  nuclear location. These results indicate that the T-DNA contains within the  construct inserted into the host chromosomes in an integral form, and also  suggest that ASL11 might be a nuclear protein and function as a potential  transcription factor. Moreover, SAMs of the over 35S:ASL11-GFP plants show  needle-like patterns that lack organ primordial; suggesting ASL11 might be  involved in sustaining indeterminate cell fate of SAMs.', '2010 Dec', 'Mol Biol Rep', '10.1007/s11033-010-0056-8', 'Feng']

SAM: !exhibits! low transformation competence 
MS medium: !enhances! SAM transformation 
GUS assays: !indicate! GUS-positive blue spots 
35S:ASL11-GFP: !introduced to! cockscomb 
ASL11: !localizes to! nucleus 
ASL11: !potentially functions as! transcription factor 
ASL11: !sustains! indeterminate cell fate of SAMs