The caryopses of barley (Hordeum vulgare), as of all cereals, are complex sink organs optimized for starch accumulation and embryo development. While their early to late development has been studied in great detail, processes underlying the caryopses' diurnal adaptation to changes in light, temperature, and the fluctuations in phloem-supplied carbon and nitrogen have remained unknown. In an attempt to identify diurnally affected processes in developing caryopses at the early maturation phase, we monitored global changes of both gene expression and metabolite levels. We applied the 22 K Barley1 GeneChip microarray and identified 2,091 differentially expressed (DE) genes that were assigned to six major diurnal expression clusters. Principal component analysis and other global analyses demonstrated that the variability within the data set relates to genes involved in circadian regulation, storage compound accumulation, embryo development, response to abiotic stress, and photosynthesis. The correlation of amino acid and sugar profiles with expression trajectories led to the identification of several hundred potentially metabolite-regulated DE genes. A comparative analysis of our data set and publicly available microarray data disclosed suborgan-specific expression of almost all diurnal DE genes, with more than 350 genes specifically expressed in the pericarp, endosperm, or embryo tissues. Our data reveal a tight linkage between day/night cycles, changes in light, and the supply of carbon and nitrogen. We present a model that suggests several phases of diurnal gene expression in developing barley caryopses, summarized as starvation and priming, energy collection and carbon fixation, light protection and chaperone activity, storage and growth, and embryo development.

Gene: !affects! Circadian regulation
Gene: !affects! Storage compound accumulation
Gene: !affects! Embryo development
Gene: !affects! Response to abiotic stress
Gene: !affects! Photosynthesis
Gene: !correlates with! Amino acid levels
Gene: !correlates with! Sugar levels
Gene: !localizes to! Pericarp
Gene: !localizes to! Endosperm
Gene: !localizes to! Embryo tissues
Gene: !responds to! Day/night cycles
Gene: !responds to! Changes in light
Gene: !responds to! Supply of carbon and nitrogen