The number of different anthocyanin molecules potentially produced by Arabidopsis thaliana and which anthocyanin molecule is the first product of anthocyanidin modification remain unknown. To accelerate the understanding of these questions, we investigated anthocyanin biosynthesis in rosette leaves of both pap1-D and wild-type (WT) A. thaliana plants grown in nine growth conditions, which were composed of three light intensities (low light, middle light, and high light) and three media derived from MS medium (medium-1, 2, and 3). These nine growth conditions differentially affected the levels of anthocyanins and pigmentation patterns of rosette leaves, which were closely related to the diversification levels of cyanin structures. The combined growth conditions of high light and either medium-2 or medium-1 induced the most molecular diversity of anthocyanin structures in rosette leaves of pap1-D plants. Twenty cyanin molecules, including five that were previously unknown, were characterized by HPLC-ESI-MS and HPLC-TOF-MS analyses. We detected that the A. thaliana anthocyanin molecule A11 was most likely the first cyanin derived from the multiple modification steps of cyanidin. In addition, in the same growth condition, rosette leaves of pap1-D plants produced much higher levels and more diverse molecular profiling of cyanins than those of WT plants. The transcript levels of PAP1, PAL1, CHS, DFR, and ANS cDNAs were much higher in pap1-D rosette leaves than in WT ones. Furthermore, on the same agar-solidified medium, an enhancement of light intensity increased levels and molecular diversity of cyanins in both pap1-D and WT rosette leaves. In the same light intensity condition, the responses of anthocyanin levels and profiling to medium alternation were different between pap1-D and WT plants.

PAP1: !enhances! anthocyanin levels 
PAL1: !enhances! anthocyanin levels 
CHS: !enhances! anthocyanin levels 
DFR: !enhances! anthocyanin levels 
ANS: !enhances! anthocyanin levels 
light intensity: !increases! anthocyanin levels 
medium: !affects! anthocyanin levels 
A11: !is the first product of! anthocyanidin modification