['20335404', 'Metabolic engineering of plant carotenoids in food crops has been a recent focus  for improving human health. Pathway manipulation is predicated on comprehensive  knowledge of this biosynthetic pathway, which has been extensively studied.  However, there existed the possibility of an additional biosynthetic step thought  to be dispensable because it could be compensated for by light. This step,  mediated by a putative Z-ISO, was predicted to occur in the sequence of redox  reactions that are coupled to an electron transport chain and convert the  colorless 15-cis-phytoene to the red-colored all-trans-lycopene. The enigma of  carotenogenesis in the absence of light (e.g. in endosperm, a target for  improving nutritional content) argued for Z-ISO as a pathway requirement.  Therefore, understanding of plant carotenoid biosynthesis was obviously  incomplete. To prove the existence of Z-ISO, maize (Zea mays) and Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutants were isolated and the gene identified. Functional  testing of the gene product in Escherichia coli showed isomerization of the  15-cis double bond in 9,15,9\'-tri-cis-zeta-carotene, proving that Z-ISO encoded  the missing step. Z-ISO was found to be important for both light-exposed and  "dark" tissues. Comparative genomics illuminated the origin of Z-ISO found  throughout higher and lower plants, algae, diatoms, and cyanobacteria. Z-ISO  evolved from an ancestor related to the NnrU (for nitrite and nitric oxide  reductase U) gene required for bacterial denitrification, a pathway that produces  nitrogen oxides as alternate electron acceptors for anaerobic growth. Therefore,  plant carotenogenesis evolved by recruitment of genes from noncarotenogenic  bacteria.', '2010 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.153916', 'Wurtzel']

Gene: !affects! Carotenoid biosynthesis 
Gene: !localizes to! Maize and Arabidopsis 
Gene: !interacts with! 9,15,9'-tri-cis-zeta-carotene 
Gene: !enhances! Nutritional content 
Gene: !represses! Light-exposed tissues 
Gene: !synthesizes! Nitrogen oxides