Sulfate is an essential macronutrient for plants. Plants have developed strategies to cope with sulfate deficiency, and other nutrient ion limitations. However, the regulation of these adaptive responses and the coordinating signals that underlie them are still poorly characterized. O-acetylserine (OAS) is a marker metabolite of sulfate starvation and has been speculated to have a signaling function. OAS is synthesized by the enzyme serine acetyltransferase (SERAT), which is encoded by five distinct genes in Arabidopsis. We investigated quadruple knockout mutants of SERAT that retained only one functional isoform. These mutants displayed symptoms of sulfate starvation. Furthermore, some of them displayed phenotypes typical of prolonged sulfate starvation, in particular, developmental programs associated with senescence or stress responses. Thus, we compared metabolite and transcriptome data from these mutants with N-, P-, K-, and S-depleted plants. This revealed many similarities with general nutrient-depletion-induced senescence (NuDIS), indicating the recruitment of existing regulatory programs for nutrient-starvation responses. Several candidate genes that could be involved in these processes were identified, including transcription factors and other regulatory proteins, as well as the functional categories of their target genes. These results outline components of the regulatory network controlling plant development under sulfate stress, forming a basis for further investigations to elucidate the complete network. In turn, this will advance our broader understanding of plant responses to a range of other nutrient stresses.

OAS: !synthesizes! SERAT 
SERAT: !encoded by! five distinct genes 
quadruple knockout mutants: !displayed symptoms of! sulfate starvation 
quadruple knockout mutants: !displayed phenotypes of! prolonged sulfate starvation 
NuDIS: !revealed similarities with! metabolite and transcriptome data 
candidate genes: !identified as! transcription factors and other regulatory proteins 
regulatory network: !outlines components of! plant development under sulfate stress