Enzymes interact to generate metabolic networks. The activities of more than 22 enzymes from central metabolism were profiled during the development of fruit of the modern tomato cultivar Solanum lycopersicum 'M82' and its wild relative Solanum pennellii (LA0716). In S. pennellii, the mature fruit remains green and contains lower sugar and higher organic acid levels. These genotypes are the parents of a widely used near introgression line population. Enzymes were also profiled in a second cultivar, S. lycopersicum 'Moneymaker', for which data sets for the developmental changes of metabolites and transcripts are available. Whereas most enzyme activities declined during fruit development in the modern S. lycopersicum cultivars, they remained high or even increased in S. pennellii, especially enzymes required for organic acid synthesis. The enzyme profiles were sufficiently characteristic to allow stages of development and cultivars and the wild species to be distinguished by principal component analysis and clustering. Many enzymes showed coordinated changes during fruit development of a given genotype. Comparison of the correlation matrices revealed a large overlap between the two modern cultivars and considerable overlap with S. pennellii, indicating that despite the very different development responses, some basic modules are retained. Comparison of enzyme activity, metabolite profiles, and transcript profiles in S. lycopersicum 'Moneymaker' revealed remarkably little connectivity between the developmental changes of transcripts and enzymes and even less between enzymes and metabolites. We discuss the concept that the metabolite profile is an emergent property that is generated by complex network interactions.

Enzymes: !interact to generate! metabolic networks
Enzymes: !profiled during! development of fruit
Enzymes: !declined in! modern S. lycopersicum cultivars
Enzymes: !remained high in! S. pennellii
Enzymes: !distinguished by! principal component analysis
Enzymes: !showed coordinated changes in! given genotype
Enzymes: !overlap between! two modern cultivars
Enzymes: !overlap with! S. pennellii
Enzymes: !little connectivity between! developmental changes of transcripts
Enzymes: !even less between! enzymes and metabolites
Metabolite profile: !generated by! complex network interactions