['20331973', 'We had previously identified the MYBC1 gene, which encodes a single-repeat R3-MYB  protein, as a putative osmotic responding gene; however, no R3-MYB transcription  factor has been reported to regulate osmotic stress tolerance. Thus, we sought to  elucidate the function of MYBC1 in response to osmotic stresses. Real-time RT-PCR  analysis indicated that MYBC1 expression responded to cold, dehydration, salinity  and exogenous ABA at the transcript level. mybc1 mutants exhibited an increased  tolerance to freezing stress, whereas 35S::MYBC1 transgenic plants exhibited  decreased cold tolerance. Transcript levels of some cold-responsive genes,  including CBF/DREB genes, KIN1, ADC1, ADC2 and ZAT12, though, were not altered in  the mybc1 mutants or the 35S::MYBC1 transgenic plants in response to cold stress,  as compared to the wild type. Microarray analysis results that are publically  available were investigated and found transcript level of MYBC1 was not altered  by overexpression of CBF1, CBF2, and CBF3, suggesting that MYBC1 is not down  regulated by these CBF family members. Together, these results suggested that  MYBC1is capable of negatively regulating the freezing tolerance of Arabidopsis in  the CBF-independent pathway. In transgenic Arabidopsis carrying an MYBC1 promoter  driven beta-glucuronidase (GUS) construct, GUS activity was observed in all  tissues and was relatively stronger in the vascular tissues. Fused MYBC1 and GFP  protein revealed that MYBC1 was localized exclusively in the nuclear compartment.', '2010 Apr 16', 'Biochem Biophys Res Commun', '10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.114', 'Li']

MYBC1: !encodes! single-repeat R3-MYB protein 
MYBC1: !responds to! cold, dehydration, salinity, exogenous ABA 
mybc1 mutants: !exhibit! increased tolerance to freezing stress 
35S::MYBC1 transgenic plants: !exhibit! decreased cold tolerance 
CBF/DREB genes, KIN1, ADC1, ADC2 and ZAT12: !not altered in! mybc1 mutants or 35S::MYBC1 transgenic plants 
MYBC1: !not down regulated by! CBF family members 
MYBC1: !negatively regulates! freezing tolerance of Arabidopsis 
MYBC1 promoter: !drives! beta-glucuronidase (GUS) construct 
GUS activity: !observed in! all tissues 
MYBC1: !localized in! nuclear compartment