['20348210', 'Lipases are involved in the generation of jasmonates, which regulate responses to  biotic and abiotic stresses. Two sn-1-specific acyl hydrolases, DEFECTIVE IN  ANTHER DEHISCENCE1 (DAD1) and DONGLE (DGL), have been reported to be localized in  plastids and to be essential and sufficient for jasmonate biosynthesis in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) leaves. Here, we show that levels of  12-oxo-phytodienoic acid (OPDA) and jasmonic acid in three different DGL RNA  interference lines and the dad1 mutant were similar to wild-type levels during  the early wound response as well as after Pseudomonas infection. Due to the lack  of sn-2 substrate specificity, synthesis of dinor OPDA was not expected and also  not found to be affected in DGL knockdown and DGL-overexpressing lines. As  reported, DAD1 participates in jasmonate formation only in the late wound  response. In addition, DGL protein was found to be localized in lipid bodies and  not in plastids. Furthermore, jasmonate levels in 16 additional mutants defective  in the expression of lipases with predicted chloroplast localization did not show  strong differences from wild-type levels after wounding, except for a  phospholipase A (PLA) PLA-Igamma1 (At1g06800) mutant line that displayed  diminished wound-induced dinor OPDA, OPDA, and jasmonic acid levels. A quadruple  mutant defective in four DAD1-like lipases displayed similar jasmonate levels as  the mutant line of PLA-Igamma1 after wounding. Hence, we identify PLA-Igamma1 as  a novel target gene to manipulate jasmonate biosynthesis. Our results suggest  that, in addition to DAD1 and PLA-Igamma1, still unidentified enzymes with sn-1  and sn-2 hydrolase activity are involved in wound- and pathogen-induced jasmonate  formation, indicating functional redundancy within the lipase family.', '2010 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.155093', 'Mueller']

Lipases: !generate! Jasmonates 
DAD1: !localizes to! Plastids 
DGL: !essential and sufficient for! Jasmonate biosynthesis 
DGL: !localizes to! Lipid bodies 
PLA-Igamma1: !diminishes! Wound-induced jasmonate levels 
DAD1/PLA-Igamma1: !redundant with! Unidentified enzymes