Auxin is an important plant growth regulator, and plays a key role in apical-basal axis formation and embryo differentiation, but the mechanism remains unclear. The level of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) during zygote and embryo development of Nicotiana tabacum L. is investigated here using the techniques of GC-SIM-MS analysis, immunolocalization, and the GUS activity assay of DR5::GUS transgenic plants. The distribution of ABP1 and PM H(+)-ATPase was also detected by immunolocalization, and this is the first time that integral information has been obtained about their distribution in the zygote and in embryo development. The results showed an increase in IAA content in ovules and the polar distribution of IAA, ABP1, and PM H(+)-ATPase in the zygote and embryo, specifically in the top and basal parts of the embryo proper (EP) during proembryo development. For information about the regulation mechanism of auxin, an auxin transport inhibitor TIBA (2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid) and exogenous IAA were, respectively, added to the medium for the culture of ovules at the zygote and early proembryo stages. Treatment with a suitable IAA concentration promoted zygote division and embryo differentiation, while TIBA treatment obviously suppressed these processes and caused the formation of abnormal embryos. The distribution patterns of IAA, ABP1, and PM H(+)-ATPase were also disturbed in the abnormal embryos. These results indicate that the polar distribution and transport of IAA begins at the zygote stage, and affects zygote division and embryo differentiation in tobacco. Moreover, ABP1 and PM H(+)-ATPase may play roles in zygote and embryo development and may also be involved in IAA signalling transduction.

IAA: !affects! zygote division and embryo differentiation
ABP1: !localizes to! top and basal parts of EP
PM H(+)-ATPase: !localizes to! top and basal parts of EP
TIBA: !represses! zygote division and embryo differentiation
IAA: !enhances! zygote division and embryo differentiation
ABP1: !interacts with! IAA signalling transduction
PM H(+)-ATPase: !interacts with! IAA signalling transduction