['20359373', 'BACKGROUND: Reminiscent of their free-living cyanobacterial ancestor,  chloroplasts proliferate by division coupled with the partition of nucleoids  (DNA-protein complexes). Division of the chloroplast envelope membrane is  performed by constriction of the ring structures at the division site. During  division, nucleoids also change their shape and are distributed essentially  equally to the daughter chloroplasts. Although several components of the envelope  division machinery have been identified and characterized, little is known about  the molecular components/mechanisms underlying the change of the nucleoid  structure. RESULTS: In order to identify new factors that are involved in the  chloroplast division, we isolated Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplast division  mutants from a pool of random cDNA-overexpressed lines. We found that the  overexpression of a previously uncharacterized gene (AtYLMG1-1) of cyanobacterial  origin results in the formation of an irregular network of chloroplast nucleoids,  along with a defect in chloroplast division. In contrast, knockdown of AtYLMG1-1  resulted in a concentration of the nucleoids into a few large structures, but did  not affect chloroplast division. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that  AtYLMG1-1 localizes in small puncta on thylakoid membranes, to which a subset of  nucleoids colocalize. In addition, in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongates,  overexpression and deletion of ylmG also displayed defects in nucleoid structure  and cell division. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the proper  distribution of nucleoids requires the YlmG protein, and the mechanism is  conserved between cyanobacteria and chloroplasts. Given that ylmG exists in a  cell division gene cluster downstream of ftsZ in gram-positive bacteria and that  ylmG overexpression impaired the chloroplast division, the nucleoid partitioning  by YlmG might be related to chloroplast and cyanobacterial division processes.', '2010 Apr 2', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-10-57', 'Miyagishima']

AtYLMG1-1: !localizes to! thylakoid membranes 
AtYLMG1-1: !affects! nucleoid structure 
AtYLMG1-1: !interacts with! subset of nucleoids 
YlmG: !synthesizes! cell division gene cluster 
YlmG: !represses! chloroplast division