['20367470', 'Myzus persicae, commonly known as green peach aphid (GPA), is a sap-sucking  insect with a broad host range. Arabidopsis thaliana responds to GPA infestation  with elevated expression of the PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 (PAD4) gene. Previously,  we had demonstrated that the loss of PAD4 gene function compromises Arabidopsis  resistance to GPA. In contrast, a mutation in the Arabidopsis SUPPRESSOR OF  SALICYLIC ACID INSENSITIVITY2 (SSI2) gene, which encodes a desaturase involved in  lipid metabolism, resulted in hyper-resistance to GPA. We demonstrate here that  PAD4 is required for the ssi2-dependent heightened resistance to GPA. Based on  electrical monitoring of insect behavior and bioassays in which the insect was  given a choice between the wild type and the ssi2 mutant, it is concluded that  the ssi2-conferred resistance is not due to deterrence of insect settling or  feeding from the phloem of the mutant. Instead, hyper-resistance in the ssi2  mutant results from heightened antibiosis that curtails insect reproduction.  Petiole exudates collected from uninfested ssi2 plants contain elevated levels of  an activity that interferes with aphid reproduction in synthetic diets. PAD4 was  required for the accumulation of this antibiotic activity in petiole exudates,  supporting the role of PAD4 in phloem-based resistance. Because PAD4 expression  is not elevated in the ssi2 mutant, we suggest that basal PAD4 expression  contributes to this antibiosis.', '2010 May', 'Mol Plant Microbe Interact', '10.1094/MPMI-23-5-0618', 'Shah']

Myzus persicae: !infests! Arabidopsis thaliana 
PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 (PAD4): !enhances! Arabidopsis resistance to GPA 
SUPPRESSOR OF SALICYLIC ACID INSENSITIVITY2 (SSI2): !enhances! Arabidopsis resistance to GPA 
PAD4: !required for! ssi2-dependent heightened resistance to GPA 
ssi2: !produces! activity that interferes with aphid reproduction 
PAD4: !required for! accumulation of antibiotic activity in petiole exudates 
PAD4: !contributes to! antibiosis