['20368970', 'Plant resistance (R) proteins provide a robust surveillance system to defend  against potential pathogens. Despite their importance in plant innate immunity,  relatively few of the approximately 170 R proteins in Arabidopsis have  well-characterized resistance specificity. In order to identify the R protein  responsible for recognition of the Pseudomonas syringae type III secreted  effector (T3SE) HopZ1a, we assembled an Arabidopsis R gene T-DNA Insertion  Collection (ARTIC) from publicly available Arabidopsis thaliana insertion lines  and screened it for plants lacking HopZ1a-induced immunity. This reverse genetic  screen revealed that the Arabidopsis R protein HOPZ-activated resistance 1 (ZAR1;  At3g50950) is required for recognition of HopZ1a in Arabidopsis. ZAR1 belongs to  the coiled-coil (CC) class of nucleotide binding site and leucine-rich repeat  (NBS-LRR) containing R proteins; however, the ZAR1 CC domain phylogenetically  clusters in a clade distinct from other related Arabidopsis R proteins.  ZAR1-mediated immunity is independent of several genes required by other R  protein signaling pathways, including NDR1 and RAR1, suggesting that ZAR1  possesses distinct signaling requirements. The closely-related T3SE protein,  HopZ1b, is still recognized by zar1 Arabidopsis plants indicating that  Arabidopsis has evolved at least two independent R proteins to recognize the HopZ  T3SE family. Also, in Arabidopsis zar1 plants HopZ1a promotes P. syringae growth  indicative of an ancestral virulence function for this T3SE prior to the  evolution of recognition by the host resistance protein ZAR1. Our results  demonstrate that the Arabidopsis resistance protein ZAR1 confers allele-specific  recognition and virulence attenuation of the Pseudomonas syringae T3SE protein  HopZ1a.', '2010 Apr 1', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1000894', 'Desveaux']

R protein: !recognizes! HopZ1a 
ZAR1: !mediates! immunity 
NDR1: !not required by! ZAR1 
RAR1: !not required by! ZAR1 
ZAR1: !recognizes! HopZ1b 
HopZ1a: !promotes! P. syringae growth