Knowledge of the proteome of the early gymnosperm embryo could provide important information for optimizing plant cloning procedures and for establishing platforms for research into plant development/regulation and in vitro transgenic studies. Compared with angiosperms, it is more difficult to induce somatic embryogenesis in gymnosperms; success in this endeavour could be increased, however, if proteomic information was available on the complex, dynamic, and multistage processes of gymnosperm embryogenesis in vivo. A proteomic analysis of Chinese fir seeds in six developmental stages was carried out during early embryogenesis. Proteins were extracted from seeds dissected from immature cones and separated by two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis. Analysis with DeCyder 6.5 software revealed 136 spots that differed in kinetics of appearance. Analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry identified proteins represented by 71 of the spots. Functional annotation of these seed proteins revealed their involvement in programmed cell death and chromatin modification, indicating that the proteins may play a central role in determining the number of zygotic embryos generated and controlling embryo patterning and shape remodelling. The analysis also revealed other proteins involved in carbon metabolism, methionine metabolism, energy production, protein storage, synthesis and stabilization, disease/defence, the cytoskeleton, and embryo development. The comprehensive protein expression profiles generated by our study provide new insights into the complex developmental processes in the seeds of the Chinese fir.

Gene: !affects! Process
Process: !involves! Proteins
Proteins: !modify! Chromatin
Proteins: !control! Embryo Patterning
Proteins: !regulate! Carbon Metabolism
Proteins: !influence! Methionine Metabolism
Proteins: !impact! Energy Production
Proteins: !govern! Protein Storage
Proteins: !determine! Synthesis/Stabilization
Proteins: !mediate! Disease/Defence
Proteins: !regulate! Cytoskeleton
Proteins: !influence! Embryo Development