Abscissic acid (ABA) determines mycorrhiza functionality and arbuscule development. In this study, we performed transcriptome analysis in response to different mycorrhization status according to the ABA content in the root to identify genes that may play a role in arbuscule functionality. Affymetrix Tomato GeneChip (approximately 10,000 probes) allowed us to detect and compare the transcriptional root profiling of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) wild-type and ABA-deficient sitiens plants colonized by Glomus intraradices. A number of identified genes in tomato belong to a category of genes already described as "mycorrhizal core-set" in other host plants. The impairment in arbuscular mycorrhiza (AM) formation in ABA-deficient mutants was associated with upregulation of genes related to defense and cell wall modification, whereas functional mycorrhization in wild-type plants was associated with activation of genes related to isoprenoid metabolism. The oxylipin pathway was activated in tomato mycorrhizal roots at late stages of interaction, and was related to the control of fungal spread in roots, not with the establishment of the symbiosis. Induction of selected genes, representing a range of biological functions and representative of the three sets of genes specifically upregulated in the different plant phenotype, was confirmed by quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, and their response to phythohormone treatment was tested, showing that ethylene and jasmonic acid are key regulators of gene expression during AM development. Comparative analysis of mycorrhiza upregulated functional categories revealed significant changes in gene expression associated with the different mycorrhization status according to the ABA content in the roots.

ABA: !determines! mycorrhiza functionality 
ABA-deficient mutants: !associated with! upregulation of defense genes 
Wild-type plants: !associated with! activation of isoprenoid metabolism genes 
Oxylipin pathway: !activated in! tomato mycorrhizal roots 
Ethylene/jasmonic acid: !key regulators of! gene expression during AM development