During their development, plants are subjected to repeated and fluctuating wind loads, an environmental factor predicted to increase in importance by scenarios of global climatic change. Notwithstanding the importance of wind stress on plant growth and development, little is known about plant acclimation to the bending stresses imposed by repeated winds. The time-course of acclimation of young poplars (Populus tremula L.xP. alba L.) to multiple stem bendings is studied here by following diameter growth and the expression of four genes PtaZFP2, PtaTCH2, PtaTCH4, and PtaACS6, previously described to be involved in the mechanical signalling transduction pathway. Young trees were submitted either to one transient bending per day for several days or to two bendings, 1-14 days apart. A diminution of molecular responses to subsequent bending was observed as soon as a second bending was applied. The minimum rest periods between two successive loadings necessary to recover a response similar to that observed after a single bending, were 7 days and 5 days for growth and molecular responses, respectively. Taken together, our results show a desensitization period of a few days after a single transitory bending, indicating a day-scale acclimation of sensitivity to the type of wind conditions plants experience in their specific environment. This work establishes the basic kinetics of acclimation to low bending frequency and these kinetic analyses will serve as the basis of ongoing work to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved. Future research will also concern plant acclimation to higher wind frequencies.

PtaZFP2: !affects! Molecular responses 
PtaTCH2: !affects! Molecular responses 
PtaTCH4: !affects! Molecular responses 
PtaACS6: !affects! Molecular responses 
Wind Stress: !affects! Plant Growth 
Bending Stresses: !affects! Diameter Growth 
Bending Stresses: !affects! Molecular Responses 
Rest Periods: !enhances! Recovery of Response 
Wind Conditions: !affects! Plant Acclimation