A genetic screen in Arabidopsis was developed to explore the regulation of chloroplast protein import in vivo using two independent reporters representing housekeeping and photosynthetic pre-proteins. We first used 5-enolpyruvylshikimate 3-phosphate synthase (EPSP synthase*), a key enzyme in the shikimic acid pathway, with a mutation that confers tolerance to the herbicide glyphosate. Because the EPSP synthase* pre-protein must be imported for its function, the loss of glyphosate tolerance provided an initial indication of an import deficiency. Second, the fate of GFP fused to a ferredoxin transit peptide (FD5-GFP) was determined. A class of altered chloroplast import (aci) mutants showed both glyphosate sensitivity and FD5-GFP mislocalized to nuclei. aci2-1 was selected for further study. Yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) fused to the transit peptide of EPSP synthase* or the small subunit of Rubisco was not imported into chloroplasts, but also localized to nuclei during protoplast transient expression. Isolated aci2-1 chloroplasts showed a 50% reduction in pre-protein import efficiency in an in vitro assay. Mutants did not grow photoautotrophically on media without sucrose and were small and dark green in soil. aci2-1 and two alleles code for Moco-sulfurase, which activates the aldehyde oxidases required for the biosynthesis of the plant hormones abscisic acid (ABA) and indole-acetic acid (IAA) and controls purine nucleotide (ATP and GTP) turnover and nitrogen recycling via xanthine dehydrogenase. These enzyme activities were not detected in aci2-1. ABA, IAA and/or purine turnover may play previously unrecognized roles in the regulation of chloroplast protein import in response to developmental, metabolic and environmental cues.

EPSP synthase*: !confers tolerance to! glyphosate
FD5-GFP: !mislocalized to! nuclei
aci2-1: !shows! glyphosate sensitivity
YFP: !fused to! transit peptide of EPSP synthase*
Moco-sulfurase: !activates! aldehyde oxidases
ABA/IAA: !controls! purine nucleotide turnover