In photosynthetic organisms chlorophyll and heme biosynthesis is tightly regulated at various levels in response to environmental adaptation and plant development. The formation of 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) is the key regulatory step and provides adequate amounts of the common precursor molecule for the Mg and Fe branches of tetrapyrrole biosynthesis. Pathway control prevents accumulation of metabolic intermediates and avoids photo-oxidative damage. In angiosperms reduction of protochlorophyllide (Pchlide) to chlorophyllide is catalyzed by the light-dependent NADPH:Pchlide oxidoreductase (POR). Although a correlation between down-regulated ALA synthesis and accumulation of Pchlide in the dark was proposed a long time ago, the time-resolved mutual dependency has never been analyzed. Taking advantage of the high metabolic activity of young barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) seedlings, in planta ALA synthesis could be determined with high time-resolution. ALA formation declined immediately after transition from light to dark and correlated with an immediate accumulation of POR-bound Pchlide within the first 60 min in darkness. The flu homologous barley mutant tigrina d(12) uncouples ALA synthesis from dark-suppression and continued to form ALA in darkness without a significant change in synthesis rate in this time interval. Similarly, inhibition of protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase by acifluorfen resulted in a delayed accumulation of Pchlide during the entire dark period and a weak repression of ALA synthesis in darkness. Moreover, it is demonstrated that dark repression of ALA formation relies rather on rapid post-translational regulation in response to accumulating Pchlide than on changes in nuclear gene expression.

ALA synthesis: !declines in! darkness
POR: !binds to! Pchlide
tigrina d(12): !uncouples ALA synthesis from! dark-suppression
acifluorfen: !inhibits! protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase
Pchlide: !represses! ALA formation
nuclear gene expression: !not involved in! dark repression of ALA formation