Vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid, AsA) has important antioxidant and metabolic functions in both plants and animals. Once used, ascorbic acid can be regenerated from its oxidized form in a reaction catalyzed by dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR, EC 1.8.5.1). To analyze the physiological role of DHAR catalyzing the reduction of DHA to ascorbate in environmental stress adaptation, we examined whether increasing the level of AsA through enhanced AsA recycling would limit the deleterious effects of oxidative stress. A chimeric construct consisting of the double CaMV35S promoter fused to the Myc-dhar gene was introduced into Arabidopsis thaliana. Transgenic plants were biochemically characterized and tested for responses to oxidative stress. Western blot indicated that the dhar-transgene was successfully expressed. In homozygous T(4) transgenic seedlings, DHAR overexpression was increased up to 1.5 to 5.4 fold, which enhanced foliar ascorbic acid levels 2- to 4.25-fold and ratio of AsA/DHA about 3- to 16-fold relative to wild type. In addition, the level of glutathione, the reductant used by DHAR, also increased as did its redox state. When whole plants were treated with high light and high temperature stress or in vitro leaf discs were subjected to 10 muM paraquat, transgenic plants showed a larger AsA pool size, lower membrane damage, and a higher level of chlorophyll compared with controls. These data suggested that increasing the plant vitamin C content through enhanced ascorbate recycling could limit the deleterious effects of environmental oxidative stress.

DHAR: !catalyzes! reduction of DHA to ascorbate 
Myc-dhar gene: !introduced into! Arabidopsis thaliana 
Double CaMV35S promoter: !fused to! Myc-dhar gene 
DHAR overexpression: !increased up to! 1.5 to 5.4 fold 
Foliar ascorbic acid levels: !enhanced 2- to 4.25-fold! relative to wild type 
Glutathione: !level increased! in transgenic plants 
High light and high temperature stress: !treated with! whole plants 
10 muM paraquat: !subjected to! leaf discs 
Transgenic plants: !showed larger AsA pool size, lower membrane damage, and higher level of chlorophyll! compared with controls