['20388664', 'The Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) trichome birefringence (tbr) mutant has  severely reduced crystalline cellulose in trichomes, but the molecular nature of  TBR was unknown. We determined TBR to belong to the plant-specific DUF231 domain  gene family comprising 46 members of unknown function in Arabidopsis. The genes  harbor another plant-specific domain, called the TBL domain, which contains a  conserved GDSL motif known from some esterases/lipases. TBR and TBR-like3 (TBL3)  are transcriptionally coordinated with primary and secondary CELLULOSE SYNTHASE  (CESA) genes, respectively. The tbr and tbl3 mutants hold lower levels of  crystalline cellulose and have altered pectin composition in trichomes and stems,  respectively, tissues generally thought to contain mainly secondary wall  crystalline cellulose. In contrast, primary wall cellulose levels remain  unchanged in both mutants as measured in etiolated tbr and tbl3 hypocotyls, while  the amount of esterified pectins is reduced and pectin methylesterase activity is  increased in this tissue. Furthermore, etiolated tbr hypocotyls have reduced  length with swollen epidermal cells, a phenotype characteristic for primary cesa  mutants or the wild type treated with cellulose synthesis inhibitors. Taken  together, we show that two TBL genes contribute to the synthesis and deposition  of secondary wall cellulose, presumably by influencing the esterification state  of pectic polymers.', '2010 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.153320', 'Scheible']

TBR: !synthesizes! secondary wall cellulose
TBL3: !synthesizes! secondary wall cellulose
TBR: !coordinates with! CESA genes
TBL3: !coordinates with! CESA genes
tbr: !reduces! crystalline cellulose
tbl3: !reduces! crystalline cellulose
tbr: !alters! pectin composition
tbl3: !alters! pectin composition
tbr: !increases! pectin methylesterase activity
tbl3: !increases! pectin methylesterase activity
tbr: !reduces! primary wall cellulose
tbl3: !reduces! primary wall cellulose