A higher frequency of hail storms, possibly due to climate change, has led to increased installation of hail nets worldwide. The objective of the present work was to investigate potential effects of the microclimate under these hail nets on micromorphological characteristics of the leaves and adaxial leaf cuticles. Leaves of apple cultivars 'Pinova' and 'Fuji' grown on trees under white (highly translucent) or red-black (low transmittance) hail nets or on uncovered (control) trees were evaluated in June, August, September and October. The microclimate under the colored hail nets had no impact on leaf micromorphology, amount of cuticular wax, or leaf thickness. Similarly, no differences in thickness and permeability for calcium could be established between cuticles of leaves grown on trees under the two types of hail nets or uncovered trees. For all evaluated parameters, significant differences were detected between the two cultivars examined. In both cultivars, leaf wax synthesis followed a characteristic curve, increasing from the first to the second evaluation, and then decreasing continuously without affecting cuticular penetration of calcium. Overall, our results show that a reduction of the hail nets by 6-10% in both light and humidity was insufficient to influence the surface properties of apple leaves and permeability of cuticles. This may suggest that pest management strategies, i.e. formulation of agrochemicals, their application and dose, do not need to be adapted when used under hail nets. Overall, the present results indicate that the microclimatic changes brought about by colored hail nets are sufficient to enhance the vegetative growth and induce the 'shade avoidance syndrome', but do not appear to affect the leaf cuticular properties.

microclimate: !has no impact on! leaf micromorphology 
microclimate: !has no impact on! amount of cuticular wax 
microclimate: !has no impact on! leaf thickness 
microclimate: !has no impact on! permeability for calcium 
cultivars: !differ in! leaf wax synthesis 
cultivars: !differ in! cuticular penetration of calcium 
hail nets: !reduce by 6-10%! light and humidity 
hail nets: !insufficient to influence! surface properties of apple leaves 
hail nets: !insufficient to influence! permeability of cuticles 
hail nets: !sufficient to enhance! vegetative growth 
hail nets: !sufficient to induce! 'shade avoidance syndrome'