['20403182', 'BACKGROUND: Proline (Pro) accumulation is a widespread response of prokaryotic  and eukaryotic cells subjected to osmotic stress or dehydration. When the cells  are released from stress, Pro is degraded to glutamate by Pro-dehydrogenase  (ProDH) and Pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (P5CDH), which are both  mitochondrial enzymes in eukaryotes. While P5CDH is a single copy gene in  Arabidopsis, two ProDH genes have been identified in the genome. Until now, only  ProDH1 (At3g30775) had been functionally characterised. RESULTS: We demonstrate  vasculature specific expression of the Arabidopsis ProDH2 gene (At5g38710) as  well as enzymatic activity and mitochondrial localisation of the encoded protein.  Expression levels of ProDH2 are generally low, but increased in senescent leaves  and in the abscission zone of floral organs. While sucrose represses ProDH2  expression, Pro and NaCl were identified as inducers. Endogenous ProDH2  expression was not able to overcome Pro sensitivity of ProDH1 mutants, but  overexpression of a GFP-tagged form of ProDH2 enabled the utilisation of Pro as  single nitrogen source for growth. Amongst two intronic insertion mutants, one  was identified as a null allele, whereas the other still produced native ProDH2  transcripts. CONCLUSIONS: Arabidopsis possesses two functional ProDHs, which have  non-redundant, although partially overlapping physiological functions. The two  ProDH isoforms differ with respect to spatial, developmental and environmental  regulation of expression. While ProDH1 appears to be the dominant isoform under  most conditions and in most tissues, ProDH2 was specifically upregulated during  salt stress, when ProDH1 was repressed. The characterisation of ProDH2 as a  functional gene requires a careful re-analysis of mutants with a deletion of  ProDH1, which were so far considered to be devoid of ProDH activity. We  hypothesise that ProDH2 plays an important role in Pro homeostasis in the  vasculature, especially under stress conditions that promote Pro accumulation.', '2010 Apr 19', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-10-70', 'Muller']

ProDH1: !dominates! most conditions
ProDH2: !upregulated during! salt stress
ProDH2: !repressed by! sucrose
ProDH2: !induces! Pro and NaCl
ProDH2: !plays role in! Pro homeostasis
ProDH1: !overcome by! ProDH2 overexpression