['20409007', 'WRKY transcription factors play a central role in transcriptional reprogramming  associated with plant immune responses. However, due to functional redundancy,  typically the contribution of individual members of this family to immunity is  only subtle. Using microarray analysis, we found that the paralogous tomato WRKY  genes SlWRKY72a and b are transcriptionally up-regulated during disease  resistance mediated by the R gene Mi-1. Virus-induced gene silencing of these two  genes in tomato resulted in a clear reduction of Mi-1-mediated resistance as well  as basal defense against root-knot nematodes (RKN) and potato aphids. Using  Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion mutants, we found that their Arabidopsis ortholog,  AtWRKY72, is also required for full basal defense against RKN as well as to the  oomycete Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis. Despite their similar roles in basal  defense against RKN in both tested plant species, WRKY72-type transcription  factors in tomato, but not in Arabidopsis, clearly contributed to basal defense  against the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae. Of the five R genes that we  tested in tomato and Arabidopsis, only Mi-1 appeared to be dependent on  WRKY72-type transcription factors. Interestingly, AtWRKY72 target genes,  identified by microarray analysis of H. arabidopsidis-triggered transcriptional  changes, appear to be largely non-responsive to analogs of the defense hormone  salicylic acid (SA). Thus, similarly to Mi-1, which in part acts independently of  SA, AtWRKY72 appears to utilize SA-independent defense mechanisms. We propose  that WRKY72-type transcription factors play a partially conserved role in basal  defense in tomato and Arabidopsis, a function that has been recruited to serve  Mi-1-dependent immunity.', '2010 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04232.x', 'Eulgem']

SlWRKY72a/b: !up-regulate! Mi-1 
AtWRKY72: !required for! basal defense against RKN 
AtWRKY72: !target genes of! H. arabidopsidis 
AtWRKY72: !non-responsive to! SA analogs 
Mi-1: !dependent on! WRKY72-type transcription factors