['20405311', 'Although several types of plant cells retain the competence to enter into  embryonic development without fertilization, the molecular mechanism(s)  underlying ectopic embryogenesis is largely unknown. To gain insight into this  mechanism, in a previous study we identified 136 ESTs specifically expressed in  microspore embryogenesis of Brassica napus. Here, we describe the  characterization of the Arabidopsis EMBRYOMAKER (EMK) gene, which is homologous  to one of the identified Brassica ESTs (BnGemb-58) and encodes an AP2 domain  transcription factor. The AtEMK was expressed in developing and mature embryos,  but its rapid disappearance occurred during germination. After germination, the  expression of AtEMK was found in the root apical meristem and the distal parts of  cotyledons. Although a mutant lacking AtEMK exhibited no distinctive defects in  the embryo, ectopic expression of AtEMK induced embryo-like structures from  cotyledons. The embryo-like structures contained high concentration of lipids,  expressed several embryo-specific genes, and could convert into independent  plants, indicating that the structures are somatic embryos. In vitro culture,  AtEMK enhanced the efficiency of somatic embryogenesis. Furthermore, ectopic  expression of AtEMK caused the formation of trichomes on cotyledons,  dedifferentiated several tissues into calli, and retarded root development,  demonstrating that AtEMK is harmful for the normal development of plants after  germination. From these results, we conclude that the AtEMK is a key player to  maintain embryonic identity, and the rapid disappearance of AtEMK expression  during germination is essential for the developmental transition between the  embryonic and vegetative phases in plants.', '2010 Jul', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-010-9634-3', 'Takahata']

AtEMK: !enhances! somatic embryogenesis 
AtEMK: !induces! embryo-like structures 
AtEMK: !expresses! embryo-specific genes 
AtEMK: !dedifferentiates! tissues into calli 
AtEMK: !retards! root development