PSK-alpha is a disulfated peptide that acts as a growth factor in plants. PSK-alpha is derived from preproproteins which are encoded by five PSK precursor genes in Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh and is perceived by leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases. Arabidopsis has two PSK receptor genes, PSKR1 and PSKR2. Although ligand and receptor are well characterized, the biological functions of PSK signaling are not well understood. Using reporter lines and receptor knockout mutants of Arabidopsis, a role for PSK signaling in biotic interactions and in wounding was analyzed. Treatment of Arabidopsis leaves with the fungal elicitor E-Fol, or the fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicicola and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum resulted in induction of PSK2 and PSKR1 as shown by promoter:GUS analysis. Wounding of hypocotyls or leaves induced PSK3:GUS, PSK5:GUS and PSKR1:GUS expression indicating that PSK precursor genes are differentially regulated in response to specific stresses. The receptor knockout lines pskr1-3 and pskr2-1 showed significantly reduced photosynthesis in response to the fungal elicitor E-Fol which indicates that fungal defence is impaired. pskr1-3 plants further showed reduced growth of crown galls after infection with Agrobacterium tumefaciens. A role for PSK signaling in Agrobacterium tumefaciens tumor growth was supported by the finding that PSK precursor genes and PSKR1 are expressed in crown galls. Overall, the results indicate that PSK signaling may play a previously undescribed role in pathogen or herbivore interactions and is crucial for Agrobacterium-induced cell proliferation in crown gall formation.

PSK-alpha: !derived from! preproteins 
preproteins: !encoded by! PSK precursor genes 
PSK-alpha: !perceived by! leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases 
Arabidopsis: !has two! PSK receptor genes 
E-Fol: !induces! PSK2 and PSKR1 
wounding: !induces! PSK3, PSK5 and PSKR1 
pskr1-3: !shows reduced! photosynthesis 
pskr1-3: !shows reduced! growth of crown galls 
PSK signaling: !plays a role in! pathogen or herbivore interactions 
PSK signaling: !crucial for! Agrobacterium-induced cell proliferation