['20429919', 'BACKGROUND: Cysteine is a component in organic compounds including glutathione  that have been implicated in the adaptation of plants to stresses. O-acetylserine  (thiol) lyase (OAS-TL) catalyses the final step of cysteine biosynthesis. OAS-TL  enzyme isoforms are localised in the cytoplasm, the plastids and mitochondria but  the contribution of individual OAS-TL isoforms to plant sulphur metabolism has  not yet been fully clarified. RESULTS: The seedling lethal phenotype of the  Arabidopsis onset of leaf death3-1 (old3-1) mutant is due to a point mutation in  the OAS-A1 gene, encoding the cytosolic OAS-TL. The mutation causes a single  amino acid substitution from Gly162 to Glu162, abolishing old3-1 OAS-TL activity  in vitro. The old3-1 mutation segregates as a monogenic semi-dominant trait when  backcrossed to its wild type accession Landsberg erecta (Ler-0) and the Di-2  accession. Consistent with its semi-dominant behaviour, wild type Ler-0 plants  transformed with the mutated old3-1 gene, displayed the early leaf death  phenotype. However, the old3-1 mutation segregates in an 11:4:1 (wild type:  semi-dominant: mutant) ratio when backcrossed to the Colombia-0 and Wassilewskija  accessions. Thus, the early leaf death phenotype depends on two semi-dominant  loci. The second locus that determines the old3-1 early leaf death phenotype is  referred to as odd-ler (for old3 determinant in the Ler accession) and is located  on chromosome 3. The early leaf death phenotype is temperature dependent and is  associated with increased expression of defence-response and oxidative-stress  marker genes. Independent of the presence of the odd-ler gene, OAS-A1 is involved  in maintaining sulphur and thiol levels and is required for resistance against  cadmium stress. CONCLUSIONS: The cytosolic OAS-TL is involved in maintaining  organic sulphur levels. The old3-1 mutation causes genome-dependent and  independent phenotypes and uncovers a novel function for the mutated OAS-TL in  cell death regulation.', '2010 Apr 29', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-10-80', 'Dijkwel']

OAS-TL: !catalyses! cysteine biosynthesis 
old3-1 mutation: !abolishes! OAS-TL activity 
old3-1 mutation: !segregates as! semi-dominant trait 
old3-1 mutation: !determines! early leaf death phenotype 
odd-ler gene: !located on! chromosome 3 
odd-ler gene: !determines! old3-1 early leaf death phenotype 
OAS-A1: !involved in! maintaining sulphur and thiol levels 
OAS-A1: !required for! resistance against cadmium stress