Plant sterols are structural components of cell membranes that provide rigidity, permeability, and regional identity to membranes. Sterols are also the precursors to the brassinosteroid signaling molecules. Evidence is accumulating that specific sterols have roles in pattern formation during development. COTYLEDON VASCULAR PATTERNING1 (CVP1) encodes C-24 STEROL METHYLTRANSFERASE2 (SMT2), one of three SMTs in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). SMT2 and SMT3, which also encodes a C-24 SMT, catalyze the reaction that distinguishes the synthesis of structural sterols from signaling brassinosteroid derivatives and are highly regulated. The deficiency of SMT2 in the cvp1 mutant results in moderate developmental defects, including aberrant cotyledon vein patterning, serrated floral organs, and reduced stature, but plants are viable, suggesting that SMT3 activity can substitute for the loss of SMT2. To test the distinct developmental roles of SMT2 and SMT3, we identified a transcript null smt3 mutant. Although smt3 single mutants appear wild type, cvp1 smt3 double mutants show enhanced defects relative to cvp1 mutants, such as discontinuous cotyledon vein pattern, and produce novel phenotypes, including defective root growth, loss of apical dominance, sterility, and homeotic floral transformations. These phenotypes are correlated with major alterations in the profiles of specific sterols but without significant alterations to brassinosteroid profiles. The alterations to sterol profiles in cvp1 mutants affect auxin response, demonstrated by weak auxin insensitivity, enhanced axr1 auxin resistance, ectopically expressed DR5:beta-glucuronidase in developing embryos, and defective response to auxin-inhibited PIN2-green fluorescent protein endocytosis. We discuss the developmental roles of sterols implied by these results.

CVP1: !encodes! SMT2 
SMT2: !catalyzes! synthesis of structural sterols 
SMT3: !substitutes for! SMT2 
cvp1 smt3 double mutants: !show enhanced defects! relative to cvp1 mutants 
cvp1 mutants: !affect auxin response! demonstrated by weak auxin insensitivity 
sterols: !alter! auxin response