['20442276', "Phloem Protein2 (PP2) is a component of the phloem protein bodies found in sieve  elements. We describe here the lectin properties of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) PP2-A1. Using a recombinant protein produced in Escherichia coli, we  demonstrated binding to N-acetylglucosamine oligomers. Glycan array screening  showed that PP2-A1 also bound to high-mannose N-glycans and  9-acyl-N-acetylneuraminic sialic acid. Fluorescence spectroscopy-based titration  experiments revealed that PP2-A1 had two classes of binding site for  N,N',N''-triacetylchitotriose, a low-affinity site and a high-affinity site,  promoting the formation of protein dimers. A search for structural similarities  revealed that PP2-A1 aligned with the Cbm4 and Cbm22-2 carbohydrate-binding  modules, leading to the prediction of a beta-strand structure for its conserved  domain. We investigated whether PP2-A1 interacted with phloem sap glycoproteins  by first characterizing abundant Arabidopsis phloem sap proteins by liquid  chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Then we demonstrated that PP2-A1 bound  to several phloem sap proteins and that this binding was not completely abolished  by glycosidase treatment. As many plant lectins have insecticidal activity, we  also assessed the effect of PP2-A1 on weight gain and survival in aphids. Unlike  other mannose-binding lectins, when added to an artificial diet, recombinant  PP2-A1 had no insecticidal properties against Acyrthosiphon pisum and Myzus  persicae. However, at mid-range concentrations, the protein affected weight gain  in insect nymphs. These results indicate the presence in PP2-A1 of several  carbohydrate-binding sites, with potentially different functions in the  trafficking of endogenous proteins or in interactions with phloem-feeding  insects.", '2010 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.153882', 'Dinant']

PP2-A1: !binds to! N-acetylglucosamine oligomers 
PP2-A1: !binds to! high-mannose N-glycans 
PP2-A1: !binds to! 9-acyl-N-acetylneuraminic sialic acid 
PP2-A1: !aligns with! Cbm4 and Cbm22-2 carbohydrate-binding modules 
PP2-A1: !interacts with! phloem sap glycoproteins 
PP2-A1: !affects! weight gain in insect nymphs