['20444210', 'Flavonoids are widely distributed in plants and play important roles in human and  animal health and nutrition. Model plants with discernible flavonoid phenotypes,  such as Arabidopsis seed patterning lines, are valuable tools that can provide  avenues for understanding flavonoid and proanthocyanidin accumulation patterns in  crops. Here, we characterize the GARP family gene, KAN4, which earlier was known  for its role in defining the boundary of the seed integument layers in  Arabidopsis. In this report, KAN4 is shown to broadly control the flavonoid  pathway in Arabidopsis seed. Loss-of-function T-DNA mutants show reduced  transcript abundance for most flavonoid and proanthocyanidin genes in young  siliques and decreased flavonols and variable proanthocyanidin content in mature  seed. KAN4 was localized to the nucleus and could specifically bind with  promoters of early and late flavonoid biosynthetic genes and PA regulatory genes.  Activated over-expression of KAN4 led to the discovery of the first novel  dominant Arabidopsis transparent testa mutant, sk21-D. Two KAN4 transcript splice  variants with identical MYB-like B-motifs were highly expressed in sk21-D and  equivalently designed activation atk4-OE lines. This extreme dual expression  resulted in large, light- and dark-coloured patches on seed coats of sk21-D and  atk4-OE lines, but not in non-activated over-expression lines. Flavonoid and  proanthocyanidin contents and transcript amounts for genes involved in flavonoid  biosynthesis also were reduced in KAN4 activation lines. These results confirm  that KAN4 is a regulatory protein which modulates the content of flavonols and PA  in Arabidopsis seeds.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Biotechnol J', '10.1111/j.1467-7652.2010.00525.x', 'Gruber']

KAN4: !controls! flavonoid pathway 
KAN4: !localizes to! nucleus 
KAN4: !binds with! promoters of flavonoid biosynthetic genes 
KAN4: !activates! over-expression 
sk21-D: !results from! KAN4 activation 
atk4-OE: !results from! KAN4 activation 
KAN4: !reduces! flavonoid and proanthocyanidin contents