To gain insight into variations in waterlogging responsiveness, net assimilation rate, stomatal conductance, emissions of isoprene and marker compounds of anoxic metabolism ethanol and acetaldehyde, and stress marker compounds nitric oxide (NO), volatile products of lipoxygenase (LOX) pathway and methanol were studied in seedlings of temperate deciduous tree species Alnus glutinosa, Populus tremula and Quercus rubra (from highest to lowest waterlogging tolerance) throughout sustained root zone waterlogging of up to three weeks. In all species, waterlogging initially resulted in reductions in net assimilation and stomatal conductance and enhanced emissions of ethanol, acetaldehyde, NO, LOX products and methanol, followed by full or partial recovery depending on process and species. Strong negative correlations between g(s) and internal NO concentration and NO flux, valid within and across species, were observed throughout the experiment. Isoprene emission capacity was not related to waterlogging tolerance. Less waterlogging tolerant species had greater reduction and smaller acclimation capacity in foliage physiological potentials, and larger emission bursts of volatile stress marker compounds. These data collectively provide encouraging evidence that emissions of volatile organics and NO can be used as quantitative measures of stress tolerance and acclimation kinetics in temperate trees.

waterlogging: !reduces! net assimilation rate
waterlogging: !reduces! stomatal conductance
waterlogging: !enhances! emissions of ethanol
waterlogging: !enhances! emissions of acetaldehyde
waterlogging: !enhances! emissions of NO
waterlogging: !enhances! emissions of LOX products
waterlogging: !enhances! emissions of methanol
g(s): !negatively correlates with! internal NO concentration
g(s): !negatively correlates with! NO flux
isoprene emission capacity: !not related to! waterlogging tolerance
less waterlogging tolerant species: !have greater reduction and smaller acclimation capacity in foliage physiological potentials!
less waterlogging tolerant species: !have larger emission bursts of volatile stress marker compounds!