The later steps of carotenoid biosynthesis involve the formation of cyclic carotenoids. The reaction is catalyzed by lycopene beta-cyclase (LCY-B), which converts lycopene into beta-carotene, and by capsanthin-capsorubin synthase (CCS), which is mainly dedicated to the synthesis of kappa-cyclic carotenoids (capsanthin and capsorubin) but also has LCY-B activity. Although the peptide sequences of plant LCY-Bs and CCS contain a putative dinucleotide-binding motif, it is believed that these two carotenoid cyclases proceed via protic activation and stabilization of resulting carbocation intermediates. Using pepper (Capsicum annuum) CCS as a prototypic carotenoid cyclase, we show that the monomeric protein contains one noncovalently bound flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) that is essential for enzyme activity only in the presence of NADPH, which functions as the FAD reductant. The reaction proceeds without transfer of hydrogen from the dinucleotide cofactors to beta-carotene or capsanthin. Using site-directed mutagenesis, amino acids potentially involved in the protic activation were identified. Substitutions of alanine, lysine, and arginine for glutamate-295 in the conserved 293-FLEET-297 motif of pepper CCS or LCY-B abolish the formation of beta-carotene and kappa-cyclic carotenoids. We also found that mutations of the equivalent glutamate-196 located in the 194-LIEDT-198 domain of structurally divergent bacterial LCY-B abolish the formation of beta-carotene. The data herein reveal plant carotenoid cyclases to be novel enzymes that combine characteristics of non-metal-assisted terpene cyclases with those attributes typically found in flavoenzymes that catalyze reactions, with no net redox, such as type 2 isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase. Thus, FAD in its reduced form could be implicated in the stabilization of the carbocation intermediate.

Lycopene beta-cyclase (LCY-B): !converts! lycopene 
Capsanthin-capsorubin synthase (CCS): !converts! lycopene 
FAD: !essential for! enzyme activity 
NADPH: !functions as! FAD reductant 
Glutamate-295: !involved in! protic activation 
Alanine, Lysine, Arginine: !substituted for! Glutamate-295 
Glutamate-196: !mutated in! structurally divergent bacterial LCY-B 
FAD: !implicated in! stabilization of carbocation intermediate