['20463021', 'Plant fatty acids can be completely degraded within the peroxisomes. Fatty acid  degradation plays a role in several plant processes including plant hormone  synthesis and seed germination. Two multifunctional peroxisomal isozymes, MFP2  and AIM1, both with 2-trans-enoyl-CoA hydratase and l-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA  dehydrogenase activities, function in mouse ear cress (Arabidopsis thaliana)  peroxisomal beta-oxidation, where fatty acids are degraded by the sequential  removal of two carbon units. A deficiency in either of the two isozymes gives  rise to a different phenotype; the biochemical and molecular background for these  differences is not known. Structure determination of Arabidopsis MFP2 revealed  that plant peroxisomal MFPs can be grouped into two families, as defined by a  specific pattern of amino acid residues in the flexible loop of the acyl-binding  pocket of the 2-trans-enoyl-CoA hydratase domain. This could explain the  differences in substrate preferences and specific biological functions of the two  isozymes. The in vitro substrate preference profiles illustrate that the  Arabidopsis AIM1 hydratase has a preference for short chain acyl-CoAs compared  with the Arabidopsis MFP2 hydratase. Remarkably, neither of the two was able to  catabolize enoyl-CoA substrates longer than 14 carbon atoms efficiently,  suggesting the existence of an uncharacterized long chain enoyl-CoA hydratase in  Arabidopsis peroxisomes.', '2010 Jul 30', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M110.106005', 'Henriksen']

MFP2: !functions in! mouse ear cress peroxisomal beta-oxidation
AIM1: !functions in! mouse ear cress peroxisomal beta-oxidation
MFP2: !belongs to! family of plant peroxisomal MFPs
AIM1: !belongs to! family of plant peroxisomal MFPs
MFP2: !has preference for! long chain acyl-CoAs
AIM1: !has preference for! short chain acyl-CoAs
MFP2: !differs from! AIM1 in substrate preferences and specific biological functions
Fatty acid degradation: !plays role in! plant hormone synthesis and seed germination