['20463025', 'A multistep two-component signaling system is established as a key element of  cytokinin signaling in Arabidopsis. Here, we provide evidence for a function of  the two-component signaling system in cold stress response in Arabidopsis. Cold  significantly induced the expression of a subset of A-type ARR genes and of GUS  in Pro(ARR7):GUS transgenic Arabidopsis. AHK2 and AHK3 were found to be primarily  involved in mediating cold to express A-type ARRs despite cytokinin deficiency.  Cold neither significantly induced AHK2 and AHK3 expression nor altered the  cytokinin contents of wild type within the 4 h during which the A-type ARR genes  exhibited peak expression in response to cold, indicating that cold might induce  ARR expression via the AHK2 and AHK3 proteins without alterations in cytokinin  levels. The ahk2 ahk3 and ahk3 ahk4 mutants exhibited enhanced freezing tolerance  compared with wild type. These ahk double mutants acclimated as efficiently to  cold as did wild type. The overexpression of the cold-inducible ARR7 in  Arabidopsis resulted in a hypersensitivity response to freezing temperatures  under cold-acclimated conditions. The expression of  C-repeat/dehydration-responsive element target genes was not affected by ARR7  overexpression as well as in ahk double mutants. By contrast, the arr7 mutants  showed increased freezing tolerance. The ahk2 ahk3 and arr7 mutants showed  hypersensitive response to abscisic acid (ABA) for germination, whereas ARR7  overexpression lines exhibited insensitive response to ABA. These results suggest  that AHK2 and AHK3 and the cold-inducible A-type ARRs play a negative regulatory  role in cold stress signaling via inhibition of ABA response, occurring  independently of the cold acclimation pathway.', '2010 Jul 23', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M109.096644', 'Kim']

AHK2: !mediates! cold 
AHK3: !mediates! cold 
ARR7: !induces! freezing tolerance 
AHK2: !inhibits! ABA response 
AHK3: !inhibits! ABA response 
ARR7: !inhibits! ABA response