['20463089', 'When attacked by insects, plants release mixtures of volatile compounds that are  beneficial for direct or indirect defense. Natural variation of volatile  emissions frequently occurs between and within plant species, but knowledge of  the underlying molecular mechanisms is limited. We investigated intraspecific  differences of volatile emissions induced from rosette leaves of 27 accessions of  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) upon treatment with coronalon, a jasmonate  mimic eliciting responses similar to those caused by insect feeding. Quantitative  variation was found for the emission of the monoterpene (E)-beta-ocimene, the  sesquiterpene (E,E)-alpha-farnesene, the irregular homoterpene  4,8,12-trimethyltridecatetra-1,3,7,11-ene, and the benzenoid compound methyl  salicylate. Differences in the relative emissions of (E)-beta-ocimene and  (E,E)-alpha-farnesene from accession Wassilewskija (Ws), a high-(E)-beta-ocimene  emitter, and accession Columbia (Col-0), a trace-(E)-beta-ocimene emitter, were  attributed to allelic variation of two closely related, tandem-duplicated terpene  synthase genes, TPS02 and TPS03. The Ws genome contains a functional allele of  TPS02 but not of TPS03, while the opposite is the case for Col-0. Recombinant  proteins of the functional Ws TPS02 and Col-0 TPS03 genes both showed  (E)-beta-ocimene and (E,E)-alpha-farnesene synthase activities. However,  differential subcellular compartmentalization of the two enzymes in plastids and  the cytosol was found to be responsible for the ecotype-specific differences in  (E)-beta-ocimene/(E,E)-alpha-farnesene emission. Expression of the functional  TPS02 and TPS03 alleles is induced in leaves by elicitor and insect treatment and  occurs constitutively in floral tissues. Our studies show that both  pseudogenization in the TPS family and subcellular segregation of functional TPS  enzymes control the variation and plasticity of induced volatile emissions in  wild plant species.', '2010 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.154864', 'Tholl']

TPS02: !affects! (E)-beta-ocimene emission 
TPS03: !affects! (E)-beta-ocimene emission 
TPS02: !localizes to! plastids 
TPS03: !localizes to! cytosol 
TPS02: !synthesizes! (E)-beta-ocimene 
TPS03: !synthesizes! (E)-beta-ocimene 
TPS02: !enhances! (E,E)-alpha-farnesene emission 
TPS03: !enhances! (E,E)-alpha-farnesene emission 
elicitor: !induces! expression of TPS02 and TPS03 
insect treatment: !induces! expression of TPS02 and TPS03