Nowadays it is accepted that natural flavonoids present in fruits and plant-derived-foods are relevant, not only for technological reasons and organoleptic properties, but also because of their potential health-promoting effects, as suggested by the available experimental and epidemiological evidence. The beneficial biological effects of these food bioactives may be driven by two of their characteristic properties: their affinity for proteins and their antioxidant activity. Over the last 15 years, numerous publications have demonstrated that besides their in vitro antioxidant capacity, certain phenolic compounds, such as anthocyanins, catechins, proanthocyanidins, and other non coloured flavonoids, may regulate different signaling pathways involved in cell survival, growth and differentiation. In this review we will update the knowledge on the cardiovascular effects of anthocyanins, catechins and proanthocyanidins, as implied by the in vitro and clinical studies on these compounds. We also review the available information on the structure, distribution and bioavailability of flavanols (monomeric catechins and proanthocyanidins) and anthocyanins, data necessary in order to understand their role in reducing risk factors and preventing cardiovascular health problems through different aspects of their bioefficacy on vascular parameters (platelet agregation, atherosclerosis, blood pressure, antioxidant status, inflammation-related markers, etc.), myocardial conditions, and whole-body metabolism (serum biochemistry, lipid profile), highlighting the need for better-designed clinical studies to improve the current knowledge on the potential health benefits of these flavonoids to cardiovascular and metabolic health.

anthocyanins: !affect! cardiovascular health
catechins: !affect! cardiovascular health
proanthocyanidins: !affect! cardiovascular health
flavanols: !localize to! fruits and plant-derived-foods
anthocyanins: !localize to! fruits and plant-derived-foods
catechins: !localize to! fruits and plant-derived-foods
proanthocyanidins: !localize to! fruits and plant-derived-foods
flavanols: !interact with! proteins
anthocyanins: !interact with! proteins
catechins: !interact with! proteins
proanthocyanidins: !interact with! proteins
flavanols: !enhance! antioxidant activity
anthocyanins: !enhance! antioxidant activity
catechins: !enhance! antioxidant activity
proanthocyanidins: !enhance! antioxidant activity
flavanols: !repress! risk factors
anthocyanins: !repress! risk factors
catechins: !repress! risk factors
proanthocyanidins: !repress! risk factors