['20488898', "We previously showed that the VASCULAR-RELATED NAC-DOMAIN6 (VND6) and VND7 genes,  which encode NAM/ATAF/CUC domain protein transcription factors, act as key  regulators of xylem vessel differentiation. Here, we report a  glucocorticoid-mediated posttranslational induction system of VND6 and VND7. In  this system, VND6 or VND7 is expressed as a fused protein with the activation  domain of the herpes virus VP16 protein and hormone-binding domain of the animal  glucocorticoid receptor, and the protein's activity is induced by treatment with  dexamethasone (DEX), a glucocorticoid derivative. Upon DEX treatment, transgenic  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants carrying the chimeric gene exhibited  transdifferentiation of various types of cells into xylem vessel elements, and  the plants died. Many genes involved in xylem vessel differentiation, such as  secondary wall biosynthesis and programmed cell death, were up-regulated in these  plants after DEX treatment. Chemical analysis showed that xylan, a major  hemicellulose component of the dicot secondary cell wall, was increased in the  transgenic plants after DEX treatment. This induction system worked in poplar  (Populus tremula x tremuloides) trees and in suspension cultures of cells from  Arabidopsis and tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum); more than 90% of the tobacco BY-2  cells expressing VND7-VP16-GR transdifferentiated into xylem vessel elements  after DEX treatment. These data demonstrate that the induction systems  controlling VND6 and VND7 activities can be used as powerful tools for  understanding xylem cell differentiation.", '2010 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.154013', 'Demura']

VND6: !regulates! xylem vessel differentiation 
VND7: !regulates! xylem vessel differentiation 
VND6/VND7: !expressed as! fused protein 
fused protein: !contains! activation domain of herpes virus VP16 & hormone-binding domain of glucocorticoid receptor 
glucocorticoid derivative: !induces! activity of VND6/VND7 
transgenic Arabidopsis plants: !exhibit! transdifferentiation of cells into xylem vessel elements 
genes involved in xylem vessel differentiation: !up-regulated! after DEX treatment 
xylan: !increased! in transgenic plants after DEX treatment 
induction system: !works in! poplar trees & suspension cultures of Arabidopsis & tobacco cells 
induction systems: !used as! powerful tools for understanding xylem cell differentiation