Chlamydomonas (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) exhibits several responses following exposure to sulfur (S)-deprivation conditions, including an increased efficiency of import and assimilation of the sulfate anion (SO(4)(2-)). Aspects of SO(4)(2-) transport during S-replete and S-depleted conditions were previously studied, although the transporters had not been functionally identified. We employed a reverse genetics approach to identify putative SO(4)(2-) transporters, examine their regulation, establish their biogenesis and subcellular locations, and explore their functionality. Upon S starvation of wild-type Chlamydomonas cells, the accumulation of transcripts encoding the putative SO(4)(2-) transporters SLT1 (for SAC1-like transporter 1), SLT2, and SULTR2 markedly increased, suggesting that these proteins function in high-affinity SO(4)(2-) transport. The Chlamydomonas sac1 and snrk2.1 mutants (defective for acclimation to S deprivation) exhibited much less of an increase in the levels of SLT1, SLT2, and SULTR2 transcripts and their encoded proteins in response to S deprivation compared with wild-type cells. All three transporters were localized to the plasma membrane, and their rates of turnover were significantly impacted by S availability; the turnover of SLT1 and SLT2 was proteasome dependent, while that of SULTR2 was proteasome independent. Finally, mutants identified for each of the S-deprivation-responsive transporters were used to establish their critical role in the transport of SO(4)(2-) into S-deprived cells.

SLT1: !increases in! S-deprived Chlamydomonas cells
SLT2: !increases in! S-deprived Chlamydomonas cells
SULTR2: !increases in! S-deprived Chlamydomonas cells
SLT1: !localizes to! plasma membrane
SLT2: !localizes to! plasma membrane
SULTR2: !localizes to! plasma membrane
SLT1: !turnover is! proteasome dependent
SLT2: !turnover is! proteasome dependent
SULTR2: !turnover is! proteasome independent
SLT1: !functions in! SO4 transport
SLT2: !functions in! SO4 transport
SULTR2: !functions in! SO4 transport