The molecular mechanisms responsible for selenium (Se) tolerance and hyperaccumulation were studied in the Se hyperaccumulator Stanleya pinnata (Brassicaceae) by comparing it with the related secondary Se accumulator Stanleya albescens using a combination of physiological, structural, genomic, and biochemical approaches. S. pinnata accumulated 3.6-fold more Se and was tolerant to 20 microm selenate, while S. albescens suffered reduced growth, chlorosis and necrosis, impaired photosynthesis, and high levels of reactive oxygen species. Levels of ascorbic acid, glutathione, total sulfur, and nonprotein thiols were higher in S. pinnata, suggesting that Se tolerance may in part be due to increased antioxidants and up-regulated sulfur assimilation. S. pinnata had higher selenocysteine methyltransferase protein levels and, judged from liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, mainly accumulated the free amino acid methylselenocysteine, while S. albescens accumulated mainly the free amino acid selenocystathionine. S. albescens leaf x-ray absorption near-edge structure scans mainly detected a carbon-Se-carbon compound (presumably selenocystathionine) in addition to some selenocysteine and selenate. Thus, S. albescens may accumulate more toxic forms of Se in its leaves than S. pinnata. The species also showed different leaf Se sequestration patterns: while S. albescens showed a diffuse pattern, S. pinnata sequestered Se in localized epidermal cell clusters along leaf margins and tips, concentrated inside of epidermal cells. Transcript analyses of S. pinnata showed a constitutively higher expression of genes involved in sulfur assimilation, antioxidant activities, defense, and response to (methyl)jasmonic acid, salicylic acid, or ethylene. The levels of some of these hormones were constitutively elevated in S. pinnata compared with S. albescens, and leaf Se accumulation was slightly enhanced in both species when these hormones were supplied. Thus, defense-related phytohormones may play an important signaling role in the Se hyperaccumulation of S. pinnata, perhaps by constitutively up-regulating sulfur/Se assimilation followed by methylation of selenocysteine and the targeted sequestration of methylselenocysteine.

Stanleya pinnata: !accumulates! 3.6-fold more Se
Stanleya albescens: !suffers! reduced growth
Stanleya pinnata: !has higher levels of! ascorbic acid, glutathione, total sulfur, and nonprotein thiols
Stanleya pinnata: !has higher levels of! selenocysteine methyltransferase protein
Stanleya albescens: !accumulates mainly! free amino acid selenocystathionine
Stanleya albescens: !detects mainly! carbon-Se-carbon compound
Stanleya albescens: !shows! diffuse pattern of Se sequestration
Stanleya pinnata: !shows! localized epidermal cell clusters for Se sequestration
Stanleya pinnata: !constitutively expresses! genes involved in sulfur assimilation, antioxidant activities, defense, and response to hormones
Stanleya pinnata: !constitutively has higher levels of! hormones
Stanleya pinnata/albescens: !enhanced leaf Se accumulation! when hormones supplied