['20501910', 'The process of dark-induced senescence in plants is relatively poorly understood,  but a functional electron-transfer flavoprotein/electron-transfer  flavoprotein:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (ETF/ETFQO) complex, which supports  respiration during carbon starvation, has recently been identified. Here, we  studied the responses of Arabidopsis thaliana mutants deficient in the expression  of isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and 2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase to extended  darkness and other environmental stresses. Evaluations of the mutant phenotypes  following carbon starvation induced by extended darkness identify similarities to  those exhibited by mutants of the ETF/ETFQO complex. Metabolic profiling and  isotope tracer experimentation revealed that isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase is  involved in degradation of the branched-chain amino acids, phytol, and Lys, while  2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase is involved exclusively in Lys degradation.  These results suggest that isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase is the more critical for  alternative respiration and that a series of enzymes, including  2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase, plays a role in Lys degradation. Both  physiological and metabolic phenotypes of the isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and  2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase mutants were not as severe as those observed for  mutants of the ETF/ETFQO complex, indicating some functional redundancy of the  enzymes within the process. Our results aid in the elucidation of the pathway of  plant Lys catabolism and demonstrate that both isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and  2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase act as electron donors to the ubiquinol pool via  an ETF/ETFQO-mediated route.', '2010 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.110.075630', 'Fernie']

ETF/ETFQO: !supports! respiration 
isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase: !degrades! branched-chain amino acids, phytol, and Lys 
2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase: !degrades! Lys 
isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase: !more critical for! alternative respiration 
2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase: !plays a role in! Lys degradation 
isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase: !acts as electron donor to! ubiquinol pool 
2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase: !acts as electron donor to! ubiquinol pool