Cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) is a root crop that accumulates large quantities of starch, and it is an important source of carbohydrate. Study on gene expressions during storage root development provides important information on storage root formation and starch accumulation as well as unlock new traits for improving of starch yield. cDNA-Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP) was used to compare gene expression profiles in fibrous and storage roots of cassava cultivar Kasetsart 50. Total of 155 differentially expressed transcript-derived fragments with undetectable or low expression in leaves were characterized and classified into 11 groups regarding to their functions. The four major groups were no similarity (20%), hypothetical or unknown proteins (17%), cellular metabolism and biosynthesis (17%) and cellular communication and signaling (14%). Interestingly, sulfite reductase (MeKD82), calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) (MeKD83), ent-kaurene synthase (KS) (MeKD106) and hexose transporter (HT) (MeKD154) showed root-specific expression patterns. This finding is consistent with previously reported genes involved in the initiation of potato tuber. Semi-quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction of early-developed root samples confirmed that those four genes exhibited significant expression with similar pattern in the storage root initiation and early developmental stages. We proposed that KS and HT may involve in transient induction of CDPK expression, which may play an important role in the signaling pathway of storage root initiation. Sulfite reductase, on the other hand, may involve in storage root development by facilitating sulfur-containing protein biosynthesis or detoxifying the cyanogenic glucoside content through aspartate biosynthesis.

MeKD82: !enhances! Sulfite reductase
MeKD83: !enhances! Calcium-dependent protein kinase
MeKD106: !enhances! Ent-kaurene synthase
MeKD154: !enhances! Hexose transporter
CDPK: !enhances! Storage root initiation
Sulfite reductase: !enhances! Protein biosynthesis/detoxification