During plant sexual reproduction, pollen germination and tube growth require development under tight spatial and temporal control for the proper delivery of the sperm cells to the ovules. Pollen tubes are fast growing tip-polarized cells able to perceive multiple guiding signals emitted by the female organ. Adhesion of pollen tubes via cell wall molecules may be part of the battery of signals. In order to study these processes, we investigated the cell wall characteristics of in vitro-grown Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) pollen tubes using a combination of immunocytochemical and biochemical techniques. Results showed a well-defined localization of cell wall epitopes. Low esterified homogalacturonan epitopes were found mostly in the pollen tube wall back from the tip. Xyloglucan and arabinan from rhamnogalacturonan I epitopes were detected along the entire tube within the two wall layers and the outer wall layer, respectively. In contrast, highly esterified homogalacturonan and arabinogalactan protein epitopes were found associated predominantly with the tip region. Chemical analysis of the pollen tube cell wall revealed an important content of arabinosyl residues (43%) originating mostly from (1-->5)-alpha-L-arabinan, the side chains of rhamnogalacturonan I. Finally, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry analysis of endo-glucanase-sensitive xyloglucan showed mass spectra with two dominant oligosaccharides (XLXG/XXLG and XXFG), both being mono O-acetylated, and accounting for over 68% of the total ion signals. These findings demonstrate that the Arabidopsis pollen tube wall has its own characteristics compared with other cell types in the Arabidopsis sporophyte. These structural features are discussed in terms of pollen tube cell wall biosynthesis and growth dynamics.

Cell wall: !localizes to! Pollen tube 
Cell wall: !contains! Arabinosyl residues 
Cell wall: !comprises of! Low esterified homogalacturonan epitopes 
Cell wall: !comprises of! Xyloglucan and arabinan from rhamnogalacturonan I epitopes 
Cell wall: !comprises of! Highly esterified homogalacturonan and arabinogalactan protein epitopes 
Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry: !detects! Mono O-acetylated oligosaccharides