The FAD7 gene encodes a omega3 fatty acid desaturase which catalyses the production of trienoic fatty acids (TAs) in plant chloroplasts. A novel GmFAD7 gene (named GmFAD7-2) has been identified in soybean, with high homology to the previously annotated GmFAD7 gene. Genomic sequencing analysis together with searches at the soybean genome database further confirmed that both GmFAD7 genes were located in two different loci within the soybean genome, suggesting that the soybean omega3 plastidial desaturase FAD7 is encoded by two different paralogous genes. Both GmFAD7-1 and GmFAD7-2 genes were expressed in all soybean tissues examined, displaying their highest mRNA accumulation in leaves. This expression profile contrasted with GmFAD3A and GmFAD3B mRNA accumulation, which was very low in this tissue. These results suggested a concerted control of plastidial and reticular omega3 desaturase gene expression in soybean mature leaves. Analysis of GmFAD7 protein distribution in different soybean tissues showed that, in mature leaves, two bands were detected, coincident with the higher expression level of both GmFAD7 genes and the highest 18:3 fatty acid accumulation. By contrast, in seeds, where FAD7 activity is low, specific GmFAD7 protein conformations were observed. These GmFAD7 protein conformations were affected in vitro by changes in the redox conditions of thiol groups and iron availability. These results suggest the existence of tissue-specific post-translational regulatory mechanisms affecting the distribution and conformation of the FAD7 enzymes related with the control of its activity.

GmFAD7-1: !localizes to! soybean genome 
GmFAD7-2: !localizes to! soybean genome 
GmFAD7-1: !expressed in! all soybean tissues 
GmFAD7-2: !expressed in! all soybean tissues 
GmFAD7-1: !highest expression in! leaves 
GmFAD7-2: !highest expression in! leaves 
GmFAD3A: !low expression in! leaves 
GmFAD3B: !low expression in! leaves 
GmFAD7 protein: !distributed in! different soybean tissues 
GmFAD7 protein: !affected by! redox conditions of thiol groups and iron availability