Strategies such as foliar application of antitranspirants have the potential to regulate transpiration, but often, the limitation of CO(2) exchange as a result of reduced stomatal conductance can impair this beneficial effect. Elevated ambient [CO(2)] could significantly improve CO(2) diffusion while effectively reducing transpiration. In this experiment, we examined the response of sweet pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) to the foliar application of antitranspirant (AT) under two [CO(2)] (380 and 2000 micromol mol(-1)) and two drought intensities (4 or 8d without irrigation). The results showed that stomatal conductance and transpiration were reduced, while AT impaired photosynthesis at standard, but not at elevated [CO(2)] of fully irrigated plants. This effect was already apparent after 4d of drought. Drought had a minor impact on chlorophyll fluorescence (F(v)/F(m)). Additionally, root respiration was increased at elevated [CO(2)] but, after 8d of drought, it was higher for plants treated with AT than for non-sprayed plants. Leaf water potential was affected more by drought at ambient compared to elevated [CO(2)], and, especially after 8d of drought, AT minimized the reductions in leaf water potential. Leaf concentrations of proline and starch were affected by both [CO(2)] and AT, especially after 8d of drought. Moreover, increasing [CO(2)] promoted the accumulation of starch, but led to decreases in the tissue concentrations of the soluble organic osmolytes, and hence diminished osmotic adjustment after 8d of water withholding, relative to ambient [CO(2)]. This study indicates that, in addition to the reported beneficial effect of elevated [CO(2)] on drought stress, AT could significantly improve drought tolerance in sweet pepper plants.

AT: !impairs! Photosynthesis
AT: !minimizes! Reduction in Leaf Water Potential
CO2: !improves! CO2 Diffusion
CO2: !promotes! Accumulation of Starch
Drought: !reduces! Stomatal Conductance
Drought: !affects! Chlorophyll Fluorescence
Drought: !increases! Root Respiration
Drought: !diminishes! Osmotic Adjustment