While it is well established that reactive oxygen species can induce cell death, intracellularly generated oxidative stress does not induce lesions in the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) photorespiratory mutant cat2 when plants are grown in short days (SD). One interpretation of this observation is that a function necessary to couple peroxisomal hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2))-triggered oxidative stress to cell death is only operative in long days (LD). Like lesion formation, pathogenesis-related genes and camalexin were only induced in cat2 in LD, despite less severe intracellular redox perturbation compared with SD. Lesion formation triggered by peroxisomal H(2)O(2) was modified by introducing secondary mutations into the cat2 background and was completely absent in cat2 sid2 double mutants, in which ISOCHORISMATE SYNTHASE1 (ICS1) activity is defective. In addition to H(2)O(2)-induced salicylic acid (SA) accumulation, the sid2 mutation in ICS1 abolished a range of LD-dependent pathogen responses in cat2, while supplementation of cat2 with SA in SD activated these responses. Nontargeted transcript and metabolite profiling identified clusters of genes and small molecules associated with the daylength-dependent ICS1-mediated relay of H(2)O(2) signaling. The effect of oxidative stress in cat2 on resistance to biotic challenge was dependent on both growth daylength and ICS1. We conclude that (1) lesions induced by intracellular oxidative stress originating in the peroxisomes can be genetically reverted; (2) the isochorismate pathway of SA synthesis couples intracellular oxidative stress to cell death and associated disease resistance responses; and (3) camalexin accumulation was strictly dependent on the simultaneous presence of both H(2)O(2) and SA signals.

cat2: !induces! cell death
cat2: !induces! pathogenesis-related genes
cat2: !induces! camalexin
sid2: !abolishes! H(2)O(2)-induced salicylic acid accumulation
sid2: !abolishes! range of LD-dependent pathogen responses
sid2: !abolishes! resistance to biotic challenge
H(2)O(2): !triggers! oxidative stress
H(2)O(2): !couples to! cell death
H(2)O(2): !couples to! SA synthesis
SA: !activates! pathogen responses
SA: !activates! resistance to biotic challenge