['20547563', "Sulphur is an essential element for plant growth and development as well as for  defence against biotic and abiotic stresses. Increasing sulphate utilization  efficiency (SUE) is an important issue for crop improvement. Little is known  about the genetic determinants of sulphate utilization efficiency. No  gain-of-function mutants with improved SUE have been reported to date. Here the  isolation and characterization of two low-sulphur-tolerant mutants, sue3 and sue4  are reported using a high-throughput genetic screen where a 'sulphur-free' solid  medium was devised to give the selection pressure necessary to suppress the  growth of the wild-type seedlings. Both mutants showed improved tolerance to low  sulphur conditions and well-developed root systems. The mutant phenotype of both  sue3 and sue4 was specific to sulphate deficiency and the mutants displayed  enhanced tolerance to heavy metal and oxidative stress. Genetic analysis revealed  that sue3 was caused by a single recessive nuclear mutation while sue4 was caused  by a single dominant nuclear mutation. The recessive locus in sue3 is the  previously identified VirE2-interacting Protein 1. The dominant locus in sue4 is  a function-unknown locus activated by the four enhancers on the T-DNA. The  function of SUE3 and SUE4 in low sulphur tolerance was confirmed either by  multiple mutant alleles or by recapitulation analysis. Taken together, our  results demonstrate that this genetic screen is a reasonable approach to isolate  Arabidopsis mutants with improved low sulphur tolerance and potentially with  enhanced sulphate utilization efficiency. The two loci identified in sue3 and  sue4 should assist in understanding the molecular mechanisms of low sulphur  tolerance.", '2010 Jul', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erq161', 'Xiang']

Sulphur: !essential for! Plant growth and development 
Sulphur: !increases! Sulphate utilization efficiency 
High-throughput genetic screen: !isolates! Low-sulphur-tolerant mutants 
Mutants: !show! Improved tolerance to low sulphur conditions 
Mutants: !display! Enhanced tolerance to heavy metal and oxidative stress 
VirE2-interacting Protein 1: !causes! Recessive locus in sue3 
Function-unknown locus: !activated by! Four enhancers on the T-DNA 
Multiple mutant alleles: !confirm! Function of SUE3 and SUE4 in low sulphur tolerance