Fruits of tomato plants carrying the high pigment-1 mutations hp-1 and hp-1(w) are characterized by an increased number of plastids coupled with enhanced levels of functional metabolites. Unfortunately, hp-1 mutant plants are also typified by light-dependent retardation in seedling and whole-plant growth and development, which limits their cultivation. These mutations were mapped to the gene encoding UV-DAMAGED DNA BINDING PROTEIN 1 (DDB1) and, recently, fruit-specific RNA interference studies have demonstrated an increased number of plastids and enhanced carotenoid accumulation in the transgenic tomato fruits. However, whole-plant overexpression of DDB1, required to substantiate its effects on seedling and plant development and to couple them with fruit phenotypes, has heretofore been unsuccessful. In this study, five transgenic lines constitutively overexpressing normal DDB1 in hp-1 mutant plants were analysed. Eleven-day-old seedlings, representing these lines, displayed up to approximately 73- and approximately 221-fold overexpression of the gene in hypocotyls and cotyledons, respectively. This overexpression resulted in statistically significant reversion to the non-mutant developmental phenotypes, including more than a full quantitative reversion. This reversion of phenotypes was generally accompanied by correlated responses in chlorophyll accumulation and altered expression of selected light signalling genes: PHYTOCHROME A, CRYPTOCHROME 1, ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5, and the gene encoding CHLOROPHYLL A/B-BINDING PROTEIN 4. Cumulatively, these results provide the missing link between DDB1 and its effects on tomato plant development.

DDB1: !affects! Seedling and plant development 
hp-1 mutant plants: !carry! DDB1 mutations 
DDB1: !overexpresses in! hp-1 mutant plants 
DDB1 overexpression: !reverts! Mutant phenotypes 
DDB1 overexpression: !correlates with! Chlorophyll accumulation 
PHYTOCHROME A, CRYPTOCHROME 1, ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5, CHLOROPHYLL A/B-BINDING PROTEIN 4: !respond to! DDB1 overexpression