['20562230', 'Genetic evidence in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) suggests that the auxin  precursor indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) is converted into active indole-3-acetic  acid (IAA) by peroxisomal beta-oxidation; however, direct evidence that  Arabidopsis converts IBA to IAA is lacking, and the role of IBA-derived IAA is  not well understood. In this work, we directly demonstrated that Arabidopsis  seedlings convert IBA to IAA. Moreover, we found that several IBA-resistant,  IAA-sensitive mutants were deficient in IBA-to-IAA conversion, including the  indole-3-butyric acid response1 (ibr1) ibr3 ibr10 triple mutant, which is  defective in three enzymes likely to be directly involved in peroxisomal IBA  beta-oxidation. In addition to IBA-to-IAA conversion defects, the ibr1 ibr3 ibr10  triple mutant displayed shorter root hairs and smaller cotyledons than wild type;  these cell expansion defects are suggestive of low IAA levels in certain tissues.  Consistent with this possibility, we could rescue the ibr1 ibr3 ibr10  short-root-hair phenotype with exogenous auxin. A triple mutant defective in  hydrolysis of IAA-amino acid conjugates, a second class of IAA precursor,  displayed reduced hypocotyl elongation but normal cotyledon size and only  slightly reduced root hair lengths. Our data suggest that IBA beta-oxidation and  IAA-amino acid conjugate hydrolysis provide auxin for partially distinct  developmental processes and that IBA-derived IAA plays a major role in driving  root hair and cotyledon cell expansion during seedling development.', '2010 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.157461', 'Bartel']

IBA: !converts to! IAA 
Arabidopsis: !converts! IBA 
ibr1 ibr3 ibr10 triple mutant: !deficient in! IBA-to-IAA conversion 
ibr1 ibr3 ibr10 triple mutant: !displays! shorter root hairs 
ibr1 ibr3 ibr10 triple mutant: !displays! smaller cotyledons 
exogenous auxin: !rescues! short-root-hair phenotype 
hydrolysis of IAA-amino acid conjugates: !reduces! hypocotyl elongation 
IBA beta-oxidation: !provides! auxin 
IAA-amino acid conjugate hydrolysis: !provides! auxin