Gibberellin 20-oxidases, enzymes of gibberellin (GA) biosynthesis, play an important role in (GA) homeostasis. To investigate the regulation of tomato SlGA20ox1 expression, a genomic clone was isolated, its promoter transcriptionally fused to the GUS reporter gene, and the construct used to transform Arabidopsis. Expression was found in diverse vegetative (leaves and roots) and reproductive (flowers) organs. GUS staining was also localized in the columella of secondary roots. GA negative feed-back regulation of SlGA20ox1:GUS was shown to be active both in tomato and in transformed Arabidopsis. Auxin (indol-3-acetic acid, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and naphtaleneacetic acid), triiodobenzoic acid (an inhibitor of auxin transport) and benzyladenine (a cytokinin) treatment induced SlGA20ox1:GUS expression associated with increased auxin content and/or signaling, detected using DR5:GUS expression as a marker. Interestingly, SlGA20ox:GUS expression was induced by auxin and root excision in the hypocotyl, an organ not showing GUS staining in control seedlings. In etiolated seedlings, SlGA20ox1:GUS expression occurred in the elongating hypocotyl region of etiolated seedlings and was down-regulated upon transfer to light associated with decrease of growth rate elongation. Our results show that feed-back, auxin and light regulation of SlGA20ox1 expression depends on DNA elements contained within the first 834bp of the 5' upstream promoter region. Putative DNA regulatory sequences involved in negative feed-back regulation and auxin response were identified in that promoter.

Gibberellin 20-oxidases: !affects! GA homeostasis 
SlGA20ox1:GUS: !localizes to! diverse vegetative and reproductive organs 
GA: !negatively regulates! SlGA20ox1:GUS 
Auxin: !induces! SlGA20ox1:GUS expression 
Triiodobenzoic acid: !inhibits! auxin transport 
Benzyladenine: !induces! SlGA20ox1:GUS expression 
Root excision: !induces! SlGA20ox1:GUS expression 
Light: !down-regulates! SlGA20ox1:GUS expression