['20584289', 'BACKGROUND: The Arabidopsis FILAMENTOUS FLOWER (FIL) gene encodes a YABBY (YAB)  family putative transcription factor that has been implicated in specifying  abaxial cell identities and thus regulating organ polarity of lateral organs. In  contrast to double mutants of fil and other YAB genes, fil single mutants display  mainly floral and inflorescence morphological defects that do not reflect merely  a loss of abaxial identity. Recently, FIL and other YABs have been shown to  regulate meristem organization in a non-cell-autonomous manner. In a screen for  new mutations affecting floral organ morphology and development, we have  identified a novel allele of FIL, fil-9 and characterized its floral and meristem  phenotypes. RESULTS: The fil-9 mutation results in highly variable disruptions in  floral organ numbers and size, partial homeotic transformations, and in defective  inflorescence organization. Examination of meristems indicates that both fil-9  inflorescence and floral meristems are enlarged as a result of an increase in  cell number, and deformed. Furthermore, primordia emergence from these meristems  is disrupted such that several primordia arise simultaneously instead of  sequentially. Many of the organs produced by the inflorescence meristems are  filamentous, yet they are not considered by the plant as flowers. The severity of  both floral organs and meristem phenotypes is increased acropetally and in higher  growth temperature. CONCLUSIONS: Detailed analysis following the development of  fil-9 inflorescence and flowers throughout flower development enabled the drawing  of a causal link between multiple traits of fil-9 phenotypes. The study  reinforces the suggested role of FIL in meristem organization. The loss of  spatial and temporal organization of fil-9 inflorescence and floral meristems  presumably leads to disrupted cell allocation to developing floral organs and to  a blurring of organ whorl boundaries. This disruption is reflected in  morphological and organ identity aberrations of fil-9 floral organs and in the  production of filamentous organs that are not perceived as flowers. Here, we show  the role of FIL in reproductive meristem development and emphasize the potential  of using fil mutants to study mersitem organization and the related effects on  flower morphogenesis.', '2010 Jun 28', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-10-131', 'Zik']

FIL: !regulates! organ polarity 
FIL: !regulates! meristem organization 
FIL: !causes! disruptions in floral organ numbers and size 
FIL: !causes! partial homeotic transformations 
FIL: !causes! defective inflorescence organization 
FIL: !increases! cell number 
FIL: !disrupts! primordia emergence 
FIL: !produces! filamentous organs 
FIL: !disrupts! spatial and temporal organization 
FIL: !leads to! disrupted cell allocation 
FIL: !blurs! organ whorl boundaries