The interaction of plants with endophytic symbiotic fungi in the genus Trichoderma alters the plant proteome and transcriptome and results in enhanced plant growth and resistance to diseases. In a previous study, we identified the numerous chitinolytic enzyme families and individual enzymes in maize which are implicated in plant disease resistance and other plant responses. We examined the differential expression of the entire suite of chitinolytic enzymes in maize plants in the presence and absence of T. harzianum. Expression of these enzymes revealed a band of chitinolytic enzyme activity that had greater mass than any known chitinase. This study reports the characterization of this large protein. It was found to be a heretofore undiscovered heterodimer between an exo- and an endo-enzyme, and the endo portion differed between plants colonized with T. harzianum and those grown in its absence and between shoots and roots. The heterodimeric enzymes from shoots in the presence and absence of T. harzianum were purified and characterized. The dimeric enzyme from Trichoderma-inoculated plants had higher specific activity and greater ability to inhibit fungal growth than those from control plants. The activity of specific chitinolytic enzymes was higher in plants grown from Trichoderma treated seeds than in control plants. This is the first report of a dimer between endo- and exochitinase. The endochitinase component of the dimer changed post Trichoderma inoculation. The dimer originating from Trichoderma inoculated plants had a higher antifungal activity than the comparable enzyme from control plants.

Trichoderma: !alters! plant proteome/transcriptome
Trichoderma: !enhances! plant growth/resistance to diseases
chitinolytic enzyme families: !implicated in! plant disease resistance/other plant responses
differential expression of chitinolytic enzymes: !reveals! band of chitinolytic enzyme activity
large protein: !characterized as! heterodimer between exo- and endo-enzyme
heterodimeric enzymes: !purified and characterized! from shoots in presence/absence of Trichoderma
dimer from Trichoderma-inoculated plants: !had higher! specific activity/ability to inhibit fungal growth
specific chitinolytic enzymes: !higher in! plants grown from Trichoderma treated seeds
dimer: !first report of! dimer between endo- and exochitinase