['20596537', 'BACKGROUND: Calreticulin (CRT) is a ubiquitous ER protein involved in multiple  cellular processes in animals, such as protein folding and calcium homeostasis.  Like in animals, plants have evolved divergent CRTs, but their physiological  functions are less understood. Arabidopsis contains three CRT proteins, where the  two CRTs AtCRT1a and CRT1b represent one subgroup, and AtCRT3 a divergent member.  METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Through expression of single Arabidopsis family  members in CRT-deficient mouse fibroblasts we show that both subgroups have  retained basic CRT functions, including ER Ca2+-holding potential and putative  chaperone capabilities. However, other more general cellular defects due to the  absence of CRT in the fibroblasts, such as cell adhesion deficiencies, were not  fully restored. Furthermore, in planta expression, protein localization and  mutant analyses revealed that the three Arabidopsis CRTs have acquired  specialized functions. The AtCRT1a and CRT1b family members appear to be  components of a general ER chaperone network. In contrast, and as recently shown,  AtCRT3 is associated with immune responses, and is essential for responsiveness  to the bacterial Pathogen-Associated Molecular Pattern (PAMP) elf18, derived from  elongation factor (EF)-Tu. Whereas constitutively expressed AtCRT1a fully  complemented Atcrt1b mutants, AtCRT3 did not. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We  conclude that the physiological functions of the two CRT subgroups in Arabidopsis  have diverged, resulting in a role for AtCRT3 in PAMP associated responses, and  possibly more general chaperone functions for AtCRT1a and CRT1b.', '2010 Jun 28', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0011342', 'Persson']

AtCRT1a: !synthesizes! ER Ca2+-holding potential 
AtCRT1a: !enhances! putative chaperone capabilities 
AtCRT1b: !synthesizes! ER Ca2+-holding potential 
AtCRT1b: !enhances! putative chaperone capabilities 
AtCRT3: !localizes to! immune responses 
AtCRT3: !interacts with! bacterial Pathogen-Associated Molecular Pattern (PAMP) elf18 
AtCRT3: !represses! Atcrt1b mutants