The complex responses of eukaryotic cells to external factors are governed by several transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes. Several of them occur in the nucleus and have been linked to the action of non-protein-coding RNAs (or npcRNAs), both long and small npcRNAs, that recently emerged as major regulators of gene expression. Regulatory npcRNAs acting in the nucleus include silencing-related RNAs, intergenic npcRNAs, natural antisense RNAs, and other aberrant RNAs resulting from the interplay between global transcription and RNA processing activities (such as Dicers and RNA-dependent polymerases). Generally, the resulting npcRNAs exert their regulatory effects through interactions with RNA-binding proteins (or RBPs) within ribonucleoprotein particles (or RNPs). A large group of RBPs are implicated in the silencing machinery through small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and their localization suggests that several act in the nucleus to trigger epigenetic and chromatin changes at a whole-genome scale. Other nuclear RBPs interact with npcRNAs and change their localization. In the fission yeast, the RNA-binding Mei2p protein, playing pivotal roles in meiosis, interact with a meiotic npcRNA involved in its nuclear re-localization. Related processes have been identified in plants and the ENOD40 npcRNA was shown to re-localize a nuclear-speckle RBP from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in Medicago truncatula. Plant RBPs have been also implicated in RNA-mediated chromatin silencing in the FLC locus through interaction with specific antisense transcripts. In this review, we discuss the interactions between RBPs and npcRNAs in the context of nuclear-related processes and their implication in plant development and stress responses. We propose that these interactions may add a regulatory layer that modulates the interactions between the nuclear genome and the environment and, consequently, control plant developmental plasticity.

npcRNA: !interacts with! RBP 
RBP: !localizes to! nucleus 
RBP: !triggers! epigenetic/chromatin changes 
Mei2p: !interacts with! meiotic npcRNA 
ENOD40 npcRNA: !re-localizes! nuclear-speckle RBP 
FLC locus: !silenced by! plant RBPs 
RBPs: !interact with! specific antisense transcripts