Selaginella bryopteris is a lycophyte resurrection plant, which incurves during desiccation and recovers on availability of moisture. The aim of the study was to test and understand the various physiological and biochemical changes the fronds undergo during desiccation and rehydration, to get an insight as to how this plant adapts and survives through the dry phase. Upon desiccation, S. bryopteris fronds showed drastic inhibition in net photosynthesis (A) and maximal photochemical efficiency of PSII (F(v)/F(m)) however, chlorophyll content did not show much variation. Dark respiration (R(d)) continued even at 10% relative water content (RWC), and showed a burst after rehydration, which is proposed to be crucial to establish protection mechanisms. Desiccation caused an enhanced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and increased lipid peroxidation. Proline accumulation increased substantially by 11-fold. Sucrose and starch contents decreased upon desiccation as compared to control. The antioxidative enzymes viz. superoxide dismutase (SOD), ascorbate peroxidase (APX) and catalase (CAT) along with soluble acid invertase increased during desiccation. S. bryopteris shows mechanical as well as physiological mechanisms for tolerance to extreme levels of desiccation stress. The rapid and almost complete recovery of F(v)/F(m) after rehydration clearly indicates the absence of marked photoinhibitory or thermal injury to PSII during desiccation. This along with the homoiochlorophyllous characteristics enables S. bryopteris to recover its A. The antioxidant metabolism further plays an important role in the desiccation tolerance of S. bryopteris.

A: !inhibited by! Desiccation 
F(v)/F(m): !recovered after! Rehydration 
Chlorophyll content: !showed little variation with! Desiccation 
R(d): !continued even at! 10% RWC 
ROS: !increased with! Desiccation 
Lipid peroxidation: !increased with! Desiccation 
Proline accumulation: !increased 11-fold with! Desiccation 
Sucrose and starch contents: !decreased with! Desiccation 
SOD, APX, CAT: !increased with! Desiccation 
Soluble acid invertase: !increased with! Desiccation 
Mechanical mechanisms: !involved in! Desiccation tolerance 
Physiological mechanisms: !involved in! Desiccation tolerance 
Photoinhibitory injury: !absent during! Desiccation 
Homoiochlorophyllous characteristics: !enabled recovery of! A 
Antioxidant metabolism: !played important role in! Desiccation tolerance