['20626652', 'The formation of Arabidopsis leaf veins is believed to require canalization of  auxin into discrete and continuous cell files to generate a highly reproducible  branched and reticulate pattern. During canalization, incipient veins become  preferred routes for auxin transport through expression and asymmetric  localization of the PINFORMED1 (PIN1) auxin efflux protein: PIN1 expression  narrows from a group of cells to a single cell file, and localization of PIN1  protein becomes polarized to the cell membrane facing a previously formed vein.  The shift in PIN1 localization is believed to require active vesicle cycling and  be auxin-dependent, generating an autoregulatory loop. Previously, we have shown  that fkd1 mutant leaves have an open vein pattern that lacks distal vein meeting.  Here, we identify FKD1 as encoding a pleckstrin homology domain- and  DUF828-containing protein. A fusion of the FKD1 promoter and the GUS reporter  gene was expressed in vascular tissue throughout the plant, and its expression in  incipient veins in leaves narrows in a manner similar to that of PIN1. FKD1  expression in roots and leaves can be altered by changes to auxin response and  auxin transport. In the absence of FKD1, PIN1::GFP narrowing to incipient veins  is delayed, and localization to the apical cell face is infrequent. The lack of  apical PIN1 localization correlates with the failure of newly forming veins to  connect distally with previously formed veins. Our data suggest that FKD1  influences PIN1 localization in an auxin-dependent manner, and we propose that it  represents a key component of the auxin canalization pathway.', '2010 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04291.x', 'Schultz']

PIN1: !expression narrows! to single cell file
PIN1: !localization polarized! to cell membrane facing vein
FKD1: !encodes! pleckstrin homology domain- and DUF828-containing protein
FKD1: !expression altered! by changes to auxin response and transport
FKD1: !influences! PIN1 localization in an auxin-dependent manner