['20625001', 'Several members of the Yellow Stripe-Like (YSL) family of proteins are  transporters of metals that are bound to the metal chelator nicotianamine or the  related set of mugineic acid family chelators known as phytosiderophores. Here,  we examine the physiological functions of three closely related Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) YSL family members, AtYSL1, AtYSL2, and AtYSL3, to  elucidate their role(s) in the allocation of metals into various organs of  Arabidopsis. We show that AtYSL3 and AtYSL1 are localized to the plasma membrane  and function as iron transporters in yeast functional complementation assays. By  using inflorescence grafting, we show that AtYSL1 and AtYSL3 have dual roles in  reproduction: their activity in the leaves is required for normal fertility and  normal seed development, while activity in the inflorescences themselves is  required for proper loading of metals into the seeds. We further demonstrate that  the AtYSL1 and AtYSL2 proteins, when expressed from the AtYSL3 promoter, can only  partially rescue the phenotypes of a ysl1ysl3 double mutant, suggesting that  although these three YSL transporters are closely related and have similar  patterns of expression, they have distinct activities in planta. In particular,  neither AtYSL1 nor AtYSL2 is able to functionally complement the reproductive  defects exhibited by ysl1ysl3 double mutant plants.', '2010 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.159103', 'Walker']

AtYSL1: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
AtYSL3: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
AtYSL1: !functions as! iron transporter 
AtYSL3: !functions as! iron transporter 
AtYSL1: !required for! normal fertility 
AtYSL3: !required for! normal fertility 
AtYSL1: !required for! normal seed development 
AtYSL3: !required for! normal seed development 
AtYSL1: !required for! proper loading of metals into seeds 
AtYSL3: !required for! proper loading of metals into seeds 
AtYSL1: !partially rescues! ysl1ysl3 double mutant phenotypes 
AtYSL2: !partially rescues! ysl1ysl3 double mutant phenotypes 
AtYSL1: !distinct activity from! AtYSL2 
AtYSL2: !distinct activity from! AtYSL1