We examined the responses of ultraviolet-absorbing compounds (UVAC) to enhanced UV-B radiation in the aquatic liverwort Jungermannia exsertifolia subsp. cordifolia for 31 days under laboratory conditions. Samples were exposed to three radiation regimes: P (only photosynthetic radiation), PA (photosynthetic + UV-A radiation) and PAB (photosynthetic + UV-A + UV-B radiation). We measured both the bulk UV absorbance of the methanolic extracts and the levels of individual UVAC. In both cases, the methanol-soluble and the methanol-insoluble, alkali-extractable cell wall-bound fractions were analyzed. The bulk UV absorbance of the soluble fraction was higher than that of the cell wall-bound fraction. The bulk UV absorbances of both fractions increased under enhanced UV-B (PAB regime). Five different hydroxycinnamic acid (HCA) derivatives were found in the soluble fraction and two additional ones in the cell wall-bound fraction, among which only p-coumaroylmalic acid in the soluble fraction and p-coumaric acid in the cell wall-bound fraction increased under enhanced UV-B. The maximum quantum yield of PSII (F(v) /F(m)) decreased and DNA damage (amount of thymine dimers) strongly increased under enhanced UV-B, showing UV-B-induced damage. We conclude that methanol-soluble and cell wall-bound fractions of the liverwort studied have different UVAC, and each individual compound may respond in a different way to UV-B radiation. Thus, the analysis of individual UVAC in both the methanol-soluble and cell wall-bound fractions is advisable to better evaluate the protection mechanisms of liverworts against UV-B radiation. In particular, p-coumaric acid and p-coumaroylmalic acid seem to be especially UV-B responsive and merit further investigation.

UVAC: !increases! under UV-B radiation 
Methanol-soluble fraction: !has higher! bulk UV absorbance 
Cell wall-bound fraction: !contains! two additional HCA derivatives 
p-coumaric acid: !increases! in cell wall-bound fraction 
p-coumaroylmalic acid: !increases! in methanol-soluble fraction 
PSII: !decreases! maximum quantum yield 
DNA damage: !increases! amount of thymine dimers