Al³+ -resistant cultivars of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) release malate through the Al³+ -activated anion transport protein Triticum aestivum aluminum-activated malate transporter 1 (TaALMT1). Expression of TaALMT1 in Xenopus oocytes and tobacco suspension cells enhances the basal transport activity (inward and outward currents present in the absence of external Al³+, and generates the same Al³+ -activated currents (reflecting the Al³+-dependent transport function) as observed in wheat cells. We investigated the amino acid residues involved in this Al³+-dependent transport activity by generating a series of mutations to the TaALMT1 protein. We targeted the acidic residues on the hydrophilic C-terminal domain of TaALMT1 and changed them to uncharged residues by site-directed mutagenesis. These mutant proteins were expressed in Xenopus oocytes and their transport activity was measured before and after Al³+ addition. Three mutations (E274Q, D275N and E284Q) abolished the Al³+-activated transport activity without affecting the basal transport activity. Truncation of the hydrophilic C-terminal domain abolished both basal and Al³+-activated transport activities. Al³+-dependent transport activity was recovered by fusing the N-terminal region of TaALMT1 with the C-terminal region of AtALMT1, a homolog from Arabidopsis. These findings demonstrate that the extracellular C-terminal domain is required for both basal and Al³+-dependent TaALMT1 activity. Furthermore, we identified three acidic amino acids within this domain that are specifically required for the activation of transport function by external Al³+.

TaALMT1: !enhances! Basal transport activity 
TaALMT1: !activates! Al³+-dependent transport activity 
Mutations: !abolish! Al³+-activated transport activity 
Truncation: !abolish! Basal and Al³+-activated transport activities 
N-terminal region of TaALMT1: !fuses with! C-terminal region of AtALMT1 
Acidic amino acids: !required for! Activation of transport function by external Al³+