TILLING (for Targeting Induced Local Lesions IN Genomes) is a well-established method for identifying plants carrying point mutations in genes of interest. A traditional TILLING project requires a significant investment of time and resources to establish the mutant population and screening infrastructure. Here, we describe a modified TILLING procedure that substantially reduces the investment needed to perform mutation screening. Our motivation for developing iTILLING was to make it practical for individual laboratories to rapidly perform mutation screens using specialized genetic backgrounds. With iTILLING, M2 seeds are collected in bulk from the mutagenized population of plants, greatly reducing the labor needed to manage the mutant lines. Growth of the M2 seedlings for mutation screening, tissue collection, and DNA extraction are all performed in 96-well format. Mutations are then identified using high-resolution melt-curve analysis of gene-specific polymerase chain reaction products. Individual plants carrying mutations of interest are transferred from the 96-well growth plates to soil. One scientist can complete an iTILLING screen in less than 4 months. As a proof-of-principle test, we applied iTILLING to Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants that were homozygous for the mekk1-1 (for MAPK/ERK kinase kinase 1) mutation and also carried a MEKK1 rescue construct. The goal of our screen was to identify mutations in the closely linked MEKK2 and MEKK3 loci. We obtained five mutations in MEKK2 and seven mutations in MEKK3, all located within 20 kb of the mekk1-1 T-DNA insertion. Using repeated iterations of the iTILLING process, mutations in three or more tandemly duplicated genes could be generated.

TILLING: !identifies! Plants 
M2 Seeds: !collected from! Mutagenized Population 
Growth Plates: !used for! Mutation Screening 
iTILLING: !reduces! Investment 
Arabidopsis: !tested with! MEKK1 Rescue Construct 
MEKK2/3: !identified mutations in! 20 kb of mekk1-1 T-DNA Insertion 
iTILLING: !generates mutations in! Tandemly Duplicated Genes