Developmental responses associated with end-of-day far-red light (EOD-FR) signaling were investigated in maize (Zea mays subspecies mays) seedlings. A survey of genetically diverse inbreds of temperate and tropical/semitropical origins, together with teosinte (Zea mays subspecies parviglumis) and a modern hybrid, revealed distinct elongation responses. A mesocotyl elongation response to the EOD-FR treatment was largely absent in the tropical/semitropical lines, but both hybrid and temperate inbred responses were of the same magnitude as in teosinte, suggesting that EOD-FR-mediated mesocotyl responses were not lost during the domestication or breeding process. The genetic architecture underlying seedling responses to EOD-FR was investigated using the intermated B73 x Mo17 mapping population. Among the different quantitative trait loci identified, two were consistently detected for elongation and responsiveness under EOD-FR, but none were associated with known light signaling loci. The central role of phytochromes in mediating EOD-FR responses was shown using a phytochromeB1 phytochromeB2 (phyB1 phyB2) mutant series. Unlike the coleoptile and first leaf sheath, EOD-FR-mediated elongation of the mesocotyl appears predominantly controlled by gibberellin. EOD-FR also reduced abscisic acid (ABA) levels in the mesocotyl for both the wild type and phyB1 phyB2 double mutants, suggesting a FR-mediated but PHYB-independent control of ABA accumulation. EOD-FR elongation responses were attenuated in both the wild type and phyB1 phyB2 double mutants when a chilling stress was applied during the dark period, concomitant with an increase in ABA levels. We present a model for the EOD-FR response that integrates light and hormonal control of seedling elongation.

EOD-FR: !enhances! Mesocotyl elongation
QTLs: !associated with! EOD-FR responses
phyB1 phyB2: !mediates! EOD-FR responses
Gibberellin: !controls! EOD-FR-mediated mesocotyl elongation
ABA: !reduced by! EOD-FR
Chilling stress: !attenuates! EOD-FR elongation responses