• Outcrossing Arabidopsis species that diverged from their inbreeding relative Arabidopsis thaliana 5 million yr ago and display a biogeographical pattern of interspecific sympatry vs intraspecific allopatry provides an ideal model for studying impacts of gene introgression and polyploidization on species diversification. • Flow cytometry analyses detected ploidy polymorphisms of 2× and 4× in Arabidopsis lyrata ssp. kamchatica of Taiwan. Genomic divergence between species/subspecies was estimated based on 98 randomly chosen nuclear genes. Multilocus analyses revealed a mosaic genome in diploid A. l. kamchatica composed of Arabidopsis halleri-like and A. lyrata-like alleles. • Coalescent analyses suggest that the segregation of ancestral polymorphisms alone cannot explain the high inconsistency between gene trees across loci, and that gene introgression via diploid A. l. kamchatica likely distorts the molecular phylogenies of Arabidopsis species. However, not all genes migrated across species freely. Gene ontology analyses suggested that some nonmigrating genes were constrained by natural selection. • High levels of estimated ancestral polymorphisms between A. halleri and A. lyrata suggest that gene flow between these species has not completely ceased since their initial isolation. Polymorphism data of extant populations also imply recent gene flow between the species. Our study reveals that interspecific gene flow affects the genome evolution in Arabidopsis.

Outcrossing Arabidopsis: !diverged from! A. thaliana 
Flow cytometry: !detected ploidy polymorphisms of! 2× and 4× 
Multilocus analyses: !revealed a mosaic genome in diploid! A. l. kamchatica 
Coalescent analyses: !suggest gene introgression via diploid! A. l. kamchatica 
Gene ontology: !constrained some nonmigrating genes by! natural selection 
A. halleri & A. lyrata: !estimated ancestral polymorphisms between! species 
Polymorphism data: !implied recent gene flow between! species 
Interspecific gene flow: !affects the genome evolution in! Arabidopsis