In the present study, the effects of epibrassinolide (EBL) on indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), abscisic acid (ABA) and polyamine (PA) tissue concentrations and antioxidant potential of 7-day-old Raphanus sativus L. cv. 'Pusa chetki' seedlings grown under Cu stress were investigated. EBL treatment alone or in combination with Cu enhanced free and bound IAA titers when compared with the metal alone. Modest increases in free and bound ABA contents were observed for EBL treatment alone. However, the combination of EBL with Cu caused major increases in both forms of ABA, over Cu alone. Among the PAs analyzed, only putrescine and cadaverine concentrations were enhanced by EBL treatment alone. By contrast, a significant decline in putrescine and spermine contents was found in seedlings treated with EBL plus Cu. EBL treatments alone or in combination with Cu enhanced activities of guaiacol peroxidase (EC1.11.1.7), catalase (EC 1.11.1.6), superoxide dismutase (EC 1.15.1.1) and glutathione reductase (EC 1.6.4.2) and protein contents in comparison with metal and control treatments. A major decrease in malondialdehyde content was also recorded for EBL treatments with or without Cu. An increase in phytochelatin content was also observed in seedlings treated with EBL alone or in combination with Cu. Major improvement in radical scavenging activities, as attested by the antioxidant activity assay using DPPH (1,1-diphenylpicrylhydrazyl), and elevated deoxyribose and reducing powers, along with increased contents of ascorbic acid, total phenols and proline, also suggest a major influence of EBL application in mitigating copper-induced oxidative stress in radish seedlings.

EBL: !enhances! IAA
EBL: !enhances! ABA
EBL: !enhances! Putrescine
EBL: !decreases! Spermine
EBL: !enhances! Guaiacol Peroxidase
EBL: !enhances! Catalase
EBL: !enhances! Superoxide Dismutase
EBL: !enhances! Glutathione Reductase
EBL: !enhances! Protein
EBL: !decreases! Malondialdehyde
EBL: !enhances! Phytochelatin
EBL: !enhances! Radical Scavenging
EBL: !enhances! Deoxyribose
EBL: !enhances! Reducing Power
EBL: !enhances! Ascorbic Acid
EBL: !enhances! Total Phenols
EBL: !enhances! Proline