['20699009', 'BACKGROUND: In flowering plants, gametogenesis generates multicellular male and  female gametophytes. In the model system Arabidopsis, the male gametophyte or  pollen grain contains two sperm cells and a vegetative cell. The female  gametophyte or embryo sac contains seven cells, namely one egg, two synergids,  one central cell and three antipodal cells. Double fertilization of the central  cell and egg produces respectively a triploid endosperm and a diploid zygote that  develops further into an embryo. The genetic control of the early embryo  patterning, especially the initiation of the first zygotic division and the  positioning of the cell plate, is largely unknown. RESULTS: Here we report the  characterization of a mutation, yaozhe (yao), that causes zygote arrest and  misplacement of cell plate of the zygote, leading to early embryo lethality. In  addition, gametophyte development is partially impaired. A small portion of the  mutant embryo sacs are arrested at four-nucleate stage with aberrant nuclear  positioning. Furthermore, the competence of male gametophytes is also  compromised. YAO encodes a nucleolar protein with seven WD-repeats. Its  homologues in human and yeast have been shown to be components of the U3 snoRNP  complex and function in 18S rRNA processing. YAO is expressed ubiquitously, with  high level of expression in tissues under active cell divisions, including embryo  sacs, pollen, embryos, endosperms and root tips. CONCLUSIONS: Phenotypic analysis  indicated that YAO is required for the correct positioning of the first zygotic  division plane and plays a critical role in gametogenesis in Arabidopsis. Since  YAO is a nucleolar protein and its counterparts in yeast and human are components  of the U3 snoRNP complex, we therefore postulate that YAO is most likely involved  in rRNA processing in plants as well.', '2010 Aug 11', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-10-169', 'Yang']

gene: YAO !affects! gametogenesis 
gene: YAO !localizes to! tissues under active cell divisions 
gene: YAO !interacts with! U3 snoRNP complex 
gene: YAO !enhances! zygote division plane positioning 
gene: YAO !represses! early embryo lethality 
gene: YAO !synthesizes! rRNA processing