Ca(2+) and nitric oxide (NO) are essential components involved in plant senescence signaling cascades. In other signaling pathways, NO generation can be dependent on cytosolic Ca(2+). The Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutant dnd1 lacks a plasma membrane-localized cation channel (CNGC2). We recently demonstrated that this channel affects plant response to pathogens through a signaling cascade involving Ca(2+) modulation of NO generation; the pathogen response phenotype of dnd1 can be complemented by application of a NO donor. At present, the interrelationship between Ca(2+) and NO generation in plant cells during leaf senescence remains unclear. Here, we use dnd1 plants to present genetic evidence consistent with the hypothesis that Ca(2+) uptake and NO production play pivotal roles in plant leaf senescence. Leaf Ca(2+) accumulation is reduced in dnd1 leaves compared to the wild type. Early senescence-associated phenotypes (such as loss of chlorophyll, expression level of senescence-associated genes, H(2)O(2) generation, lipid peroxidation, tissue necrosis, and increased salicylic acid levels) were more prominent in dnd1 leaves compared to the wild type. Application of a Ca(2+) channel blocker hastened senescence of detached wild-type leaves maintained in the dark, increasing the rate of chlorophyll loss, expression of a senescence-associated gene, and lipid peroxidation. Pharmacological manipulation of Ca(2+) signaling provides evidence consistent with genetic studies of the relationship between Ca(2+) signaling and senescence with the dnd1 mutant. Basal levels of NO in dnd1 leaf tissue were lower than that in leaves of wild-type plants. Application of a NO donor effectively rescues many dnd1 senescence-related phenotypes. Our work demonstrates that the CNGC2 channel is involved in Ca(2+) uptake during plant development beyond its role in pathogen defense response signaling. Work presented here suggests that this function of CNGC2 may impact downstream basal NO production in addition to its role (also linked to NO signaling) in pathogen defense responses and that this NO generation acts as a negative regulator during plant leaf senescence signaling.

Ca(2+): !modulates! NO generation
CNGC2: !localizes to! plasma membrane
CNGC2: !affects! plant response to pathogens
dnd1: !lacks! CNGC2
dnd1: !reduces! Ca(2+) accumulation
dnd1: !promotes! senescence-associated phenotypes
Ca(2+) channel blocker: !hastens! senescence of detached wild-type leaves
NO donor: !rescues! dnd1 senescence-related phenotypes
CNGC2: !impacts! downstream basal NO production