['20706207', 'Cell proliferation is the main driving force for plant growth. Although genome  sequence analysis revealed a high number of cell cycle genes in plants, little is  known about the molecular complexes steering cell division. In a targeted  proteomics approach, we mapped the core complex machinery at the heart of the  Arabidopsis thaliana cell cycle control. Besides a central regulatory network of  core complexes, we distinguished a peripheral network that links the core  machinery to up- and downstream pathways. Over 100 new candidate cell cycle  proteins were predicted and an in-depth biological interpretation demonstrated  the hypothesis-generating power of the interaction data. The data set provided a  comprehensive view on heterodimeric cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-cyclin  complexes in plants. For the first time, inhibitory proteins of plant-specific  B-type CDKs were discovered and the anaphase-promoting complex was characterized  and extended. Important conclusions were that mitotic A- and B-type cyclins form  complexes with the plant-specific B-type CDKs and not with CDKA;1, and that  D-type cyclins and S-phase-specific A-type cyclins seem to be associated  exclusively with CDKA;1. Furthermore, we could show that plants have evolved a  combinatorial toolkit consisting of at least 92 different CDK-cyclin complex  variants, which strongly underscores the functional diversification among the  large family of cyclins and reflects the pivotal role of cell cycle regulation in  the developmental plasticity of plants.', '2010 Aug 10', 'Mol Syst Biol', '10.1038/msb.2010.53', 'De']

Cell proliferation: !drives! Plant growth
Genome sequence analysis: !revealed! High number of cell cycle genes
Targeted proteomics approach: !mapped! Core complex machinery 
Central regulatory network: !links to! Up- and downstream pathways
CDK-cyclin complexes: !form! Mitotic A- and B-type cyclins
Inhibitory proteins: !discovered! Of plant-specific B-type CDKs
Anaphase-promoting complex: !characterized and extended! By data set
92 different CDK-cyclin complex variants: !evolved! By plants