['20709814', 'Formins have long been known to regulate microfilaments but have also recently  been shown to associate with microtubules. In this study, Arabidopsis thaliana  FORMIN14 (AFH14), a type II formin, was found to regulate both microtubule and  microfilament arrays. AFH14 expressed in BY-2 cells was shown to decorate  preprophase bands, spindles, and phragmoplasts and to induce coalignment of  microtubules with microfilaments. These effects perturbed the process of cell  division. Localization of AFH14 to microtubule-based structures was confirmed in  Arabidopsis suspension cells. Knockdown of AFH14 in mitotic cells altered  interactions between microtubules and microfilaments, resulting in the formation  of an abnormal mitotic apparatus. In Arabidopsis afh14 T-DNA insertion mutants,  microtubule arrays displayed abnormalities during the meiosis-associated process  of microspore formation, which corresponded to altered phenotypes during tetrad  formation. In vitro biochemical experiments showed that AFH14 bound directly to  either microtubules or microfilaments and that the FH2 domain was essential for  cytoskeleton binding and bundling. However, in the presence of both microtubules  and microfilaments, AFH14 promoted interactions between microtubules and  microfilaments. These results demonstrate that AFH14 is a unique plant formin  that functions as a linking protein between microtubules and microfilaments and  thus plays important roles in the process of plant cell division.', '2010 Aug', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.110.075507', 'Ren']

AFH14: !localizes to! microtubule-based structures 
AFH14: !binds directly to! microtubules 
AFH14: !binds directly to! microfilaments 
AFH14: !promotes interactions between! microtubules and microfilaments 
AFH14: !perturbs! cell division 
AFH14: !alters interactions between! microtubules and microfilaments 
AFH14: !induces coalignment of! microtubules and microfilaments 
AFH14: !plays important roles in! process of plant cell division