['20712629', 'In a screen for senescence-associated genes in Arabidopsis thaliana, a novel,  highly up-regulated membrane protein was identified. It is a member of an  uncharacterised, strictly plant-specific gene family and was named AtDMP1  (Arabidopsis thaliana DUF679 domain membrane protein 1). The AtDMP proteins are  predicted to have four transmembrane spans, with cytosolic amino- and  carboxy-termini. In this study, we investigated the phylogenetic distribution of  DMP proteins, their tissue-specific expression and subcellular localisation in A.  thaliana. The Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Physcomitrella patens genomes in  dicots contain only a single DMP gene copy, whereas there are five to 13 DMP  genes and 11-16 in monocots, many of which supposedly result from recent gene  duplications. The ubiquitous occurrence of DMP proteins in green plants and their  absence from other kingdoms suggest a role in plant-specific processes. In A.  thaliana, expression of nine out of ten DMP genes was detected. The expression  patterns were found to be markedly tissue- and development-specific; thus,  functional redundancy of most proteins is unlikely. The occurrence of several  AtDMPs in tissues undergoing senescence (AtDMP1, -3, -4), dehiscence (AtDMP7) or  abscission (AtDMP2, -4, -7) suggests involvement of DMPs in different types of  programmed cell death. AtDMP-eGFP fusion proteins were found to localise either  to the endoplasmic reticulum, the tonoplast or, under certain conditions, to both  membrane systems. Further investigations are in progress to elucidate functions  of the AtDMP proteins.', '2010 Sep', 'Plant Biol (Stuttg)', '10.1111/j.1438-8677.2010.00381.x', 'Kunze']

AtDMP1: !localizes to! endoplasmic reticulum/tonoplast 
AtDMP1: !associated with! senescence/dehiscence/abscission 
AtDMPs: !ubiquitous in! green plants 
AtDMPs: !absent from! other kingdoms 
AtDMPs: !tissue-specific expression! A. thaliana 
AtDMPs: !development-specific expression! A. thaliana