The moss Syntrichia caninervis (S. caninervis) is one of the dominant species in biological soil crusts of deserts. It has long been the focus of scientific research because of its ecological value. Moreover, S. caninervis has a special significance in biogenesis research because it is characterized by its fast restoration of photosynthesis upon onset of rehydration of the desiccated organism. In order to study the mechanisms of rapid photosynthetic recovery in mosses upon rewatering, we investigated the kinetics of the recovery process of photosynthetic activity in photosystem (PS) II, with an indirect assessment of the photochemical processes based on chlorophyll (Chl) fluorescence measurements. Our results showed that recovery can be divided into two phases. The fast initial phase, completed within 3 min, was characterized by a quick increase in maximal quantum efficiency of PSII (F(v)/F(m)). Over 50% of the PSII activities, including excitation energy transfer, oxygen evolution, charge separation, and electron transport, recovered within 0.5 min after rehydration. The second, slow phase was dominated by the increase of plastoquinone (PQ) reduction and the equilibrium of the energy transport from the inner antenna to the reaction center (RC) of PSII. Analysis of the recovery process in the presence of 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethyl urea (DCMU) revealed that blocking the electron transport from Q(A) to Q(B) did not hamper Chl synthesis or Chl organization in thylakoid membranes under light conditions. A de novo chloroplast protein synthesis was not necessary for the initial recovery of photochemical activity in PSII. In conclusion, the moss's ability for rapid recovery upon rehydration is related to Chl synthesis, quick structural reorganization of PSII, and fast restoration of PSII activity without de novo chloroplast protein synthesis.

Chl synthesis: !enhances! PSII activity 
Chl organization: !enhances! PSII activity 
DCMU: !blocks! electron transport 
De novo protein synthesis: !not necessary for! initial recovery of photochemical activity