The breeding of polyploid rice made no breakthrough for a long time because of low seed set. The discovery and application of polyploid meiosis stability (PMeS) material played a pivotal role in solving this problem. Our results indicated that genome duplication led to different outcomes in different rice cultivars in terms of pollen fertility, viability, and the accumulation of important physiological substances such as free proline and endogenous hormones. Pollen from the PMeS HN2026-4X lines showed a high fertility and viability similar to those of HN2026-2X (4X indicates tetraploid while 2X indicates the diploid), whereas both rates decreased dramatically in Balilla-4X. The results of pollen microstructure and ultrastructure investigations suggested that the pollen development pattern in HN2026-4X appeared normal at all stages, but a lot of changes were discovered in Balilla-4X. Stable meiosis, timely tapetum degradation, and normal mitochondria development were critical factors insuring the high frequency pollen fertility of PMeS rice. The free proline content increased markedly in HN2026-4X as compared to HN2026-2X, but it was decreased for Balilla-4X. Genome duplication effects on regulating endogenous hormones accumulation in pollen were evident, resulting in the clear difference between PMeS HN2026-4X and Balilla-4X. The accumulation of IAA, ZR, and GA in mature pollen distinguished HN2026-4X from Balilla-4X, which was linked to normal pollen development. In particular, the excessive accumulation of ABA at the meiosis stage may be correlated to disorganized meiosis in Balilla-4X. All the results provided unequivocal evidence that genome duplication played specific roles in the normal pollen development of PMeS HN2026-4X.

Genome duplication: !affects! Pollen fertility 
Genome duplication: !affects! Viability 
Genome duplication: !enhances! Free proline content 
Genome duplication: !regulates! Endogenous hormones accumulation 
PMeS HN2026-4X: !shows! High fertility and viability 
Balilla-4X: !shows! Decreased fertility and viability 
Stable meiosis: !ensures! High frequency pollen fertility 
Tapetum degradation: !ensures! High frequency pollen fertility 
Normal mitochondria development: !ensures! High frequency pollen fertility 
Excessive ABA accumulation: !correlates to! Disorganized meiosis