Many plant cells respond to pathogens by the induction of phytoalexin biosynthesis, but the underlying changes of gene expression are often obscured by their close linkage to the complex rearrangements during pathogen defense, especially the hypersensitive cell death. In root-derived cell cultures of Eschscholzia californica, the overproduction of cytotoxic benzophenanthridine alkaloids can be triggered by a minimum of pathogen pressure that does not evoke hypersensitive reactions. Such conditions activate a signal chain that is initiated by a short contact to low concentrations of yeast glycoprotein elicitor and includes a transient acidification of the cytoplasm. In contrast, high elicitor concentrations signal via an increase of jasmonate and trigger hypersensitive cell death, preceded by a drastic decay of translatable mRNAs. The main changes in protein and mRNA patterns caused by either signal path were compared by 2D proteomic separation, MS/MS sequencing and mRNA-in vitro translation. The four proteins showing the highest overexpression were identical between cells that received low or high-elicitor treatment and overlapped with the three proteins most up-regulated by artificial pH shifts. They comprised one biosynthetic enzyme (norcoclaurine:SAM 4' O-methyl-transferase) plus a unique combination of stress-protective proteins: a heat shock protein (hsp 70); a peptidyl-prolyl-cis/trans isomerase (cyclophilin); and a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. It appears that overproduction of the benzophenanthridine phytoalexins requires the up-regulation of a rate-limiting biosynthetic enzyme plus the coordinated expression of a specific set of protective enzymes and thus is managed like an oxidative stress.

yeast glycoprotein elicitor: !triggers! signal chain
signal chain: !initiates! transient acidification of cytoplasm
low concentrations of yeast glycoprotein elicitor: !activates! signal chain
high concentrations of yeast glycoprotein elicitor: !signals via! increase of jasmonate
increase of jasmonate: !triggers! hypersensitive cell death
2D proteomic separation, MS/MS sequencing and mRNA-in vitro translation: !compare! changes in protein and mRNA patterns
norcoclaurine:SAM 4' O-methyl-transferase: !overexpressed! by low or high-elicitor treatment
heat shock protein (hsp 70): !overexpressed! by low or high-elicitor treatment
peptidyl-prolyl-cis/trans isomerase (cyclophilin): !overexpressed! by low or high-elicitor treatment
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase: !overexpressed! by low or high-elicitor treatment
overproduction of benzophenanthridine phytoalexins: !