['20798329', 'Reactive oxygen species and redox signaling undergo synergistic and antagonistic  interactions with phytohormones to regulate protective responses of plants  against biotic and abiotic stresses. However, molecular insight into the nature  of this crosstalk remains scarce. We demonstrate that the hydrogen  peroxide-responsive UDP-glucosyltransferase UGT74E2 of Arabidopsis thaliana is  involved in the modulation of plant architecture and water stress response  through its activity toward the auxin indole-3-butyric acid (IBA). Biochemical  characterization of recombinant UGT74E2 demonstrated that it strongly favors IBA  as a substrate. Assessment of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), IBA, and their  conjugates in transgenic plants ectopically expressing UGT74E2 indicated that the  catalytic specificity was maintained in planta. In these transgenic plants, not  only were IBA-Glc concentrations increased, but also free IBA levels were  elevated and the conjugated IAA pattern was modified. This perturbed IBA and IAA  homeostasis was associated with architectural changes, including increased shoot  branching and altered rosette shape, and resulted in significantly improved  survival during drought and salt stress treatments. Hence, our results reveal  that IBA and IBA-Glc are important regulators of morphological and physiological  stress adaptation mechanisms and provide molecular evidence for the interplay  between hydrogen peroxide and auxin homeostasis through the action of an IBA UGT.', '2010 Aug', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.109.071316', 'Van']

UGT74E2: !modulates! plant architecture 
UGT74E2: !regulates! water stress response 
UGT74E2: !favors! IBA as substrate 
UGT74E2: !increases! IBA-Glc concentrations 
UGT74E2: !elevates! free IBA levels 
UGT74E2: !modifies! conjugated IAA pattern 
IBA/IBA-Glc: !regulate! morphological and physiological stress adaptation mechanisms 
Hydrogen peroxide: !interacts with! auxin homeostasis 
UGT74E2: !mediates! interplay between hydrogen peroxide and auxin homeostasis