The R2R3-type OsMyb4 transcription factor of rice has been shown to play a role in the regulation of osmotic adjustment in heterologous overexpression studies. However, the exact composition and organization of its underlying transcriptional network has not been established to be a robust tool for stress tolerance enhancement by regulon engineering. OsMyb4 network was dissected based on commonalities between the global chilling stress transcriptome and the transcriptome configured by OsMyb4 overexpression. OsMyb4 controls a hierarchical network comprised of several regulatory sub-clusters associated with cellular defense and rescue, metabolism and development. It regulates target genes either directly or indirectly through intermediary MYB, ERF, bZIP, NAC, ARF and CCAAT-HAP transcription factors. Regulatory sub-clusters have different combinations of MYB-like, GCC-box-like, ERD1-box-like, ABRE-like, G-box-like, as1/ocs/TGA-like, AuxRE-like, gibberellic acid response element (GARE)-like and JAre-like cis-elements. Cold-dependent network activity enhanced cellular antioxidant capacity through radical scavenging mechanisms and increased activities of phenylpropanoid and isoprenoid metabolic processes involving various abscisic acid (ABA), jasmonic acid (JA), salicylic acid (SA), ethylene and reactive oxygen species (ROS) responsive genes. OsMyb4 network is independent of drought response element binding protein/C-repeat binding factor (DREB/CBF) and its sub-regulons operate with possible co-regulators including nuclear factor-Y. Because of its upstream position in the network hierarchy, OsMyb4 functions quantitatively and pleiotrophically. Supra-optimal expression causes misexpression of alternative targets with costly trade-offs to panicle development.

OsMyb4: !controls! hierarchical network 
hierarchical network: !comprised of! regulatory sub-clusters 
regulatory sub-clusters: !associated with! cellular defense and rescue, metabolism and development 
OsMyb4: !regulates! target genes 
target genes: !through! MYB, ERF, bZIP, NAC, ARF and CCAAT-HAP transcription factors 
cold-dependent network activity: !enhanced! cellular antioxidant capacity 
cellular antioxidant capacity: !through! radical scavenging mechanisms 
radical scavenging mechanisms: !increased! activities of phenylpropanoid and isoprenoid metabolic processes 
phenylpropanoid and isoprenoid metabolic processes: !involving! ABA, JA, SA, ethylene and ROS responsive genes 
OsMyb4 network: !independent of! DREB/CBF 
sub-regulons: !operate with! possible co-regulators including nuclear factor-Y 
OsMyb4: !functions! quantitatively and pleiotrophically