In bright sunlight photosynthetic activity is limited by the enzymatic machinery of carbon dioxide assimilation. This supererogation of energy can be easily visualized by the significant increases of photosynthetic activity under high CO(2) conditions or other metabolic strategies which can increase the carbon flux from CO(2) to metabolic pools. However, even under optimal CO(2) conditions plants will provide much more NADPH+H(+) and ATP that are required for the actual demand, yielding in a metabolic situation, in which no reducible NADP(+) would be available. As a consequence, excited chlorophylls can activate oxygen to its singlet state or the photosynthetic electrons can be transferred to oxygen, producing highly active oxygen species such as the superoxide anion, hydroxyl radicals and hydrogen peroxide. All of them can initiate radical chain reactions which degrade proteins, pigments, lipids and nucleotides. Therefore, the plants have developed protection and repair mechanism to prevent photodamage and to maintain the physiological integrity of metabolic apparatus. The first protection wall is regulatory energy dissipation on the level of the photosynthetic primary reactions by the so-called non-photochemical quenching. This dissipative pathway is under the control of the proton gradient generated by the electron flow and the xanthophyll cycle. A second protection mechanism is the effective re-oxidation of the reduction equivalents by so-called "alternative electron cycling" which includes the water-water cycle, the photorespiration, the malate valve and the action of antioxidants. The third system of defence is the repair of damaged components. Therefore, plants do not suffer from energy shortage, but instead they have to invest in proteins and cellular components which protect the plants from potential damage by the supererogation of energy. Under this premise, our understanding and evaluation for certain energy dissipating processes such as non-photochemical quenching or photorespiration appear in a quite new perspective, especially when discussing strategies to improve the solar energy conversion into plant biomass.

CO2: !increases! Photosynthetic activity
NADPH+H(+): !yields! Metabolic situation
Excited chlorophylls: !activate! Oxygen
Oxygen: !produces! Highly active oxygen species
Proton gradient: !controls! Non-photochemical quenching
Reduction equivalents: !re-oxidized by! Alternative electron cycling
Proteins: !protect! Plants from photodamage
Solar energy: !converted to! Plant biomass