['20813909', 'The fibrillins are a large family of chloroplast proteins that have been linked  with stress tolerance and disease resistance. FIBRILLIN4 (FIB4) is found  associated with the photosystem II light-harvesting complex, thylakoids, and  plastoglobules, which are chloroplast compartments rich in lipophilic  antioxidants. For this study, FIB4 expression was knocked down in apple (Malus 3  domestica) using RNA interference. Plastoglobule osmiophilicity was decreased in  fib4 knockdown (fib4 KD) tree chloroplasts compared with the wild type, while  total plastoglobule number was unchanged. Compared with the wild type, net  photosynthetic CO(2) fixation in fib4 KD trees was decreased at high light  intensity but was increased at low light intensity. Furthermore, fib4 KD trees  produced more anthocyanins than the wild type when transferred from low to high  light intensity, indicating greater sensitivity to high light stress. Relative to  the wild type, fib4 KD apples were more sensitive to methyl viologen and had  higher superoxide levels during methyl viologen treatment. Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) fib4 mutants and fib4 KD apples were more susceptible than  their wild-type counterparts to the bacterial pathogens Pseudomonas syringae  pathovar tomato and Erwinia amylovora, respectively, and were more sensitive to  ozone-induced tissue damage. Following ozone stress, plastoglobule osmiophilicity  decreased in wild-type apple and remained low in fib4 KD trees; total  plastoglobule number increased in fib4 KD apples but not in the wild type. These  results indicate that FIB4 is required for plastoglobule development and  resistance to multiple stresses. This study suggests that FIB4 is involved in  regulating plastoglobule content and that defective regulation of plastoglobule  content leads to broad stress sensitivity and altered photosynthetic activity.', '2010 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.164095', 'McNellis']

FIB4: !localizes to! photosystem II light-harvesting complex, thylakoids, and plastoglobules
FIB4: !affects! plastoglobule osmiophilicity 
FIB4: !enhances! net photosynthetic CO(2) fixation
FIB4: !enhances! anthocyanin production
FIB4: !enhances! resistance to methyl viologen
FIB4: !enhances! resistance to bacterial pathogens
FIB4: !enhances! resistance to ozone-induced tissue damage