['20836892', 'BACKGROUND: In all domains of life, transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules contain  modified nucleosides. Modifications to tRNAs affect their coding capacity and  influence codon-anticodon interactions. Nucleoside modification deficiencies have  a diverse range of effects, from decreased virulence in bacteria, neural system  disease in human, and gene expression and stress response changes in plants. The  purpose of this study was to identify genes involved in tRNA modification in the  model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, to understand the function of nucleoside  modifications in plant growth and development. RESULTS: In this study, we  established a method for analyzing modified nucleosides in tRNAs from the model  plant species, Arabidopsis thaliana and hybrid aspen (Populus tremula x  tremuloides). 21 modified nucleosides in tRNAs were identified in both species.  To identify the genes responsible for the plant tRNA modifications, we performed  global analysis of the Arabidopsis genome for candidate genes. Based on the  conserved domains of homologs in Sacccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli,  more than 90 genes were predicted to encode tRNA modifying enzymes in the  Arabidopsis genome. Transcript accumulation patterns for the genes in Arabidopsis  and the phylogenetic distribution of the genes among different plant species were  investigated. Transcripts for the majority of the Arabidopsis candidate genes  were found to be most abundant in rosette leaves and shoot apices. Whereas most  of the tRNA modifying gene families identified in the Arabidopsis genome was  found to be present in other plant species, there was a big variation in the  number of genes present for each family.Through a loss of function mutagenesis  study, we identified five tRNA modification genes (AtTRM10, AtTRM11, AtTRM82,  AtKTI12 and AtELP1) responsible for four specific modified nucleosides (m1G, m2G,  m7G and ncm5U), respectively (two genes: AtKTI12 and AtELP1 identified for ncm5U  modification). The AtTRM11 mutant exhibited an early-flowering phenotype, and the  AtELP1 mutant had narrow leaves, reduced root growth, an aberrant silique shape  and defects in the generation of secondary shoots. CONCLUSIONS: Using a reverse  genetics approach, we successfully isolated and identified five tRNA modification  genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. We conclude that the method established in this  study will facilitate the identification of tRNA modification genes in a wide  variety of plant species.', '2010 Sep 14', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-10-201', 'Zheng']

tRNA: !contains! modified nucleosides 
genes: !encode! tRNA modifying enzymes 
Arabidopsis genome: !predicts! genes 
transcripts: !accumulate in! rosette leaves and shoot apices 
genes: !vary in! number among plant species 
AtTRM11: !causes! early-flowering phenotype 
AtELP1: !results in! narrow leaves, reduced root growth, aberrant silique shape