['20830211', 'BACKGROUND: Programmed cell death (PCD) is a necessary part of the life of  multi-cellular organisms. A type of plant PCD is the defensive hypersensitive  response (HR) elicited via recognition of a pathogen by host resistance (R)  proteins. The lethal, recessive accelerated cell death 11 (acd11) mutant exhibits  HR-like accelerated cell death, and cell death execution in acd11 shares genetic  requirements for HR execution triggered by one subclass of R proteins.  METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To identify genes required for this PCD pathway,  we conducted a genetic screen for suppressors of acd11, here called lazarus (laz)  mutants. In addition to known suppressors of R protein-mediated HR, we isolated  13 novel complementation groups of dominant and recessive laz mutants. Here we  describe laz1, which encodes a protein with a domain of unknown function  (DUF300), and demonstrate that LAZ1 contributes to HR PCD conditioned by the  Toll/interleukin-1 (TIR)-type R protein RPS4 and by the coiled-coil (CC)-type R  protein RPM1. Using a yeast-based topology assay, we also provide evidence that  LAZ1 is a six transmembrane protein with structural similarities to the human  tumor suppressor TMEM34. Finally, we demonstrate by transient expression of  reporter fusions in protoplasts that localization of LAZ1 is distributed between  the cytosol, the plasma membrane and FM4-64 stained vesicles.  CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings indicate that LAZ1 functions as a  regulator or effector of plant PCD associated with the HR, in addition to its  role in acd11-related death. Furthermore, the similar topology of a plant and  human DUF300 proteins suggests similar functions in PCD across the eukaryotic  kingdoms, although a direct role for TMEM34 in cell death control remains to be  established. Finally, the subcellular localization pattern of LAZ1 suggests that  it may have transport functions for yet unknown, death-related signaling  molecules at the plasma membrane and/or endosomal compartments. In summary, our  results validate the utility of the large-scale suppressor screen to identify  novel components with functions in plant PCD, which may also have implications  for deciphering cell death mechanisms in other organisms.', '2010 Sep 7', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0012586', 'Mundy']

LAZ1: !contributes to! HR PCD 
LAZ1: !localizes to! cytosol, plasma membrane, vesicles 
LAZ1: !has similar topology to! human tumor suppressor TMEM34 
RPS4: !triggers! HR PCD 
RPM1: !triggers! HR PCD