['20837703', 'Calcium (Ca(2+)) signals regulate many aspects of plant development, including a  programmed cell death pathway that protects plants from pathogens (hypersensitive  response). Cytosolic Ca(2+) signals result from a combined action of Ca(2+)  influx through channels and Ca(2+) efflux through pumps and cotransporters.  Plants utilize calmodulin-activated Ca(2+) pumps (autoinhibited Ca(2+)-ATPase  [ACA]) at the plasma membrane, endoplasmic reticulum, and vacuole. Here, we show  that a double knockout mutation of the vacuolar Ca(2+) pumps ACA4 and ACA11 in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) results in a high frequency of hypersensitive  response-like lesions. The appearance of macrolesions could be suppressed by  growing plants with increased levels (greater than 15 mm) of various anions,  providing a method for conditional suppression. By removing plants from a  conditional suppression, lesion initials were found to originate primarily in  leaf mesophyll cells, as detected by aniline blue staining. Initiation and spread  of lesions could also be suppressed by disrupting the production or accumulation  of salicylic acid (SA), as shown by combining aca4/11 mutations with a sid 2 (for  salicylic acid induction-deficient2) mutation or expression of the SA degradation  enzyme NahG. This indicates that the loss of the vacuolar Ca(2+) pumps by itself  does not cause a catastrophic defect in ion homeostasis but rather potentiates  the activation of a SA-dependent programmed cell death pathway. Together, these  results provide evidence linking the activity of the vacuolar Ca(2+) pumps to the  control of a SA-dependent programmed cell death pathway in plants.', '2010 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.159038', 'Harper']

Ca(2+): !regulates! Plant Development 
ACA: !activates! Ca(2+) Pumps 
aca4/11: !results in! Hypersensitive Response-like Lesions 
Anions: !suppress! Macrolesions 
Mesophyll Cells: !originate! Lesion Initials 
SA: !potentiates! Activation of Programmed Cell Death Pathway