To test the hypothesis that leaf-level photosynthetic-related traits might confer late successionals a competitive advantage over early successionals in low-light growth conditions, steady photosynthetic assimilation- and dynamic photosynthetic induction-related traits were examined in low-light-grown seedlings with contrasting successional status. Compared with the early successionals, late successionals as a group significantly exhibited lower leaf gas exchange rates. While late successionals required a longer time to respond to simulated sunflecks, they had lower rates of induction losses after sunflecks. Such photosynthetic induction traits allowed late successionals to more effectively utilize subsequent sunflecks. It was observed that plants with lower gas exchange rates responded more slowly to simulated sunfelcks, but they had lower rates of induction losses after sunflecks. In addition, the rate of response to sunflecks was positively correlated with the rate of induction loss after sunflecks across the successional status of species. A principal components analysis (PCA) demonstrated that early and late successionals were separated along the first axis of the PCA, and that early successionals were grouped on the right and were associated with higher gas exchange rates, fast responses to sunflecks, and rapid rates of induction loss after sunflecks; late successionals held an opposite pattern. Overall, our results suggest that smaller respiratory carbon losses and lower metabolic costs give late successionals a competitive advantage in low-light growth conditions, that late successionals have an advantage over early successionals in utilizing sunflecks, and thus that the successional status of species are mainly associated with the leaf-level photosynthetic-related traits.

late successionals: !have lower! gas exchange rates 
late successionals: !require longer! time to respond to sunflecks 
late successionals: !have lower! induction losses after sunflecks 
lower gas exchange rates: !correlate with! slower response to sunflecks 
lower gas exchange rates: !correlate with! lower induction losses after sunflecks 
early successionals: !have higher! gas exchange rates 
early successionals: !respond faster! to sunflecks 
early successionals: !have higher! induction losses after sunflecks