['20876334', 'Environmental stresses are major factors in limiting plant growth and crop  production. To find genes improving salt tolerance, the screening of a large  population of transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana that expressed rice full-length  cDNAs under salinity stress is reported here. In this study one of the isolated  salt-tolerant lines, R07303 was analysed in detail. An uncharacterized rice gene  CHLOROPLAST PROTEIN-ENHANCING STRESS TOLERANCE (OsCEST) was integrated in R07303.  Newly constructed transgenic Arabidopsis that overexpressed OsCEST or its  Arabidopsis homologue AtCEST showed improved tolerance to salinity stress. OsCEST  and AtCEST were mainly transcribed in photosynthetic tissues. Green fluorescent  protein-fused OsCEST and AtCEST proteins were localized to the chloroplast in the  Arabidopsis leaf protoplasts. CEST-overexpressing Arabidopsis showed enhanced  tolerance not only to salt stress but also to drought stress, high-temperature  stress, and paraquat, which causes photooxidative stress. Under saline  conditions, overexpression of CESTs modulated the stress-induced impairment of  photosynthetic activity and the peroxidation of lipids. Reduced expression of  AtCEST because of double-stranded RNA interference resulted in the impairment of  photosynthetic activity, the reduction of green pigment, defects in chloroplast  development, and growth retardation under light. This paper discusses the  relationship between the chloroplast protein CEST and photooxidative damage.', '2011 Jan', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erq290', 'Oda']

Environmental stresses: !limit! Plant growth 
OsCEST: !enhances! Salt tolerance 
AtCEST: !enhances! Salt tolerance 
OsCEST/AtCEST: !localizes to! Chloroplast 
OsCEST/AtCEST: !enhances! Tolerance to drought, high-temperature, and paraquat 
OsCEST/AtCEST: !modulates! Stress-induced impairment of photosynthetic activity 
AtCEST: !reduces! Photosynthetic activity 
AtCEST: !impairs! Chloroplast development 
AtCEST: !retards! Growth under light