['20870712', 'The role of protein isoaspartyl methyltransferase (PIMT) in repairing a wide  assortment of damaged proteins in a host of organisms has been inferred from the  affinity of the enzyme for isoaspartyl residues in a plethora of amino acid  contexts. The identification of PIMT target proteins in plant seeds, where the  enzyme is highly active and proteome long-lived, has been hindered by large  amounts of isoaspartate-containing storage proteins. Mature seed phage display  libraries circumvented this problem. Inclusion of the PIMT co-substrate,  S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet), during panning permitted PIMT to retain aged phage  in greater numbers than controls lacking co-substrate or when PIMT protein  binding was poisoned with S-adenosyl homocysteine. After four rounds, phage titer  plateaued in AdoMet-containing pans, whereas titer declined in both controls.  This strategy identified 17 in-frame PIMT target proteins, including a  cupin-family protein similar to those identified previously using on-blot  methylation. All recovered phage had at least one susceptible Asp or Asn residue.  Five targets were recovered independently. Two in-frame targets were produced in  Escherichia coli as recombinant proteins and shown by on-blot methylation to  acquire isoAsp, becoming a PIMT target. Both gained isoAsp rapidly in solution  upon thermal insult. Mutant analysis of plants deficient in any of three in-frame  PIMT targets resulted in demonstrable phenotypes. An over-representation of  clones encoding proteins involved in protein production suggests that the  translational apparatus comprises a subgroup for which PIMT-mediated repair is  vital for orthodox seed longevity. Impaired PIMT activity would hinder protein  function in these targets, possibly resulting in poor seed performance.', '2010 Nov 26', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M110.157008', 'Downie']

PIMT: !affects! Repair 
PIMT: !retains! Aged Phage 
PIMT: !requires! AdoMet 
PIMT: !targets! Cupin-family Protein 
PIMT: !acquires! IsoAsp 
PIMT: !repairs! Translational Apparatus