To identify genes associated with the cytokinin-induced enhanced drought tolerance, we analyzed the transcriptome of wild-type and transgenic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum 'SR1') plants expressing P(SARK)::IPT (for senescence-associated receptor kinase::isopentenyltransferase) grown under well-watered and prolonged water deficit conditions using the tomato GeneChip. During water deficit, the expression of genes encoding components of the carotenoid pathway leading to ABA biosynthesis was enhanced in the wild-type plants, but repressed in the transgenic plants. On the other hand, transgenic plants displayed higher transcript abundance of genes involved in the brassinosteroid biosynthetic pathways. Several genes coding for proteins associated with Chl synthesis, light reactions, the Calvin-Benson cycle and photorespiration were induced in the transgenic plants. Notably, increased transcript abundance of genes associated with PSII, the cytochrome b(6)/f complex, PSI, NADH oxidoreductase and the ATP complex was found in the P(SARK)::IPT plants. The increased transcript abundance was assessed by quantitative PCR and the increased protein levels were confirmed by Western blots. Our results indicated that while the photosynthetic apparatus in the wild-type plants was degraded, photosynthesis in the transgenic plants was not affected and photosynthetic proteins were not degraded. During water deficit, wild-type plants displayed a significant reduction in electron transfer and photochemical quenching, with a marked increase in non-photochemical quenching, suggesting a decrease in energy transfer to the PSII core complexes and an increase in cyclic electron transfer reactions.

Gene: !enhances! ABA biosynthesis
Gene: !represses! ABA biosynthesis
Gene: !enhances! Brassinosteroid biosynthetic pathways
Gene: !enhances! Chl synthesis
Gene: !enhances! Light reactions
Gene: !enhances! Calvin-Benson cycle
Gene: !enhances! Photorespiration
Gene: !enhances! PSII
Gene: !enhances! Cytochrome b(6)/f complex
Gene: !enhances! PSI
Gene: !enhances! NADH oxidoreductase
Gene: !enhances! ATP complex
Gene: !reduces! Electron transfer
Gene: !increases! Photochemical quenching
Gene: !increases! Non-photochemical quenching