['20884812', 'Ubiquitination is a eukaryotic posttranslational protein modification that is  mediated by the cascade of E1, E2, and E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligases and is involved  in regulating numerous cellular functions. In this study, we obtained 100  different Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) T-DNA insertion mutant plants in  which RING E3 Ub ligase genes were suppressed and monitored their phenotypes in  the presence of exogenous abscisic acid (ABA), a plant stress hormone. One of  these loss-of-function mutants displayed ABA-insensitive phenotypes at the  germination stage and was named atairp1 (for Arabidopsis ABA-insensitive RING  protein 1). AtAIRP1 encodes a cytosolic protein containing a single C3H2C3-type  RING motif with in vitro E3 Ub ligase activity. AtAIRP1 was significantly induced  by ABA and drought stress. In contrast to atairp1 mutant plants,  AtAIRP1-overexpressing transgenic plants (35S:AtAIRP1-sGFP) were hypersensitive  to exogenous ABA in terms of radicle emergence, cotyledon development, root  elongation, and stomatal closure. Ectopic expression of AtAIRP1-sGFP in atairp1  effectively rescued the loss-of-function ABA-insensitive phenotype. Both  35S:AtAIRP1-sGFP and atairp1/35S:AtAIRP1-sGFP plants accumulated higher amounts  of hydrogen peroxide in response to exogenous ABA than did wild-type and atairp1  mutant plants. AtAIRP1 overexpressors were markedly tolerant to severe drought  stress, as opposed to atairp1, which was highly susceptible. The levels of  drought stress-related genes and basic leucine zipper transcription factor genes  were up-regulated in the 35S:AtAIRP1-sGFP lines relative to wild-type and atairp1  mutant plants in response to ABA. Overall, these results suggest that AtAIRP1, a  C3H2C3-type RING E3 Ub ligase, is a positive regulator in the Arabidopsis  ABA-dependent drought response.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.164749', 'Kim']

E1: !mediates! Ubiquitination 
E3 Ub ligase gene: !suppressed in! Arabidopsis mutant plants 
AtAIRP1: !encodes! C3H2C3-type RING motif 
AtAIRP1: !induced by! ABA and drought stress 
atairp1 mutant plants: !insensitive to! exogenous ABA 
35S:AtAIRP1-sGFP transgenic plants: !hypersensitive to! exogenous ABA 
AtAIRP1-sGFP: !rescues! atairp1 loss-of-function phenotype 
AtAIRP1 overexpressors: !tolerant to! severe drought stress 
AtAIRP1: !positive regulator in! Arabidopsis ABA-dependent drought response