Cytosolic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (cytFBPase) (E.C. 3.1.3.11) catalyzes the first irreversible reaction of daytime sucrose synthesis. A Flaveria linearis (F. linearis) mutant (line 84-9) previously shown to have ~10% wildtype cytFBPase activity contains no cytFBPase activity based on enzymatic and immunoprecipitation analysis. Genetic segregation and Southern analysis of an F2 population shows one gene copy of cytFBPase in F. linearis and linkage of null cytFBPase activity to the cytFBPase structural gene. A point mutation is present in the structural gene coding for cytFBPase in the mutant, causing a cryptic pre-mRNA splice site and a corresponding 24 amino acid deletion spanning the active site of the enzyme. Collectively, these data support the identification of a null-activity mutant for cytFBPase in F. linearis. This is the first report of a null mutant in the daytime sucrose synthesis pathway confirmed by both enzymatic and molecular analysis. Null cytFBPase in F. linearis does not predispose all lines to high starch accumulation due to an epistatic gene interaction; low starch accumulation in null cytFBPase lines segregates with elevated pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase (PFP) activity when grown in a 16 h photoperiod. Surprisingly, growth of parental lines and F2 progeny having null cytFBPase in continuous light rescued the wildtype growth phenotype. All null cytFBPase lines showed CO(2)-insensitivity/reversed sensitivity of photosynthesis, indicating that null cytFBPase causes a reduced total capacity for both photosynthesis and end-product synthesis regardless of starch and PFP phenotype. Collectively, the data indicate that F. linearis, a C3-C4 photosynthetic intermediate, has alternative cytFBPase-independent pathways for daytime sucrose synthesis.

CytFBPase: !catalyzes! daytime sucrose synthesis
mutant: !contains no! cytFBPase activity
point mutation: !causes! cryptic pre-mRNA splice site
null cytFBPase: !epistatically interacts with! PFP activity
null cytFBPase: !reduces! total capacity for photosynthesis and end-product synthesis