The plant sucrose transporter SUT1 (from Solanum tuberosum, S. lycopersicum, or Zea mays) exhibits redox-dependent dimerization and targeting if heterologously expressed in S. cerevisiae (Krügel et al., 2008). It was also shown that SUT1 is present in motile vesicles when expressed in tobacco cells and that its targeting to the plasma membrane is reversible. StSUT1 is internalized in the presence of brefeldin A (BFA) in yeast, plant cells, and in mature sieve elements as confirmed by immunolocalization. These results were confirmed here and the dynamics of intracellular SUT1 localization were further elucidated. Inhibitor studies revealed that vesicle movement of SUT1 is actin-dependent. BFA-mediated effects might indicate that anterograde vesicle movement is possible even in mature sieve elements, and could involve components of the cytoskeleton that were previously thought to be absent in SEs. Our results are in contradiction to this old dogma of plant physiology and the potential of mature sieve elements should therefore be re-evaluated. In addition, SUT1 internalization was found to be dependent on the plasma membrane lipid composition. SUT1 belongs to the detergent-resistant membrane (DRM) fraction in planta and is targeted to membrane raft-like microdomains when expressed in yeast (Krügel et al., 2008). Here, SUT1-GFP expression in different yeast mutants, which were unable to perform endocytosis and/or raft formation, revealed a strong link between SUT1 raft localization, the sterol composition and membrane potential of the yeast plasma membrane, and the capacity of the SUT1 protein to be internalized by endocytosis. The results provide new insight into the regulation of sucrose transport and the mechanism of endocytosis in plant cells.

SUT1: !dimerizes! redox-dependent 
SUT1: !localizes to! motile vesicles 
SUT1: !internalized by! BFA 
SUT1: !movement dependent on! actin 
SUT1: !targeted to! membrane raft-like microdomains 
SUT1: !regulated by! plasma membrane lipid composition 
SUT1: !internalized by! endocytosis