Low temperature is one of the abiotic factors limiting plant growth and productivity. Yet, knowledge about sex-related responses to low temperature is very limited. In our study, the effects of low, non-freezing temperature on morphological, physiological, and ultrastructural traits of leaves in Populus cathayana Rehd. males and females were investigated. The results showed that 4 °C temperature caused a chilling stress, and females suffered from greater negative effects than did males. At the early growth stage of development, chilling (4 °C) significantly inhibited plant growth, decreased net photosynthesis rate (P(n)), stomatal conductance (g(s)), transpiration (E), and chlorophyll pigments (Chl), and increased intercellular CO(2) concentration (C(i)), chlorophyll a/b (Chl a/b), proline, soluble sugar and H(2)O(2) contents, and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity in both sexes, whereas peroxidase (POD) and glutathione reductase (GR) activities decreased and thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) content increased only in females. Chilling stress also caused chloroplast changes and an accumulation of numerous plastoglobules and small vesicles in both sexes. However, disintegrated chloroplasts and numerous tilted grana stacks were only found in chilling-stressed females. Under chilling stress, males showed higher Chl and soluble sugar contents, and higher superoxide dismutase (SOD), POD, and GR activities than did females. In addition, males exhibited a better chloroplast structure and more intact plasma membranes than did females under chilling stress. These results suggest that sexually different responses to chilling are significant and males possess a better self-protection mechanism than do females in P. cathayana.

Low temperature: !inhibits! Plant growth
Low temperature: !decreases! P(n)
Low temperature: !decreases! g(s)
Low temperature: !increases! C(i)
Low temperature: !increases! Chl a/b
Low temperature: !increases! Proline
Low temperature: !increases! Soluble sugar
Low temperature: !increases! H(2)O(2)
Low temperature: !increases! APX activity
Low temperature: !decreases! POD activity
Low temperature: !decreases! GR activity
Low temperature: !increases! TBARS content
Low temperature: !causes! Chloroplast changes
Males: !exhibit better! Self-protection mechanism
Females: !suffer greater! Negative effects