['20921156', 'We studied the function of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) Botrytis  Susceptible1 Interactor (BOI) in plant responses to pathogen infection and  abiotic stress. BOI physically interacts with and ubiquitinates Arabidopsis BOS1,  an R2R3MYB transcription factor previously implicated in stress and pathogen  responses. In transgenic plants expressing the BOS1-beta-glucuronidase transgene,  beta-glucuronidase activity could be detected only after inhibition of the  proteosome, suggesting that BOS1 is a target of ubiquitin-mediated degradation by  the proteosome. Plants with reduced BOI transcript levels generated through RNA  interference (BOI RNAi) were more susceptible to the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis  cinerea and less tolerant to salt stress. In addition, BOI RNAi plants exhibited  increased cell death induced by the phytotoxin alpha-picolinic acid and by a virulent  strain of the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae, coincident with peak  disease symptoms. However, the hypersensitive cell death associated with  different race-specific resistance genes was unaffected by changes in the level  of BOI transcript. BOI expression was enhanced by B. cinerea and salt stress but  repressed by the plant hormone gibberellin, indicating a complex regulation of  BOI gene expression. Interestingly, BOI RNAi plants exhibit reduced growth  responsiveness to gibberellin. We also present data revealing the function of  three Arabidopsis BOI-RELATED GENES (BRGs), which contribute to B. cinerea  resistance and the suppression of disease-associated cell death. In sum, BOI and  BRGs represent a subclass of RING E3 ligases that contribute to plant disease  resistance and abiotic stress tolerance through the suppression of  pathogen-induced as well as stress-induced cell death.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.163915', 'Mengiste']

BOI: !interacts with! BOS1 
BOI: !ubiquitinates! BOS1 
BOI: !enhances! Botrytis cinerea resistance 
BOI: !enhances! salt stress tolerance 
BOI: !represses! alpha-picolinic acid cell death 
BOI: !represses! Pseudomonas syringae cell death 
BOI: !enhanced by! B. cinerea 
BOI: !enhanced by! salt stress 
BOI: !repressed by! gibberellin 
BRGs: !contribute to! B. cinerea resistance 
BRGs: !suppress! disease-associated cell death