['20935176', 'Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) have been well documented to be involved in  diverse aspects of biotic and abiotic stresses, especially detoxification  processes. Whether they regulate plant development remains unclear. Here, we  report on our isolation by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction of a  plant GST, AtGSTU17, from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and demonstrate that  its expression is regulated by multiple photoreceptors, especially phytochrome A  (phyA) under all light conditions. Further physiological studies indicated that  AtGSTU17 participates in various aspects of seedling development, including  hypocotyl elongation, anthocyanin accumulation, and far-red light-mediated  inhibition of greening with a requirement of functional phyA. The  loss-of-function mutant of AtGSTU17 (atgstu17) resulted in reduced biomass of  seedlings and number of lateral roots in the presence of auxin, as well as  insensitivity to abscisic acid (ABA)-mediated inhibition of root elongation, with  similarity to different phyA mutant alleles. Moreover, the root phenotype  conferred by atgstu17 was reflected by histochemical beta-glucuronidase staining of  AtGSTU17 promoter activity with the addition of auxin or ABA. Further microarray  analysis of wild-type Columbia and atgstu17 seedlings treated with far-red  irradiation or ABA revealed that AtGSTU17 might modulate hypocotyl elongation by  positively regulating some light-signaling components and negatively regulating a  group of auxin-responsive genes and modulate root development by negatively  controlling an auxin transport protein in the presence of ABA. Therefore, our  data reveal that AtGSTU17 participates in light signaling and might modulate  various aspects of Arabidopsis development by affecting glutathione pools via a  coordinated regulation with phyA and phytohormones.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.159152', 'Hsieh']

AtGSTU17: !regulates! Plant Development 
AtGSTU17: !regulated by! Multiple Photoreceptors 
AtGSTU17: !participates in! Seedling Development 
AtGSTU17: !affects! Glutathione Pools 
AtGSTU17: !coordinated with! PhyA and Phytohormones 
PhyA: !regulates! AtGSTU17 Expression 
Auxin: !influences! AtGSTU17 Promoter Activity 
ABA: !modulates! Root Development