['20935174', 'The Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) yellow variegated2 (var2) mutant has  green- and white-sectored leaves due to loss of VAR2, a subunit of the  chloroplast FtsH protease/chaperone complex. Suppressor screens are a valuable  tool to gain insight into VAR2 function and the mechanism of var2 variegation.  Here, we report the molecular characterization of 004-003, a line in which var2  variegation is suppressed. We found that the suppression phenotype in this line  is caused by lack of a chloroplast pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) protein that we  named SUPPRESSOR OF VARIEGATION7 (SVR7). PPR proteins contain tandemly repeated  PPR motifs that bind specific RNAs, and they are thought to be central regulators  of chloroplast and mitochondrial nucleic acid metabolism in plants. The svr7  mutant has defects in chloroplast ribosomal RNA (rRNA) processing that are  different from those in other svr mutants, and these defects are correlated with  reductions in the accumulation of some chloroplast proteins, directly or  indirectly. We also found that whereas var2 displays a leaf variegation phenotype  at 22 degrees C, it has a pronounced chlorosis phenotype at 8 degrees C that is correlated with  defects in chloroplast rRNA processing and a drastic reduction in chloroplast  protein accumulation. Surprisingly, the cold-induced phenotype of var2 cannot be  suppressed by svr7. Our results strengthen the previously established linkage  between var2 variegation and chloroplast rRNA processing/chloroplast translation,  and they also point toward the possibility that VAR2 mediates different  activities in chloroplast biogenesis at normal and chilling temperatures.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.164111', 'Rodermel']

VAR2: !affects! chloroplast FtsH protease/chaperone complex
SVR7: !suppresses! VAR2 variegation
PPR protein: !binds! specific RNAs
SVR7: !causes defects in! chloroplast ribosomal RNA (rRNA) processing
VAR2: !displays! leaf variegation phenotype at 22 degrees C
VAR2: !displays! chlorosis phenotype at 8 degrees C
SVR7: !cannot suppress! cold-induced phenotype of VAR2