['20940346', 'High mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family are chromatin-associated  proteins that as architectural factors are involved in the regulation of  transcription and other DNA-dependent processes. HMGB proteins are generally  considered nuclear proteins, although mammalian HMGB1 can also be detected in the  cytoplasm and outside of cells. Plant HMGB proteins studied so far were found  exclusively in the cell nucleus. Using immunofluorescence and fluorescence  microscopy of HMGB proteins fused to the green fluorescent protein, we have  examined the subcellular localization of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  HMGB2/3 and HMGB4 proteins, revealing that, in addition to a prominent nuclear  localization, they can be detected also in the cytoplasm. The nucleocytoplasmic  distribution appears to depend on the cell type. By time-lapse fluorescence  microscopy, it was observed that the HMGB2 and HMGB4 proteins tagged with  photoactivatable green fluorescent protein can shuttle between the nucleus and  the cytoplasm, while HMGB1 remains nuclear. The balance between the basic  amino-terminal and the acidic carboxyl-terminal domains flanking the central HMG  box DNA-binding domain critically influences the nucleocytoplasmic distribution  of the HMGB proteins. Moreover, protein kinase CK2-mediated phosphorylation of  the acidic tail modulates the intranuclear distribution of HMGB2. Collectively,  our results show that, in contrast to other Arabidopsis HMGB proteins such as  HMGB1 and HMGB5, the HMGB2/3 and HMGB4 proteins occur preferentially in the cell  nucleus, but to various extents also in the cytoplasm.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.163055', 'Grasser']

HMGB proteins: !are involved in! regulation of transcription 
HMGB proteins: !localize to! nucleus and cytoplasm 
HMGB2/3 and HMGB4: !shuttle between! nucleus and cytoplasm 
basic amino-terminal domain: !influences! nucleocytoplasmic distribution 
acidic carboxyl-terminal domain: !influences! nucleocytoplasmic distribution 
protein kinase CK2: !modulates! intranuclear distribution of HMGB2