Iron deficiency induces several responses to iron shortage in plants. Metabolic changes occur to sustain the increased iron uptake capacity of Fe-deficient plants. We evaluated the metabolic changes of three Prunus rootstocks submitted to iron chlorosis and their different responses for tolerance using measurements of metabolites and enzymatic activities. The more tolerant rootstocks Adesoto (Prunus insititia) and GF 677 (Prunus amygdalus×Prunus persica), and the more sensitive Barrier (P. persica×Prunus davidiana) were grown hydroponically in iron-sufficient and -deficient conditions over two weeks. Sugar, organic and amino acid concentrations of root tips were determined after two weeks of iron shortage by proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of extracts. Complementary analyses of organic acids were performed by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. The major soluble sugars found were glucose and sucrose. The major organic acids were malic and citric acids, and the major amino acid was asparagine. Iron deficiency increased root sucrose, total organic and amino acid concentrations and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase activity. After two weeks of iron deficiency, the malic, citric and succinic acid concentrations increased in the three rootstocks, although no significant differences were found among genotypes with different tolerance to iron chlorosis. The tolerant rootstock Adesoto showed higher total organic and amino acid concentrations. In contrast, the susceptible rootstock Barrier showed lower total amino acid concentration and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase activity values. These results suggest that the induction of this enzyme activity under iron deficiency, as previously shown in herbaceous plants, indicates the tolerance level of rootstocks to iron chlorosis. The analysis of other metabolic parameters, such as organic and amino acid concentrations, provides complementary information for selection of genotypes tolerant to iron chlorosis.

Iron deficiency: !induces! Metabolic changes 
Metabolic changes: !sustain! Increased iron uptake capacity 
Rootstocks: !differ in! Tolerance to iron chlorosis 
Iron deficiency: !increases! Root sucrose, total organic and amino acid concentrations and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase activity 
Malic, citric and succinic acid concentrations: !increase! In all rootstocks 
Tolerant rootstock Adesoto: !shows higher! Total organic and amino acid concentrations 
Susceptible rootstock Barrier: !shows lower! Total amino acid concentration and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase activity values