['20959419', 'To investigate early salt acclimation mechanisms in a salt-tolerant poplar  species (Populus euphratica), the kinetics of molecular, metabolic, and  physiological changes during a 24-h salt exposure were measured. Three distinct  phases of salt stress were identified by analyses of the osmotic pressure and the  shoot water potential: dehydration, salt accumulation, and osmotic restoration  associated with ionic stress. The duration and intensity of these phases differed  between leaves and roots. Transcriptome analysis using P. euphratica-specific  microarrays revealed clusters of coexpressed genes in these phases, with only 3%  overlapping salt-responsive genes in leaves and roots. Acclimation of cellular  metabolism to high salt concentrations involved remodeling of amino acid and  protein biosynthesis and increased expression of molecular chaperones (dehydrins,  osmotin). Leaves suffered initially from dehydration, which resulted in changes  in transcript levels of mitochondrial and photosynthetic genes, indicating  adjustment of energy metabolism. Initially, decreases in stress-related genes  were found, whereas increases occurred only when leaves had restored the osmotic  balance by salt accumulation. Comparative in silico analysis of the poplar stress  regulon with Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) orthologs was used as a strategy  to reduce the number of candidate genes for functional analysis. Analysis of  Arabidopsis knockout lines identified a lipocalin-like gene (AtTIL) and a gene  encoding a protein with previously unknown functions (AtSIS) to play roles in  salt tolerance. In conclusion, by dissecting the stress transcriptome of tolerant  species, novel genes important for salt endurance can be identified.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.164152', 'Polle']

Dehydration: !affects! Photosynthetic genes 
Salt accumulation: !enhances! Molecular chaperones 
Osmotic balance: !represses! Stress-related genes 
AtTIL: !plays role in! Salt tolerance 
AtSIS: !plays role in! Salt tolerance