['20965997', 'Lateral root primordia are initiated by anticlinal division of cells in the  pericycle and are constructed through an ordered set of cell divisions. At the  completion of the development of the primordium, cell division ceases, after  which the lateral root meristem is activated. In Arabidopsis, this course of  lateral root morphogenesis was found to be significantly susceptible to srd2-1, a  temperature-sensitive mutation of the SRD2 gene encoding an activator of small  nuclear RNA (snRNA) transcription. The srd2-1 mutation altered the organization  of cells of the root primordium and, importantly, maintained primordial cell  division for a long period, resulting in the formation of abnormal hemispherical  laterals. Expression patterns of various reporter genes suggested that both the  apical-basal and radial axes were not well established in the lateral root  primordia of the srd2-1 mutant. In the early stages of development of the  primordium, the srd2-1 mutation reduced the amount of the auxin efflux  facilitator PIN-FORMED (PIN) and, probably by this means, interfered with the  generation of an auxin gradient. Spliceosomal snRNAs accumulated at high levels  throughout young root primordia and then decreased in association with the arrest  of cell division, and finally increased again when the apical meristem became  activated. The accumulation of snRNAs was severely suppressed by the srd2-1  mutation, and this was detectable before any morphological defect became evident.  These findings suggest that high-level accumulation of snRNA involving the SRD2  function is particularly important for expression of PINs in polarized pattern  generation during the development of lateral root primordia.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcq159', 'Sugiyama']

SRD2: !activates! snRNA transcription
srd2-1 mutation: !alters! organization of cells in root primordium
srd2-1 mutation: !reduces! amount of PIN
snRNAs: !accumulate! throughout young root primordia
srd2-1 mutation: !suppresses! accumulation of snRNAs
SRD2 function: !important for! expression of PINs