['20978221', 'Here, we describe the snowy cotyledon3 (sco3-1) mutation, which impairs  chloroplast and etioplast development in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. SCO3 is  a member of a largely uncharacterized protein family unique to the plant kingdom.  The sco3-1 mutation alters chloroplast morphology and development, reduces  chlorophyll accumulation, impairs thylakoid formation and photosynthesis in  seedlings, and results in photoinhibition under extreme CO(2) concentrations in  mature leaves. There are no readily apparent changes to chloroplast biology, such  as transcription or assembly that explain the disruption to chloroplast  biogenesis. Indeed, SCO3 is actually targeted to another organelle, specifically  to the periphery of peroxisomes. However, impaired chloroplast development cannot  be attributed to perturbed peroxisomal metabolic processes involving germination,  fatty acid beta-oxidation or photorespiration, though there are so far undescribed  changes in low and high CO(2) sensitivity in seedlings and young true leaves.  Many of the chloroplasts are bilobed, and some have persistent membranous  extensions that encircle other cellular components. Significantly, there are  changes to the cytoskeleton in sco3-1, and microtubule inhibitors have similar  effects on chloroplast biogenesis as sco3-1 does. The localization of SCO3 to the  periphery of the peroxisomes was shown to be dependent on a functional  microtubule cytoskeleton. Therefore, the microtubule and peroxisome-associated  SCO3 protein is required for chloroplast development, and sco3-1, along with  microtubule inhibitors, demonstrates an unexpected role for the cytoskeleton and  peroxisomes in chloroplast biogenesis.', '2010 Oct', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.110.074781', 'Pogson']

SCO3: !affects! chloroplast development 
SCO3: !localizes to! peroxisomes 
microtubule inhibitors: !have similar effects on! chloroplast biogenesis 
microtubule cytoskeleton: !required for! SCO3 localization 
microtubule cytoskeleton: !required for! chloroplast development