Ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (ERF) genes constitute one of the largest transcription factor gene families in plants. In Arabidopsis and rice, only a few ERF genes have been characterized so far. Flower senescence is associated with increased ethylene production in many flowers. However, the characterization of ERF genes in flower senescence has not been reported. In this study, 13 ERF cDNAs were cloned from petunia. Based on the sequence characterization, these PhERFs could be classified into four of the 12 known ERF families. Their predicted amino acid sequences exhibited similarities to ERFs from other plant species. Expression analyses of PhERF mRNAs were performed in corollas and gynoecia of petunia flower. The 13 PhERF genes displayed differential expression patterns and levels during natural flower senescence. Exogenous ethylene accelerates the transcription of the various PhERF genes, and silver thiosulphate (STS) decreased the transcription of several PhERF genes in corollas and gynoecia. PhERF genes of group VII showed a strong association with the rise in ethylene production in both petals and gynoecia, and might be associated particularly with flower senescence in petunia. The effect of sugar, methyl jasmonate, and the plant hormones abscisic acid, salicylic acid, and 6-benzyladenine in regulating the different PhERF transcripts was investigated. Functional nuclear localization signal analyses of two PhERF proteins (PhERF2 and PhERF3) were carried out using fluorescence microscopy. These results supported a role for petunia PhERF genes in transcriptional regulation of petunia flower senescence processes.

Ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (ERF): !constitutes! largest transcription factor gene family
ERF: !characterized! Arabidopsis and rice
Flower senescence: !associated with! increased ethylene production
13 ERF cDNAs: !cloned from! petunia
PhERF: !classified into! four of 12 known ERF families
PhERF mRNAs: !displayed differential expression patterns and levels! during natural flower senescence
Exogenous ethylene: !accelerates! transcription of various PhERF genes
Silver thiosulphate (STS): !decreased! transcription of several PhERF genes
Group VII PhERF genes: !strongly associated with! rise in ethylene production
Sugar, methyl jasmonate, abscisic acid, salicylic acid, 6-benzyladenine: !regulate! different PhERF transcripts
PhERF2 and PhERF3 proteins: !analysed using fluorescence microscopy! for functional nuclear localization signal