The transcription factor HAHB10 belongs to the sunflower (Helianthus annuus) HD-Zip II subfamily and it has been previously associated with the induction of flowering. In this study it is shown that HAHB10 is expressed in sunflower leaves throughout the vegetative stage and in stamens during the reproductive stage. In short-day inductive conditions the expression of this gene is induced in shoot apexes together with the expression of the flowering genes HAFT and HAAP1. Transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing HAHB10 cDNA under regulation either by its own promoter or by cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S exhibited an early flowering phenotype. This phenotype was completely reverted in a non-inductive light regime, indicating a photoperiod-dependent action for this transcription factor. Gene expression profiling of Arabidopsis plants constitutively expressing HAHB10 indicated that specific flowering transition genes such as FT, FUL, and SEP3 were induced several fold, whereas genes related to biotic stress responses, such as PR1, PR2, ICS1, AOC1, EDS5, and PDF1-2a, were repressed. The expression of HAHB10 and of the flowering genes HASEP3 and HAFT was up-regulated by both salicylic acid (SA) treatment and infection with a virulent strain of Pseudomonas syringae. Basal SA and jasmonic acid (JA) levels in Arabidopsis plants ectopically expressing HAHB10 were similar to those of control plants; however, SA levels differentially increased in the transgenic plants after wounding and infection with P. syringae while JA levels differentially decreased. Taken together, the results indicated that HAHB10 participates in two different processes in plants: the transition from the vegetative to the flowering stage via the induction of specific flowering transition genes and the accumulation of phytohormones upon biotic stresses.

HAHB10: !induces! flowering
HAHB10: !induces! HAFT and HAAP1
HAHB10: !induces! FT, FUL, SEP3
HAHB10: !represses! PR1, PR2, ICS1, AOC1, EDS5, PDF1-2a
HAHB10: !upregulates! HASEP3 and HAFT
HAHB10: !increases! SA levels
HAHB10: !decreases! JA levels