['21051239', 'Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), a vitamin B(6) vitamer, is an essential cofactor for  numerous enzymes. Pyridoxine/pyridoxamine phosphate oxidase (PPOX) catalyzes the  synthesis of pyridoxal phosphate from pyridoxine phosphate (PNP) and/or  pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP). The At5g49970 locus in Arabidopsis thaliana encodes  an AtPPOX, a PNP/PMP oxidase. The expression of the AtPPOX gene varied in  different tissues of Arabidopsis examined, being up-regulated by light, heat  shock, ABA, and ethylene treatments, and down-regulated by exposure to drought  and NaCl. Monoclonal antibodies raised against two different domains of AtPPOX  recognized different sizes of AtPPOX, suggesting that AtPPOX proteins are  produced as splice variants of the AtPPOX gene in Arabidopsis. Phylogenetic  analysis of AtPPOX across all domains of life demonstrated that plant AtPPOX  homologs have an additional Yjef_N domain preceding the Pyridox_Oxidase domain at  the C-terminal end of the protein, while AtPPOX homologs from bacteria, fungi and  animals have only Pyridox_Oxidase domain. The presence of the Yjef_N domain in  plant AtPPOX homologs suggests that acquisition of this domain, and its fusion  with the pyridox_oxidase domain began with the endosymbiotic acquisition of the  chloroplast. Bioinformatic analysis suggested that AtPPOX is localized in  chloroplast, but the monoclonal antibody could not be used for subcellular  localization of this protein. A GFP-AtPPOX fusion construct introduced into the  Arabidopsis protoplast confirmed localization of AtPPOX into the chloroplast. An  RNAi mutant of AtPPOX showed sensitivity to high light suggesting a role for PPOX  in resistance to photooxidative damage, and alteration in root growth in the  presence of sucrose suggests a role for PPOX in root development.', '2011 Jan', 'Plant Physiol Biochem', '10.1016/j.plaphy.2010.10.003', 'Singh']

AtPPOX: !synthesizes! PLP 
AtPPOX: !localizes to! chloroplast 
AtPPOX: !enhances! resistance to photooxidative damage 
AtPPOX: !affects! root growth