['21060858', 'Eukaryotic DNA cytosine methylation can be used to transcriptionally silence  repetitive sequences, including transposons and retroviruses. This silencing is  stable between cell generations as cytosine methylation is maintained  epigenetically through DNA replication. The Arabidopsis thaliana Dnmt3 cytosine  methyltransferase ortholog DOMAINS rearranged methyltransferase2 (DRM2) is  required for establishment of small interfering RNA (siRNA) directed DNA  methylation. In mammals PIWI proteins and piRNA act in a convergently evolved  RNA-directed DNA methylation system that is required to repress transposon  expression in the germ line. De novo methylation may also be independent of RNA  interference and small RNAs, as in Neurospora crassa. Here we identify a clade of  catalytically mutated DRM2 paralogs in flowering plant genomes, which in  A.thaliana we term domains rearranged methyltransferase3 (DRM3). Despite being  catalytically mutated, DRM3 is required for normal maintenance of non-CG DNA  methylation, establishment of RNA-directed DNA methylation triggered by repeat  sequences and accumulation of repeat-associated small RNAs. Although the  mammalian catalytically inactive Dnmt3L paralogs act in an analogous manner,  phylogenetic analysis indicates that the DRM and Dnmt3 protein families diverged  independently in plants and animals. We also show by site-directed mutagenesis  that both the DRM2 N-terminal UBA domains and C-terminal methyltransferase domain  are required for normal RNA-directed DNA methylation, supporting an essential  targeting function for the UBA domains. These results suggest that plant and  mammalian RNA-directed DNA methylation systems consist of a combination of  ancestral and convergent features.', '2010 Oct 28', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1001182', 'Jacobsen']

DNA: !maintained epigenetically through! DNA replication 
DRM2: !required for! siRNA-directed DNA methylation 
PIWI proteins: !act in! convergently evolved RNA-directed DNA methylation system 
Neurospora crassa: !may have! de novo methylation independent of RNA interference 
DRM3: !required for! maintenance of non-CG DNA methylation 
DRM3: !required for! establishment of RNA-directed DNA methylation 
DRM2: !requires! UBA domains and C-terminal methyltransferase domain 
DRM and Dnmt3 protein families: !diverged independently in! plants and animals