Our previous study indicated that PSII is more sensitive to chilling and light stress than PSI in tropical trees, and Erythrophleum guineense is more sensitive to chilling stress than Dalbergia odorifera and Khaya ivorensis, but the underlying physiological mechanisms are unclear. Although recent studies have reported that cyclic electron flow (CEF) plays an important role in photoprotection, the role of CEF in protecting PSI and PSII of tropical tree species remains unclear. We investigated the effect of temporal chilling temperature on energy distribution in PSII, the redox state of P700 and CEF in the above-mentioned tropical evergreen tree species grown in an open field. Our results indicated that the overclosure of PSII reaction centers at chilling temperature led to excess excitation pressure in PSII. At the temporal chilling temperature under low light, PSI acceptor side limitation [Y(NA)] was lower than those at 25°C for all species. Although the effective quantum yield of CEF [Y(CEF)] was not significantly stimulated in E. guineense and K. ivorensis under temporal chilling at low light levels, the ratio of Y(CEF) to the effective quantum yield of PSII [Y(II)] significantly increased. Under chilling conditions Y(CEF)/Y(II) was stimulated much more in K. ivorensis and D. odorifera compared with that in the chilling-sensitive E. guineense. These results suggested that stimulation of Y(CEF)/Y(II) plays an important role in protecting PSI and PSII from photoinhibition caused by chilling stress.

PSII: !more sensitive to! chilling and light stress 
E. guineense: !more sensitive to! chilling stress 
CEF: !plays an important role in! photoprotection 
temporal chilling temperature: !overclosure of! PSII reaction centers 
Y(NA): !lower than! 25°C 
Y(CEF): !not significantly stimulated in! E. guineense and K. ivorensis 
Y(CEF)/Y(II): !significantly increased! under chilling conditions 
Y(CEF)/Y(II): !stimulated much more in! K. ivorensis and D. odorifera 
Y(CEF)/Y(II): !protects PSI and PSII from! photoinhibition