['21087810', 'Plastidial degradation of transitory starch yields mainly maltose and glucose.  Following the export into the cytosol, maltose acts as donor for a glucosyl  transfer to cytosolic heteroglycans as mediated by a cytosolic transglucosidase  (DPE2; EC 2.4.1.25) and the second glucosyl residue is liberated as glucose. The  cytosolic phosphorylase (Pho2/PHS2; EC 2.4.1.1) also interacts with heteroglycans  using the same intramolecular sites as DPE2. Thus, the two glucosyl transferases  interconnect the cytosolic pools of glucose and glucose 1-phosphate. Due to the  complex monosaccharide pattern, other heteroglycan-interacting proteins (HIPs)  are expected to exist. Identification of those proteins was approached by using  two types of affinity chromatography. Heteroglycans from leaves of Arabidopsis  thaliana (Col-0) covalently bound to Sepharose served as ligands that were  reacted with a complex mixture of buffer-soluble proteins from Arabidopsis  leaves. Binding proteins were eluted by sodium chloride. For identification,  SDS-PAGE, tryptic digestion and MALDI-TOF analyses were applied. A strongly  interacting polypeptide (approximately 40kDa; designated as HIP1.3) was observed  as product of locus At1g09340. Arabidopsis mutants deficient in HIP1.3 were  reduced in growth and contained heteroglycans displaying an altered  monosaccharide pattern. Wild type plants express HIP1.3 most strongly in leaves.  As revealed by immuno fluorescence, HIP1.3 is located in the cytosol of mesophyll  cells but mostly associated with the cytosolic surface of the chloroplast  envelope membranes. In an HIP1.3-deficient mutant the immunosignal was  undetectable. Metabolic profiles from leaves of this mutant and wild type plants  as well were determined by GC-MS. As compared to the wild type control, more than  ten metabolites, such as ascorbic acid, fructose, fructose bisphosphate, glucose,  glycine, were elevated in darkness but decreased in the light. Although the  biochemical function of HIP1.3 has not yet been elucidated, it is likely to  possess an important function in the central carbon metabolism of higher plants.', '2011 Aug 15', 'J Plant Physiol', '10.1016/j.jplph.2010.09.008', 'Steup']

DPE2: !mediates! Glucosyl transfer 
Pho2/PHS2: !interacts with! Heteroglycans 
HIPs: !expected to exist! 
HIP1.3: !interacts strongly with! Heteroglycans 
HIP1.3: !localizes to! Cytosol & Chloroplast Envelope 
HIP1.3: !affects! Metabolic Profiles