['21088220', 'A family of peptide signaling molecules (AtPeps) and their plasma membrane  receptor AtPepR1 are known to act in pathogen-defense signaling cascades in  plants. Little is currently known about the molecular mechanisms that link these  signaling peptides and their receptor, a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like  kinase, to downstream pathogen-defense responses. We identify some cellular  activities of these molecules that provide the context for a model for their  action in signaling cascades. AtPeps activate plasma membrane inwardly conducting  Ca(2+) permeable channels in mesophyll cells, resulting in cytosolic Ca(2+)  elevation. This activity is dependent on their receptor as well as a cyclic  nucleotide-gated channel (CNGC2). We also show that the leucine-rich repeat  receptor-like kinase receptor AtPepR1 has guanylyl cyclase activity, generating  cGMP from GTP, and that cGMP can activate CNGC2-dependent cytosolic Ca(2+)  elevation. AtPep-dependent expression of pathogen-defense genes (PDF1.2, MPK3,  and WRKY33) is mediated by the Ca(2+) signaling pathway associated with AtPep  peptides and their receptor. The work presented here indicates that extracellular  AtPeps, which can act as danger-associated molecular patterns, signal by  interaction with their receptor, AtPepR1, a plasma membrane protein that can  generate cGMP. Downstream from AtPep and AtPepR1 in a signaling cascade, the  cGMP-activated channel CNGC2 is involved in AtPep- and AtPepR1-dependent inward  Ca(2+) conductance and resulting cytosolic Ca(2+) elevation. The signaling  cascade initiated by AtPeps leads to expression of pathogen-defense genes in a  Ca(2+)-dependent manner.', '2010 Dec 7', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1000191107', 'Berkowitz']

AtPeps: !activate! CNGC2 
AtPepR1: !interacts with! AtPeps 
AtPepR1: !generates! cGMP 
cGMP: !activates! CNGC2 
AtPeps/AtPepR1: !initiate! signaling cascade 
signaling cascade: !leads to! expression of pathogen-defense genes 
expression of pathogen-defense genes: !dependent on! Ca(2+)