Increasing food production and mitigating climate change are two primary but seemingly contradictory objectives for tropical landscapes. This special feature examines synergies and trade-offs among these objectives. Four themes emerge from the papers: the important roles of both forest and agriculture sectors for climate mitigation in tropical countries; the minor contribution from deforestation-related agricultural expansion to overall food production at global and continental scales; the opportunities for synergies between improved food production and reductions in greenhouse gas emissions through diversion of agricultural expansion to already-cleared lands, improved soil, crop, and livestock management, and agroforestry; and the need for targeted policy and management interventions to make these synergistic opportunities a reality. We conclude that agricultural intensification is a key factor to meet dual objectives of food production and climate mitigation, but there is no single panacea for balancing these objectives in all tropical landscapes. Place-specific strategies for sustainable land use emerge from assessments of current land use, demographics, and other biophysical and socioeconomic characteristics, using a whole-landscape, multisector perspective.

Forest: !contributes to! Climate Mitigation
Agriculture: !contributes to! Climate Mitigation
Deforestation-related Agricultural Expansion: !minor contribution to! Food Production
Agricultural Expansion: !diverted to! Already-Cleared Lands
Soil Management: !improved for! Synergies between Food Production and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Crop Management: !improved for! Synergies between Food Production and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Livestock Management: !improved for! Synergies between Food Production and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Agroforestry: !opportunity for! Synergies between Food Production and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Policy Interventions: !needed for! Making Synergistic Opportunities a Reality
Agricultural Intensification: !key factor for! Meeting Dual Objectives of Food Production and Climate Mitigation