['21098677', 'In land-plant chloroplasts, the grana play multiple roles in photosynthesis,  including the potential increase of photosynthetic capacity in light and  enhancement of photochemical efficiency in shade. However, the molecular  mechanisms of grana formation remain elusive. Here, we report a novel gene,  Grana-Deficient Chloroplast1 (GDC1), required for chloroplast grana formation in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). In the chloroplast of knockout mutant gdc1-3,  only stromal thylakoids were observed, and they could not stack together to form  appressed grana. The mutant exhibited seedling lethality with pale green  cotyledons and true leaves. Further blue native-polyacrylamide gel  electrophoresis analysis indicated that the trimeric forms of Light-Harvesting  Complex II (LHCII) were scarcely detected in gdc1-3, confirming previous reports  that the LHCII trimer is essential for grana formation. The Lhcb1 protein, the  major component of the LHCIIb trimer, was substantially reduced, and another  LHCIIb trimer component, Lhcb2, was slightly reduced in the gdc1-3 mutant,  although their transcription levels were not altered in the mutant. This suggests  that defective LHCII trimer formation in gdc1-3 is due to low amounts of Lhcb1  and Lhcb2. GDC1 encodes a chloroplast protein with an ankyrin domain within the  carboxyl terminus. It was highly expressed in Arabidopsis green tissues, and its  expression was induced by photosignaling pathways. Immunoblot analysis of the  GDC1-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion protein in 35S::GDC1-GFP transgenic  plants with GFP antibody indicates that GDC1 is associated with an approximately  440-kD thylakoid protein complex instead of the LHCII trimer. This shows that  GDC1 may play an indirect role in LHCII trimerization during grana formation.', '2011 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.165589', 'Yang']

GDC1: !encodes! chloroplast protein 
GDC1: !induces! photosignaling pathways 
GDC1: !associates with! 440-kD thylakoid protein complex 
LHCII trimer: !essential for! grana formation 
Lhcb1, Lhcb2: !compose! LHCIIb trimer 
gdc1-3 mutant: !reduces! Lhcb1, Lhcb2