The effects of 2-aminoindane-2-phosphonic acid (AIP), a potent phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) inhibitor, on the accumulation of cadmium and nickel in chamomile (Matricaria chamomilla) were examined in this study. In vitro assay of AIP effect showed a 90% reduction in PAL activity. In plants cultured for 7 days in Cd or Ni solutions with AIP, PAL activity was higher in both shoots and roots (in comparison with metals without AIP), and was correlated with changes in free phenylalanine content. Individual amino acids were both positively and negatively affected by AIP, with the accumulation of tyrosine and proline showing increases in some variants. Contents of soluble phenols and flavonoids were not considerably affected, while amounts of coumarin-related compounds, cell wall-bound phenols and phenolic acids were substantially reduced in AIP-treated variants. Lignin accumulation decreased in controls and increased in Cd variants in response to AIP. Shoot Cd content was depleted, but shoot Ni was elevated by AIP. Total root content of Cd and Ni decreased in +AIP variants. AIP also caused more expressive changes in hydrogen peroxide and superoxide content in Cd than in Ni variants. Our results indicate that phenols have important roles in the uptake of Cd and Ni. The present findings are discussed in the context of available data regarding AIP's effect on phenols.

PAL: !inhibited by! AIP
AIP: !reduces! PAL activity
PAL: !correlated with! changes in free phenylalanine content
AIP: !affects! individual amino acids
AIP: !reduces! contents of soluble phenols and flavonoids
AIP: !increases! amounts of coumarin-related compounds, cell wall-bound phenols and phenolic acids
AIP: !decreases! lignin accumulation
AIP: !depletes! shoot Cd content
AIP: !elevates! shoot Ni content
AIP: !decreases! total root content of Cd and Ni
AIP: !causes! more expressive changes in hydrogen peroxide and superoxide content in Cd than in Ni variants
Phenols: !have important roles in! uptake of Cd and Ni