Salicylic acid (SA) is known to affect photosynthesis under normal conditions and induces tolerance in plants to biotic and abiotic stresses through influencing physiological processes. In this study, physiological processes were compared in salt-tolerant (Pusa Vishal) and salt-sensitive (T44) cultivars of mungbean and examined how much these processes were induced by SA treatment to alleviate decrease in photosynthesis under salt stress. Cultivar T44 accumulated higher leaf Na(+) and Cl(-) content and exhibited greater oxidative stress than Pusa Vishal. Activity of antioxidant enzymes, ascorbate peroxidase (APX) and glutathione reductase (GR) was greater in Pusa Vishal than T44. Contrarily, activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) was greater in T44. The greater accumulation of leaf nitrogen and sulfur through higher activity of their assimilating enzymes, nitrate reductase (NR) and ATP-sulfurylase (ATPS) increased reduced glutathione (GSH) content more conspicuously in Pusa Vishal than T44. Application of 0.5 mM SA increased nitrogen and sulfur assimilation, GSH content and activity of APX and GR. This resulted in the increase in photosynthesis under non-saline condition and alleviated the decrease in photosynthesis under salt stress. It also helped in restricting Na(+) and Cl(-) content in leaf, and maintaining higher efficiency of PSII, photosynthetic N-use efficiency (NUE) and water relations in Pusa Vishal. However, application of 1.0 mM SA resulted in inhibitory effects. The effect of SA was more pronounced in Pusa Vishal than T44. These results indicate that SA application alleviates the salt-induced decrease in photosynthesis mainly through inducing the activity of NR and ATPS, and increasing antioxidant metabolism to a greater extent in Pusa Vishal than T44.

SA: !induces tolerance in! plants 
SA: !increases! photosynthesis 
SA: !alleviates decrease in! photosynthesis 
SA: !increases activity of! NR and ATPS 
SA: !increases antioxidant metabolism to a greater extent in! Pusa Vishal 
T44: !accumulates higher leaf Na(+) and Cl(-) content than! Pusa Vishal 
T44: !exhibits greater oxidative stress than! Pusa Vishal 
T44: !has greater activity of SOD than! Pusa Vishal 
Pusa Vishal: !has greater activity of APX and GR than! T44 
Pusa Vishal: !accumulates more nitrogen and sulfur than! T44 
Pusa Vishal: !has greater GSH content than! T44