Chloroplasts are crucial for the process of photosynthesis, as well as for developmental and environmental sensing. One of the important mechanisms of sensing is retrograde (plastid-to-nucleus) signaling, whereby the state of the chloroplast is signaled to the nucleus, resulting in alterations in gene expression for chloroplast proteins, usually at the transcriptional level. Retrograde signaling was early studied in carotenoid-deficient plants that contain, upon exposure to high light, photooxidized plastids that arise because of an inability to quench ROS produced during the light reactions of photosynthesis. Phytoene desaturase (PDS) is required for one of the early steps of the carotenogenic pathway, and impaired PDS activity during early chloroplast biogenesis results in a highly reduced plastoquinone pool (high excitation pressure), accumulation of the colorless C(40) intermediate, phytoene, and white photooxidized plastids. Here, we discuss results from global transcript profiling of white leaf tissues of Arabidopsis that are blocked at the PDS step in three different ways--two by mutation (immutans & pds3) and one by inhibitor treatment (norflurazon). We show that the molecular phenotypes of the three tissues bear many similarities, but that there are also significant tissue-specific differences. We propose that PDS acts as a rheostat of excitation pressure-mediated retrograde signaling during chloroplast development, and speculate that whether the rheostat is set high (as in pds3 and NF-treated seedlings), intermediate (as in im) or low (as in WT) is a crucial determinant of the suite of genes that is expressed during chloroplast biogenesis.

Chloroplasts: !are crucial for! photosynthesis
PDS: !required for! carotenogenic pathway
PDS: !acts as a rheostat of! excitation pressure-mediated retrograde signaling
high light: !produces! photooxidized plastids
mutation/inhibitor treatment: !blocks! PDS step
white leaf tissues: !bear similarities and differences in! molecular phenotypes