Quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for yield and drought-related traits were exchanged via marker-assisted selection between elite cultivars of two cotton species, Gossypium barbadense (GB) cv. F-177 and Gossypium hirsutum (GH) cv. Siv'on. Three of the resultant near-isogenic lines (NILs), each introgressed with a different QTL region, expressed an advantage in osmotic adjustment (OA) and other drought-related traits relative to their recipient parents. These NILs and the parental genotypes were field-grown under well-watered and water-limited conditions, and characterized for their metabolic and mineral compositions. Comparisons were then made between (1) GB and GH genotypes, (2) the contrasting water regimes and (3) each NIL and its recipient parent. Hierarchical clustering analysis clearly distinguished between GB and GH genotypes based on either metabolite or mineral composition. Comparisons between well-watered and water-limited conditions in each of the genotypes showed differing trends in the various solutes. The greater concentrations of potassium, magnesium and calcium under water stress, when compared with well-watered conditions, may have enhanced OA or osmoprotection. All NILs exhibited significantly modified solute composition relative to their recipient parents. In particular, increased levels of alanine, aspartic acid, citric acid, malic acid, glycerol, myoinositol, threonic acid, potassium, magnesium and calcium were found under drought conditions in one or more of the NILs relative to their recipient parents. The increased values of these solutes could contribute to the superior capacity of these NILs to cope with drought.

QTLs: !exchanged between! elite cotton cultivars 
NILs: !expressed advantage in! OA and drought-related traits 
GB/GH genotypes: !distinguished by! metabolite/mineral composition 
Water regimes: !influenced! solute composition 
NILs: !showed modified! solute composition relative to recipient parents 
Solute composition: !enhanced! OA/osmoprotection 
NILs: !exhibited increased levels of! alanine, aspartic acid, citric acid, etc.