['21143681', 'Although the gibberellin (GA) signaling pathway has been elucidated, very little  is known about the steps linking first transcriptional activation to  physiological responses. Among the few identified GA-induced genes are the  plant-specific GAST1-like genes, which encode small proteins with a conserved  cysteine-rich domain. The role of these proteins in plant development and GA  responses is not yet clear. The Arabidopsis GAST1-like gene family consists of 14  members, GASA1-14. Here we show that over-expression of the GA-induced GASA4 gene  in Arabidopsis promoted GA responses such as flowering and seed germination.  Suppression of several GASA genes using synthetic microRNA (miR(GASA) ) also  promoted seed germination. This was probably caused by suppression of GASA5,  which acts as a repressor of GA responses. Previously, we proposed that  GAST1-like proteins are involved in redox reactions via their cysteine-rich  domain. The results of this study support this hypothesis, as over-expression of  GASA4 suppressed ROS accumulation and the transgenic seeds were partially  resistant to the NO donor sodium nitroprusside (SNP). Moreover, Escherichia coli  expressing intact GASA4 or a truncated version containing only the cysteine-rich  domain were resistant to SNP. Mutated GASA4, in which conserved cysteines were  replaced by alanines, lost its redox activity and the ability to promote GA  responses, suggesting that the two functions are linked. We propose that GA  induces some GAST1-like genes and suppresses others to regulate its own  responses. We also suggest that the encoded proteins regulate the redox status of  specific components to promote or suppress these responses.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04390.x', 'Weiss']

GASA4: !promotes! GA responses 
GASA5: !represses! GA responses 
GASA4: !suppresses! ROS accumulation 
GASA4: !resists! SNP 
GASA4: !regulates! redox status 
GA: !induces! GAST1-like genes 
GA: !suppresses! GAST1-like genes