Class III Homeodomain Leucine Zipper (HD-Zip III) proteins have been implicated in the regulation of cambium identity, as well as primary and secondary vascular differentiation and patterning in herbaceous plants. They have been proposed to regulate wood formation but relatively little evidence is available to validate such a role. We characterised and compared HD-Zip III gene family in an angiosperm tree, Populus spp. (poplar), and the gymnosperm Picea glauca (white spruce), representing two highly evolutionarily divergent groups. Full-length cDNA sequences were isolated from poplar and white spruce. Phylogenetic reconstruction indicated that some of the gymnosperm sequences were derived from lineages that diverged earlier than angiosperm sequences, and seem to have been lost in angiosperm lineages. Transcript accumulation profiles were assessed by RT-qPCR on tissue panels from both species and in poplar trees in response to an inhibitor of polar auxin transport. The overall transcript profiles HD-Zip III complexes in white spruce and poplar exhibited substantial differences, reflecting their evolutionary history. Furthermore, two poplar sequences homologous to HD-Zip III genes involved in xylem development in Arabidopsis and Zinnia were over-expressed in poplar plants. PtaHB1 over-expression produced noticeable effects on petiole and primary shoot fibre development, suggesting that PtaHB1 is involved in primary xylem development. We also obtained evidence indicating that expression of PtaHB1 affected the transcriptome by altering the accumulation of 48 distinct transcripts, many of which are predicted to be involved in growth and cell wall synthesis. Most of them were down-regulated, as was the case for several of the poplar HD-Zip III sequences. No visible physiological effect of over-expression was observed on PtaHB7 transgenic trees, suggesting that PtaHB1 and PtaHB7 likely have distinct roles in tree development, which is in agreement with the functions that have been assigned to close homologs in herbaceous plants. This study provides an overview of HD-zip III genes related to woody plant development and identifies sequences putatively involved in secondary vascular growth in angiosperms and in gymnosperms. These gene sequences are candidate regulators of wood formation and could be a source of molecular markers for tree breeding related to wood properties.

Class III Homeodomain Leucine Zipper (HD-Zip III) proteins: !regulate! cambium identity
HD-Zip III proteins: !proposed to regulate! wood formation
Populus spp. and Picea glauca: !represent! two highly evolutionarily divergent groups
Phylogenetic reconstruction: !indicated! some of the gymnosperm sequences were derived from lineages that diverged earlier than angiosperm sequences
Transcript accumulation profiles: !assessed! by RT-qPCR on tissue panels from both species
Overall transcript profiles HD-Zip III complexes: !exhibited! substantial differences
Two poplar sequences homologous to HD-Zip III genes: !over-expressed! in poplar plants
PtaHB1 over-expression: !produced noticeable effects! on petiole and primary shoot fibre development
PtaHB1 expression: !affected! the transcriptome by altering the accumulation of 48 distinct transcripts
PtaHB1 and PtaHB7: !likely have distinct roles! in tree development