['21156857', 'Phosphate (Pi) limitation causes plants to modulate the architecture of their  root systems to facilitate the acquisition of Pi. Previously, we reported that  the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) SUMO E3 ligase SIZ1 regulates root  architecture remodeling in response to Pi limitation; namely, the siz1 mutations  cause the inhibition of primary root (PR) elongation and the promotion of lateral  root (LR) formation. Here, we present evidence that SIZ1 is involved in the  negative regulation of auxin patterning to modulate root system architecture in  response to Pi starvation. The siz1 mutations caused greater PR growth inhibition  and LR development of seedlings in response to Pi limitation. Similar root  phenotypes occurred if Pi-deficient wild-type seedlings were supplemented with  auxin. N-1-Naphthylphthalamic acid, an inhibitor of auxin efflux activity,  reduced the Pi starvation-induced LR root formation of siz1 seedlings to a level  equivalent to that seen in the wild type. Monitoring of the auxin-responsive  reporter DR5::uidA indicated that auxin accumulates in PR tips at early stages of  the Pi starvation response. Subsequently, DR5::uidA expression was observed in  the LR primordia, which was associated with LR elongation. The time-sequential  patterning of DR5::uidA expression occurred earlier in the roots of siz1 as  compared with the wild type. In addition, microarray analysis revealed that  several other auxin-responsive genes, including genes involved in cell wall  loosening and biosynthesis, were up-regulated in siz1 relative to wild-type  seedlings in response to Pi starvation. Together, these results suggest that SIZ1  negatively regulates Pi starvation-induced root architecture remodeling through  the control of auxin patterning.', '2011 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.165191', 'Hasegawa']

SIZ1: !regulates! root architecture remodeling 
SIZ1: !controls! auxin patterning 
Pi limitation: !causes! modulation of root systems 
Pi limitation: !promotes! LR formation 
Auxin: !accumulates in! PR tips 
Auxin: !induces! LR elongation 
Cell wall loosening/biosynthesis genes: !up-regulated by! Pi starvation