['21169366', 'Reactive carbonyls, especially alpha,beta-unsaturated carbonyls produced through lipid  peroxidation, damage biomolecules such as proteins and nucleotides; elimination  of these carbonyls is therefore essential for maintaining cellular homeostasis.  In this study, we focused on an NADPH-dependent detoxification of reactive  carbonyls in plants and explored the enzyme system involved in this  detoxification process. Using acrolein (CH(2) = CHCHO) as a model alpha,beta-unsaturated  carbonyl, we purified a predominant NADPH-dependent acrolein-reducing enzyme from  cucumber leaves, and we identified the enzyme as an alkenal/one oxidoreductase  (AOR) catalyzing reduction of an alpha,beta-unsaturated bond. Cloning of cDNA encoding  AORs revealed that cucumber contains two distinct AORs, chloroplastic AOR and  cytosolic AOR. Homologs of cucumber AORs were found among various plant species,  including Arabidopsis, and we confirmed that a homolog of Arabidopsis (At1g23740)  also had AOR activity. Phylogenetic analysis showed that these AORs belong to a  novel class of AORs. They preferentially reduced alpha,beta-unsaturated ketones rather  than alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehydes. Furthermore, we selected candidates of other  classes of enzymes involved in NADPH-dependent reduction of carbonyls based on  the bioinformatic information, and we found that an aldo-keto reductase  (At2g37770) and aldehyde reductases (At1g54870 and At3g04000) were implicated in  the reduction of an aldehyde group of saturated aldehydes and methylglyoxal as  well as alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehydes in chloroplasts. These results suggest that  different classes of NADPH-dependent reductases cooperatively contribute to the  detoxification of reactive carbonyls.', '2011 Mar 4', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M110.202226', 'Sugimoto']

AOR: !reduces! alpha,beta-unsaturated carbonyls 
AOR: !belongs to! novel class 
At1g23740: !has! AOR activity 
At2g37770: !implicated in! reduction of aldehyde group 
At1g54870: !implicated in! reduction of methylglyoxal 
At3g04000: !implicated in! reduction of alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehydes 
NADPH-dependent reductases: !cooperatively contribute to! detoxification of reactive carbonyls