['21175886', 'Transport of dicarboxylates across the chloroplast envelope plays an important  role in transferring carbon skeletons to the nitrogen assimilation pathway and  exporting reducing equivalent to the cytosol to prevent photo-inhibition (the  malate valve). It was previously shown that the Arabidopsis plastidic  2-oxoglutarate/malate transporter (AtpOMT1) and the general dicarboxylate  transporter (AtpDCT1) play crucial roles at the interface between carbon and  nitrogen metabolism. However, based on the in vitro transport properties of the  recombinant transporters, it was hypothesized that AtpOMT1 might play a dual  role, also functioning as an oxaloacetate/malate transporter, which is a crucial  but currently unidentified component of the chloroplast malate valve. Here, we  test this hypothesis using Arabidopsis T-DNA insertional mutants of AtpOMT1.  Transport studies revealed a dramatically reduced rate of oxaloacetate uptake  into chloroplasts isolated from the knockout plant. CO(2) -dependent O(2)  evolution assays showed that cytosolic oxaloacetate is efficiently transported  into chloroplasts mainly by AtpOMT1, and supported the absence of additional  oxaloacetate transporters. These findings strongly indicate that the  high-affinity oxaloacetate transporter in Arabidopsis chloroplasts is AtpOMT1.  Further, the knockout plants showed enhanced photo-inhibition under high light  due to greater accumulation of reducing equivalents in the stroma, indicating  malfunction of the malate valve in the knockout plants. The knockout mutant  showed a phenotype consistent with reductions in 2-oxoglutarate transport,  glutamine synthetase/glutamate synthase activity, subsequent amino acid  biosynthesis and photorespiration. Our results demonstrate that AtpOMT1 acts  bi-functionally as an oxaloacetate/malate transporter in the malate valve and as  a 2-oxoglutarate/malate transporter mediating carbon/nitrogen metabolism.', '2011 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04397.x', 'Taniguchi']

AtpOMT1: !transports! oxaloacetate 
AtpOMT1: !transports! 2-oxoglutarate 
AtpOMT1: !mediates! carbon/nitrogen metabolism 
AtpDCT1: !plays crucial role in! carbon/nitrogen metabolism 
AtpOMT1: !functions as! oxaloacetate/malate transporter 
AtpOMT1: !functions as! 2-oxoglutarate/malate transporter 
Knockout plants: !show enhanced photo-inhibition under high light! 
Knockout plants: !show reductions in! 2-oxoglutarate transport 
Knockout plants: !show reductions in! glutamine synthetase/glutamate synthase activity