['21189294', 'The nuclear pore complex (NPC) facilitates nucleocytoplasmic transport, a crucial  process for various cellular activities. The NPC comprises ~30 nucleoporins and  is well characterized in vertebrates and yeast. However, only eight plant  nucleoporins have been identified, and little information is available about the  complete molecular structure of plant NPCs. In this study, an interactive  proteomic approach was used to identify Arabidopsis thaliana nucleoporins. A  series of five cycles of interactive proteomic analysis was performed using green  fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged nucleoporins. The identified nucleoporins were  then cloned and subcellular localization analyses were performed. We found that  the plant NPC contains at least 30 nucleoporins, 22 of which had not been  previously annotated. Surprisingly, plant nucleoporins shared a similar domain  organization to their vertebrate (human) and yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)  counterparts. Moreover, the plant nucleoporins exhibited higher sequence homology  to vertebrate nucleoporins than to yeast nucleoporins. Plant NPCs lacked seven  components (NUCLEOPORIN358 [Nup358], Nup188, Nup153, Nup45, Nup37, NUCLEAR  DIVISION CYCLE1, and PORE MEMBRANE PROTEIN OF 121 kD) that were present in  vertebrate NPCs. However, plants possessed a nucleoporin, Nup136/Nup1, that  contained Phe-Gly repeats, and sequence analysis failed to identify a vertebrate  homolog for this protein. Interestingly, Nup136-GFP showed greater mobility on  the nuclear envelope than did other nucleoporins, and a Nup136/Nup1 deficiency  caused various defects in plant development. These findings provide valuable new  information about plant NPC structure and function.', '2010 Dec', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.110.079947', 'Hara-Nishimura']

NPC: !facilitates! nucleocytoplasmic transport 
GFP-tagged nucleoporins: !identify! Arabidopsis thaliana nucleoporins 
plant NPCs: !contain! at least 30 nucleoporins 
plant nucleoporins: !share! similar domain organization 
plant nucleoporins: !exhibit higher sequence homology to! vertebrate nucleoporins 
plants: !possess! Nup136/Nup1 
Nup136-GFP: !shows greater mobility on! nuclear envelope 
Nup136/Nup1 deficiency: !causes! various defects in plant development