Polyploidization has repeatedly occurred during plant evolution. Although autopolyploidy is the best model to characterize the polyploidization effects in a highly controlled manner, there are limited studies on autopolyploids compared to allopolyploids. To improve our understanding of autopolyploidy effects in maize, we developed an inbred Oh43 ploidy series consisting of the diploid (2X), tetraploid (4X) and hexaploid (6X) lines and compared their phenotypes and gene expression in the mature adult leaf tissue. Our phenotypic study showed that plants of higher ploidy exhibit increased cell size but slower growth rate, later flowering, fewer tassel branches, reduced stature and fertility. Two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D DIGE) and gel electrophoresis followed by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (GeLC-MS) assays of the leaf proteomes revealed ~40 and 26% quantitative differentially expressed (DE) proteins, respectively, at the per genome level. A small number of qualitative DE proteins were also identified in the GeLC-MS assay. The majority of the quantitative DE proteins found in the 2D DIGE assay were present in either the 4X versus 6X or the 2X versus 6X comparison but not the 2X versus 4X comparison. Aneuploidy in some 6X plants might contribute to the more extensive changes of gene expression per genome in the 6X. Most changes of the protein expression per genome are less than twofold. Less than 5% of the DE genes exhibit a positive or negative continuous correlation through the ploidy series between their protein expression per genome, and the genome copy number. Hence, in the Oh43 ploidy series, expression for most proteins in a cell increases linearly with ploidy.

Polyploidization: !increases! Cell size
Polyploidization: !slows! Growth rate
Polyploidization: !delays! Flowering
Polyploidization: !reduces! Tassel branches
Polyploidization: !decreases! Stature
Polyploidization: !impairs! Fertility
Protein expression: !correlates with! Genome copy number