['21199564', 'In plants, the ubiquitin/26S proteasome system (UPS) plays a central role in  protein degradation and is involved in many steps of defence mechanisms,  regardless of the types of pathogen targeted. In addition to its proteolytic  activities, the UPS ribonuclease (RNase) activity, previously detected in 20S  proteasome preparations from cauliflower and sunflower (Helianthus annuus), has  been shown to specifically target plant viral RNAs in vitro. In this study, we  show that recombinant Arabidopsis thaliana proteasomal alpha(5) subunit expressed in  Escherichia coli harbours an RNase activity that degrades Tobacco mosaic virus  (TMV, Tobamovirus)- and Lettuce mosaic virus (LMV, Potyvirus)-derived RNAs in  vitro. The analysis of mutated forms of the alpha(5) subunit demonstrated that  mutation of a glutamic acid at position 110 affects RNase activity. Furthermore,  it was demonstrated, using a bimolecular fluorescence complement assay, that the  multifunctional helper component proteinase (HcPro) of LMV, already known to  interfere with the 20S proteasome RNase activity in vitro, can interact in vivo  with the recombinant alpha(5) subunit. Further experiments demonstrated that, in  LMV-infected lettuce cells, alpha(5) is partially relocalized to HcPro-containing  infection-specific inclusions. Susceptibility analyses of Arabidopsis mutants,  knocked out for each At-PAE gene encoding alpha(5) , showed that one (KO-pae1) of the  two mutants exhibited a significantly increased susceptibility to LMV infection.  Taken together, these results extend to A. thaliana alpha(5) the range of  HcPro-interacting proteasomal subunits, and suggest that HcPro may modulate its  associated RNase activity which may contribute to an antiviral response.', '2011 Feb', 'Mol Plant Pathol', '10.1111/j.1364-3703.2010.00654.x', 'German-Retana']

UPS: !plays a role in! protein degradation 
UPS: !harbours! RNase activity 
RNase: !targets! plant viral RNAs 
alpha(5): !harbours! RNase activity 
alpha(5): !mutated at! glutamic acid 110 
HcPro: !interacts with! alpha(5) 
HcPro: !relocalizes to! infection-specific inclusions 
KO-pae1: !exhibits increased susceptibility to! LMV infection