Stable transformation of Mesembryanthemum crystallinum L. (common ice plant) with a green fluorescent protein (GFP) construct targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum was obtained. Seven and fourteen days after germination seedlings were infected with Agrobacterium rhizogenes strain ARqua1 either by direct coating of the cut radicles with bacteria growing on solid medium or by immersion of the cut surface in bacterial suspension at different optical densities. Both methods of infection resulted in production of GFP-positive roots with a frequency ranging from 6 to 20% according to the age of the explants and the application procedure. The green fluorescing roots displayed the typical hairy root phenotype and were easily maintained in liquid medium without growth regulators for over 2 years. Stable expression of the transgene in the roots was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunoblotting and the capacity of roots to grow and produce callus on kanamycin-enriched medium. Nineteen endogenous cytokinins were determined in transgenic and non-transformed roots. The results revealed significantly lower levels of the free bases of isopentenyladenine, dihydrozeatin, cis- and trans-zeatin, as well as a conspicuous decline in concentrations of the corresponding nucleosides and most nucleotides in transgenic roots compared to the wild type. Comparison of the cytokinin profiles in transgenic and non-transformed roots suggested that transformation by A. rhizogenes disturbed cytokinin metabolism during the early steps of biosynthesis. Calli obtained from transformed roots were GFP-positive and remained non-regenerative or displayed high rhizogenic potential depending on the auxin/cytokinin ratio in the medium. Calli and callus-derived roots showed a strong GFP signal for over 2 years.

GFP construct: !targeted to! endoplasmic reticulum
Agrobacterium rhizogenes: !infects! seedlings
transgene: !expressed in! roots
PCR: !confirms! stable expression
cytokinins: !lower levels of! transgenic roots
A. rhizogenes: !disturbs! cytokinin metabolism
auxin/cytokinin ratio: !determines! rhizogenic potential
calli/roots: !strong GFP signal for! over 2 years