['21209078', 'Metacaspases (MCPs) are members of a new family of cysteine proteases found in  plants, fungi, and protozoa that are structurally related to metazoan caspases.  Recent studies showed that plant MCPs are arginine/lysine-specific cysteine  proteases with caspase-like processing activities in vitro and in vivo, and some  of the plant type II MCPs exhibit Ca(2+) dependence for their endopeptidase  activity in vitro. However, the mechanisms and biological relevance of Ca(2+)  dependence and self-processing of plant MCPs remains unclear. Here we show that  recombinant AtMCP2d, the most abundantly expressed member of Arabidopsis type II  MCPs at the transcriptional level, exhibits a strict Ca(2+) dependence for its  catalytic activation that is apparently mediated by intramolecular self-cleavage  mechanism. However, rapid inactivation of AtMCP2d activity concomitant with  Ca(2+)-induced self-processing at multiple internal sites was observed. Because  active AtMCP2d can cleave its inactive form, intermolecular cleavage (autolysis)  of AtMCP2d could also occur under our assay conditions. Ca(2+)-induced  self-processing of recombinant AtMCP2d was found to correlate with the sequential  appearance of at least six intermediates, including self-cleaved forms, during  the proenzyme purification process. Six of these peptides were characterized, and  the cleavage sites were mapped through N-terminal protein sequencing. Mutation  analysis of AtMCP2d revealed that cleavage after Lys-225, which is a highly  conserved residue among the six Arabidopsis type II MCPs, is critical for the  catalytic activation by Ca(2+), and we demonstrate that this residue is essential  for AtMCP2d activation of H(2)O(2)-induced cell death in yeast. Together, our  results provide clues to understand the mode of regulation for this class of  proteases.', '2011 Mar 25', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M110.194340', 'Lam']

AtMCP2d: !exhibits! Ca(2+) dependence 
AtMCP2d: !cleaves! inactive form 
AtMCP2d: !correlates with! sequential appearance of intermediates 
AtMCP2d: !mapped through! N-terminal protein sequencing 
Lys-225: !critical for! catalytic activation by Ca(2+) 
Lys-225: !essential for! AtMCP2d activation of H(2)O(2)-induced cell death