['21209845', 'Fertilization is one of the most important processes in all organisms utilizing  sexual reproduction. In a previous study, we succeeded in identifying a novel  male gametic transmembrane protein GCS1 (GENERATIVE CELL SPECIFIC 1), also called  HAP2 (HAPLESS 2) in the male-sterile Arabidopsis thaliana mutants, as a factor  critical to gamete fusion in flowering plants. Interestingly, GCS1 is highly  conserved among various eukaryotes covering plants, protists and invertebrates.  Of these organisms, Chlamydomonas (green alga) and Plasmodium (malaria parasite)  GCS1s similarly show male gametic expression and gamete fusion function. Since it  is generally believed that protein factors controlling gamete fusion have rapidly  evolved and different organisms utilize species-specific gamete fusion factors,  GCS1 may be an ancient fertilization factor derived from the common ancestor of  those organisms above. And therefore, its molecular structure and function are  important to understanding the common molecular mechanics of eukaryotic  fertilization. In this study, we tried to detect the central functional domain(s)  of GCS1, using complementation assay of Arabidopsis GCS1 mutant lines expressing  modified GCS1. As a result, the positively-charged C-terminal sequence of this  protein is dispensable for gamete fusion, while the highly conserved N-terminal  domain is critical to GCS1 function. In addition, in vitro fertilization assay of  Plasmodium berghei (mouse malaria parasite) knock-in lines expressing partly  truncated GCS1 showed similar results. Those findings above indicate that the  extracellular N-terminus alone is sufficient for GCS1-based gamete fusion.', '2010 Dec 31', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0015957', 'Miyagishima']

GCS1: !critical to! gamete fusion 
GCS1: !highly conserved among! eukaryotes 
GCS1: !may be derived from! common ancestor 
GCS1: !dispensable for! gamete fusion 
GCS1: !N-terminal domain critical to! GCS1 function 
GCS1: !N-terminus alone sufficient for! gamete fusion