['21205621', 'Nonsymbiotic hemoglobins are ubiquitously expressed in plants and divided into  two different classes based on gene expression pattern and oxygen-binding  properties. Most of the published research has been on the function of class 1  hemoglobins. To investigate the role of class 2 hemoglobins, transgenic  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants were generated overexpressing  Arabidopsis hemoglobin-2 (AHb2) under the control of a seed-specific promoter.  Overexpression of AHb2 led to a 40% increase in the total fatty acid content of  developing and mature seeds in three subsequent generations. This was mainly due  to an increase in the polyunsaturated C18:2 (omega-6) linoleic and C18:3 (omega-3)  alpha-linolenic acids. Moreover, AHb2 overexpression led to an increase in the  C18:2/C18:1 and C18:3/C18:2 ratios as well as in the C18:3 content in mol % of  total fatty acids and in the unsaturation/saturation index of total seed lipids.  The increase in fatty acid content was mainly due to a stimulation of the rate of  triacylglycerol synthesis, which was attributable to a 3-fold higher energy state  and a 2-fold higher sucrose content of the seeds. Under low external oxygen, AHb2  overexpression maintained an up to 5-fold higher energy state and prevented  fermentation. This is consistent with AHb2 overexpression results in improved  oxygen availability within developing seeds. In contrast to this, overexpression  of class 1 hemoglobin did not lead to any significant increase in the metabolic  performance of the seeds. These results provide evidence for a specific function  of class 2 hemoglobin in seed oil production and in promoting the accumulation of  polyunsaturated fatty acids by facilitating oxygen supply in developing seeds.', '2011 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.166462', 'Geigenberger']

AHb2: !overexpression leads to! increased fatty acid content 
AHb2: !stimulates! triacylglycerol synthesis 
AHb2: !maintains! higher energy state 
AHb2: !prevents! fermentation 
AHb2: !facilitates! oxygen supply 
Class 1 hemoglobin: !does not lead to! significant increase in metabolic performance