['21231936', 'Arabidopsis RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) C-terminal domain (CTD) phosphatases  regulate stress-responsive gene expression and plant development via the  dephosphorylation of serine (Ser) residues of the CTD. Some of these phosphatases  (CTD phosphatase-like 1 (CPL1) to CPL3) negatively regulate ABA and stress  responses. Here, we isolated AtCPL5, a cDNA encoding a protein containing two CTD  phosphatase domains (CPDs). To characterize AtCPL5, we analyzed the gene  expression patterns and subcellular protein localization, investigated various  phenotypes of AtCPL5-overexpressors and knockout mutants involved in ABA and  drought responses, performed microarray and RNA hybridization analyses using  AtCPL5-overexpressors, and assessed the CTD phosphatase activities of the  purified AtCPL5 and each CPD of the protein. Transcripts of the nucleus-localized  AtCPL5 were induced by ABA and drought. AtCPL5-overexpressors exhibited  ABA-hypersensitive phenotypes (increased inhibition of seed germination, seedling  growth, and stomatal aperture), lower transpiration rates upon dehydration, and  enhanced drought tolerance, while the knockout mutants showed weak ABA  hyposensitivity. AtCPL5 overexpression changed the expression of numerous genes,  including those involved in ABA-mediated responses. In contrast to Ser-5-specific  phosphatase activity of the negative stress response regulators, purified AtCPL5  and each CPD of the protein specifically dephosphorylated Ser-2 in RNAPII CTD. We  conclude that AtCPL5 is a unique CPL family protein that positively regulates  ABA-mediated development and drought responses in Arabidopsis.', '2011 Apr', 'New Phytol', '10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03601.x', 'Kim']

AtCPL5: !localizes to! nucleus 
AtCPL5: !induces! ABA and drought responses 
AtCPL5: !enhances! seed germination, seedling growth, stomatal aperture, transpiration rates, and drought tolerance 
AtCPL5: !represses! ABA hyposensitivity 
AtCPL5: !changes expression of! numerous genes 
AtCPL5: !dephosphorylates! Ser-2 in RNAPII CTD