['21248074', 'Phosphate (Pi) deficiency triggers the differential expression of a large set of  genes, which communally adapt the plant to low Pi bioavailability. To infer  functional modules in early transcriptional responses to Pi deficiency, we  conducted time-course microarray experiments and subsequent coexpression-based  clustering of Pi-responsive genes by pairwise comparison of genes against a  customized database. Three major clusters, enriched in genes putatively  functioning in transcriptional regulation, root hair formation, and developmental  adaptations, were predicted from this analysis. Validation of gene expression by  quantitative reverse transcription-PCR revealed that transcripts from randomly  selected genes were robustly induced within the first hour after transfer to  Pi-deplete medium. Pectin-related processes were among the earliest and most  robust responses to Pi deficiency, indicating that cell wall alterations are  critical in the early transcriptional response to Pi deficiency. Phenotypical  analysis of homozygous mutants defective in the expression of genes from the root  hair cluster revealed eight novel genes involved in Pi deficiency-induced root  hair elongation. The plants responded rapidly to Pi deficiency by the induction  of a subset of transcription factors, followed by a repression of genes involved  in cell wall alterations. The combined results provide a novel, integrated view  at a systems level of the root responses that acclimate Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) to suboptimal Pi levels.', '2011 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.166520', 'Schmidt']

Pi deficiency: !triggers! differential expression of genes 
transcription factors: !induce! subset of genes 
genes: !repress! cell wall alterations 
root hair formation: !enriched in! genes 
developmental adaptations: !enriched in! genes 
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR: !validates! gene expression 
pectin-related processes: !among earliest and most robust! responses to Pi deficiency 
homozygous mutants: !reveal! eight novel genes involved in root hair elongation