Chloroplasts change their positions in the cell depending on the light conditions. In the dark, chloroplasts in fern prothallia locate along the anticlinal wall (dark position). However, chloroplasts become relocated to the periclinal wall (light position) when the light shines perpendicularly to the prothallia. Red light is effective in inducing this relocation in Adiantum capillus-veneris, and neochrome1 (neo1) has been identified as the red light receptor regulating this movement. Nevertheless, we found here that chloroplasts in neo1 mutants still become relocated from the dark position to the light position under red light. We tested four neo1 mutant alleles (neo1-1, neo1-2, neo1-3, and neo1-4), and all of them showed the red-light-induced chloroplast relocation. Furthermore, chloroplast light positioning under red light occurred also in Pteris vittata, another fern species naturally lacking the neo1-dependent phenomenon. The light positioning of chloroplasts occurred independently of the direction of red light, a response different to that of the neo1-dependent movement. Photosynthesis inhibitors 3-(3,4 dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea or 2,5-dibromo-3-isopropyl-6-methyl-p-benzoquinone blocked this movement. Addition of sucrose (Suc) or glucose to the culture medium induced migration of the chloroplasts to the periclinal wall in darkness. Furthermore, Suc could override the effects of 3-(3,4 dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea. Interestingly, the same light positioning was evident for nuclei under red light in the neo1 mutant. The nuclear light positioning was also induced in darkness with the addition of Suc or glucose. These results indicate that photosynthesis-dependent nondirectional movement contributes to the light positioning of these organelles in addition to the neo1-dependent directional movement toward light.

neo1: !regulates! chloroplast relocation 
chloroplasts: !relocate to! light position 
red light: !induces! chloroplast relocation 
neo1 mutants: !show! chloroplast relocation 
Pteris vittata: !exhibits! chloroplast relocation 
3-(3,4 dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea: !blocks! chloroplast movement 
Suc/glucose: !induces! chloroplast migration 
Suc/glucose: !overrides! 3-(3,4 dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea 
red light: !induces! nuclear light positioning 
Suc/glucose: !induces! nuclear light positioning