['21240189', 'Protein ubiquitylation regulates a broad variety of biological processes in all  eukaryotes. Recent work identified a novel class of cullin-containing ubiquitin  ligases (E3s) composed of CUL4, DDB1, and one WD40 protein, believed to act as a  substrate receptor. Strikingly, CUL4-based E3 ligases (CRL4s) have important  functions at the chromatin level, including responses to DNA damage in metazoans  and plants and, in fission yeast, in heterochromatin silencing. Among putative  CRL4 receptors we identified MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR OF IRA1 (MSI1), which belongs  to an evolutionary conserved protein family. MSI1-like proteins contribute to  different protein complexes, including the epigenetic regulatory Polycomb  repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Here, we provide evidence that Arabidopsis MSI1  physically interacts with DDB1A and is part of a multimeric protein complex  including CUL4. CUL4 and DDB1 loss-of-function lead to embryo lethality.  Interestingly, as in fis class mutants, cul4 mutants exhibit autonomous endosperm  initiation and loss of parental imprinting of MEDEA, a target gene of the  Arabidopsis PRC2 complex. In addition, after pollination both MEDEA transcript  and protein accumulate in a cul4 mutant background. Overall, our work provides  the first evidence of a physical and functional link between a CRL4 E3 ligase and  a PRC2 complex, thus indicating a novel role of ubiquitylation in the repression  of gene expression.', '2011 Feb 16', 'EMBO J', '10.1038/emboj.2010.359', 'Genschik']

Protein ubiquitylation: !regulates! biological processes 
CUL4: !composes! E3 ligases 
DDB1: !composes! E3 ligases 
WD40 protein: !acts as! substrate receptor 
CRL4s: !have important functions at! chromatin level 
MSI1: !belongs to! evolutionary conserved protein family 
MSI1: !contributes to! protein complexes 
Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2): !regulates! epigenetic regulatory 
Arabidopsis MSI1: !physically interacts with! DDB1A 
CUL4: !leads to! embryo lethality 
CUL4: !indicates a novel role of! ubiquitylation in gene expression repression