A full-length cDNA encoding Narcissus tazetta lectin (NTL) was isolated from Chinese narcissus (N. tazetta var. Chinensis Roem). The open reading frame (ORF) was 519 bp long and encoded 172 amino acids with a theoretical isoelectric point of 5.27 and a calculated molecular mass of 18.6 kDa. Conserved domain analysis indicated that it possessed three D-(+)-mannose-binding sites, presumed to be similar to those of Galanthus nivalis agglutinin (GNA)-like lectins. A recombinant (glutathione S-transferase) GST-NTL fusion protein of around 40 kDa was successfully synthesized in vitro. Lysates of cells expressing this recombinant protein exhibited significant hemagglutinating activity [418 hemagglutinating units (HU)], as did the purified protein (265 HU). Sugar specificity assays suggested that mannose is the only sugar that significantly inhibits this hemagglutinating activity, confirming that NTL is a member of the GNA-like lectin family. NTL is highly transcribed in flowers, leaves and roots, but less so in scales. However, similar levels of the NTL protein were observed in all four of these organs by western blotting. A fluorescent NTL-GFP (green fluorescent protein) fusion protein was found to be primarily localized in the vacuole of transformed onion epidermal cells, indicating that NTL may be a vacuolar storage protein. This is the first study in which the function of NTL has been examined and provides a considerable body of data concerning its physiological role in Chinese narcissus. The results obtained may be useful in the molecular engineering of plants with enhanced tolerance of biotic and abiotic stresses. Moreover, they may be relevant to medical applications of lectins.

NTL: !encodes! 172 amino acids 
NTL: !possesses! 3 D-(+)-mannose-binding sites 
GST-NTL fusion protein: !exhibits! significant hemagglutinating activity 
Sugar specificity assays: !suggest! mannose is only sugar that inhibits hemagglutinating activity 
NTL: !highly transcribed in! flowers, leaves and roots 
Western blotting: !observed! similar levels of NTL protein in all four organs 
NTL-GFP fusion protein: !localized in! vacuole of transformed onion epidermal cells