Low-temperature (LT) tolerance in winter wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is an economically important but complex trait. Four selected wheat genotypes, a winter hardy cultivar, Norstar, a tender spring cultivar, Manitou and two near-isogenic lines with Vrn-A1 (spring Norstar) and vrn-A1 (winter Manitou) alleles of Manitou and Norstar were cold-acclimated at 6°C and crown and leaf tissues were collected at 0, 2, 14, 21, 35, 42, 56 and 70 days of cold acclimation. cDNA-AFLP profiling was used to determine temporal expression profiles of transcripts during cold-acclimation in crown and leaf tissues, separately to determine if LT regulatory circuitries in crown and leaf tissues could be delineated using this approach. Screening 64 primer combinations identified 4,074 and 2,757 differentially expressed transcript-derived fragments (TDFs) out of which 38 and 16% were up-regulated as compared to 3 and 6% that were down-regulated in crown and leaf tissues, respectively. DNA sequencing of TDFs revealed sequences common to both tissues including genes coding for DEAD-box RNA helicase, choline-phosphate cytidylyltransferase and delta-1-pyrroline carboxylate synthetase. TDF specific to crown tissues included genes coding for phospahtidylinositol kinase, auxin response factor protein and brassinosteroid insensitive 1-associated receptor kinase. In leaf, genes such as methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase, NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase and malate dehydrogenase were identified. However, 30 and 14% of the DNA sequences from the crown and leaf tissues, respectively, were hypothetical or unknown proteins. Cluster analysis of up-, down-regulated and unique TDFs, DNA sequence and real-time PCR validation, infer that mechanisms operating in crown and leaf tissue in response to LT are differently regulated and warrant further studies.

Dead-box RNA helicase: !affects! LT tolerance 
Choline-phosphate cytidylyltransferase: !affects! LT tolerance 
Delta-1-pyrroline carboxylate synthetase: !affects! LT tolerance 
Phospahtidylinositol kinase: !affects! LT tolerance 
Auxin response factor protein: !affects! LT tolerance 
Brassinosteroid insensitive 1-associated receptor kinase: !affects! LT tolerance 
Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase: !affects! LT tolerance 
NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase: !affects! LT tolerance 
Malate dehydrogenase: !affects! LT tolerance