['21266656', "Target of rapamycin (TOR) is a central regulator of cell growth, cell death,  nutrition, starvation, hormone, and stress responses in diverse eukaryotes.  However, very little is known about TOR signaling and the associated functional  domains in plants. We have taken a genetic approach to dissect TOR functions in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and report here that the kinase domain is  essential for the role of TOR in embryogenesis and 45S rRNA expression. Twelve  new T-DNA insertion mutants, spanning 14.2 kb of TOR-encoding genomic region,  have been characterized. Nine of these share expression of defective kinase  domain and embryo arrest at 16 to 32 cell stage. However, three T-DNA insertion  lines affecting FATC domain displayed normal embryo development, indicating that  FATC domain was dispensable in Arabidopsis. Genetic complementation showed that  the TOR kinase domain alone in tor-10/tor-10 mutant background can rescue early  embryo lethality and restore normal development. Overexpression of full-length  TOR or kinase domain in Arabidopsis displayed developmental abnormalities in  meristem, leaf, root, stem, flowering time, and senescence. We further show that  TOR, especially the kinase domain, plays a role in ribosome biogenesis by  activating 45S rRNA production. Of the six putative nuclear localization  sequences in the kinase domain, nuclear localization sequence 6 was identified to  confer TOR nuclear targeting in transient expression assays. Chromatin  immunoprecipitation studies revealed that the HEAT repeat domain binds to 45S  rRNA promoter and the 5' external transcribed spacer elements motif. Together,  these results show that TOR controls the embryogenesis, postembryonic  development, and 45S rRNA production through its kinase domain in Arabidopsis.", '2011 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.169045', 'Datla']

Target of rapamycin (TOR): !regulates! Cell growth
TOR: !essential for! Embryogenesis
TOR: !dispensable for! FATC domain
TOR Kinase Domain: !rescues! Early embryo lethality
TOR: !plays a role in! Ribosome biogenesis
Nuclear Localization Sequence 6: !confers! TOR nuclear targeting
HEAT Repeat Domain: !binds to! 45S rRNA promoter