Bienertia sinuspersici is a land plant known to perform C(4) photosynthesis through the location of dimorphic chloroplasts in separate cytoplasmic domains within a single photosynthetic cell. A protocol was developed with isolated protoplasts to obtain peripheral chloroplasts (P-CP), a central compartment (CC), and chloroplasts from the CC (C-CP) to study the subcellular localization of photosynthetic functions. Analyses of these preparations established intracellular compartmentation of processes to support a NAD-malic enzyme (ME)-type C(4) cycle. Western-blot analyses indicated that the CC has Rubisco from the C(3) cycle, the C(4) decarboxylase NAD-ME, a mitochondrial isoform of aspartate aminotransferase, and photorespiratory markers, while the C-CP and P-CP have high levels of Rubisco and pyruvate, Pidikinase, respectively. Other enzymes for supporting a NAD-ME cycle via an aspartate-alanine shuttle, carbonic anhydrase, phosophoenolpyruvate carboxylase, alanine, and an isoform of aspartate aminotransferase are localized in the cytosol. Functional characterization by photosynthetic oxygen evolution revealed that only the C-CP have a fully operational C(3) cycle, while both chloroplast types have the capacity to photoreduce 3-phosphoglycerate. The P-CP were enriched in a putative pyruvate transporter and showed light-dependent conversion of pyruvate to phosphoenolpyruvate. There is a larger investment in chloroplasts in the central domain than in the peripheral domain (6-fold more chloroplasts and 4-fold more chlorophyll). The implications of this uneven distribution for the energetics of the C(4) and C(3) cycles are discussed. The results indicate that peripheral and central compartment chloroplasts in the single-cell C(4) species B. sinuspersici function analogous to mesophyll and bundle sheath chloroplasts of Kranz-type C(4) species.

Gene: !localizes to! peripheral chloroplasts 
Gene: !localizes to! central compartment 
Gene: !synthesizes! Rubisco 
Gene: !synthesizes! NAD-ME 
Gene: !synthesizes! mitochondrial isoform of aspartate aminotransferase 
Gene: !synthesizes! photorespiratory markers 
Gene: !synthesizes! Pidikinase 
Gene: !synthesizes! carbonic anhydrase 
Gene: !synthesizes! phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 
Gene: !synthesizes! alanine 
Gene: !synthesizes! isoform of aspartate aminotransferase 
Gene: !synthesizes! putative pyruvate transporter