Replication of chloroplast DNA (ctDNA) in several plants and in Chlamydomonas reinhardii has been shown to occur by a double displacement loop (D-loop) mechanism and potentially also by a rolling circle mechanism. D-loop replication origins have been mapped in several species. Minimal replication origin sequences used as probes identified two potential binding proteins by southwestern blot analysis. A 28 kDa (apparent molecular weight by SDS-PAGE analysis) soybean protein has been isolated by origin sequence-specific DNA affinity chromatography from total chloroplast proteins. Mass spectrometry analysis identified this protein as the product of the soybean C6SY33 gene (accession number ACU14156), which is annotated as encoding a putative uncharacterized protein with a molecular weight of 25,897 Da, very near the observed molecular weight of the purified protein based on gel electrophoresis. Western blot analysis using an antibody against a homologous Arabidopsis protein indicates that this soybean protein is localized specifically in chloroplasts. The soybean protein shares some homology within a single-stranded DNA binding (SSB) domain of E. coli SSB and an Arabidopsis thaliana mitochondrial-localized SSB of about 21 kDa (mtSSB). However, the soybean protein induces a specific electrophoretic mobility shift only when incubated with a double-stranded fragment containing the previously mapped ctDNA replication oriA region. This protein has no electrophoretic mobility shift activity when incubated with single-stranded DNA. In contrast, the Arabidopsis mtSSB causes a mobility shift only with single-stranded DNA but not with the oriA fragment or with control dsDNA of unrelated sequence. These results suggest that the 26 kDa soybean protein is a specific origin binding protein that may be involved in initiation of ctDNA replication.

ctDNA: !replicates by! D-loop mechanism 
ctDNA: !binds to! 28 kDa soybean protein 
soybean protein: !encoded by! C6SY33 gene 
soybean protein: !localized in! chloroplasts 
soybean protein: !shares homology with! E. coli SSB 
soybean protein: !shares homology with! Arabidopsis mtSSB 
soybean protein: !induces mobility shift with! oriA fragment 
Arabidopsis mtSSB: !induces mobility shift with! single-stranded DNA 
Arabidopsis mtSSB: !does not induce mobility shift with! oriA fragment