['21261953', 'BACKGROUND: Sulfate and phosphate are both vital macronutrients required for  plant growth and development. Despite evidence for interaction between sulfate  and phosphate homeostasis, no transcriptional factor has yet been identified in  higher plants that affects, at the gene expression and physiological levels, the  response to both elements. This work was aimed at examining whether PHR1, a  transcription factor previously shown to participate in the regulation of genes  involved in phosphate homeostasis, also contributed to the regulation and  activity of genes involved in sulfate inter-organ transport. RESULTS: Among the  genes implicated in sulfate transport in Arabidopsis thaliana, SULTR1;3 and  SULTR3;4 showed up-regulation of transcripts in plants grown under  phosphate-deficient conditions. The promoter of SULTR1;3 contains a motif that is  potentially recognizable by PHR1. Using the phr1 mutant, we showed that SULTR1;3  up-regulation following phosphate deficiency was dependent on PHR1. Furthermore,  transcript up-regulation was found in phosphate-deficient shoots of the phr1  mutant for SULTR2;1 and SULTR3;4, indicating that PHR1 played both a positive and  negative role on the expression of genes encoding sulfate transporters.  Importantly, both phr1 and sultr1;3 mutants displayed a reduction in their  sulfate shoot-to-root transfer capacity compared to wild-type plants under  phosphate-deficient conditions. CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that PHR1 plays  an important role in sulfate inter-organ transport, in particular on the  regulation of the SULTR1;3 gene and its impact on shoot-to-root sulfate transport  in phosphate-deficient plants. PHR1 thus contributes to the homeostasis of both  sulfate and phosphate in plants under phosphate deficiency. Such a function is  also conserved in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii via the PHR1 ortholog PSR1.', '2011 Jan 24', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-11-19', 'Poirier']

PHR1: !affects! SULTR1;3 
SULTR1;3: !up-regulates! transcripts 
PHR1: !plays role in! sulfate inter-organ transport 
PHR1: !positively and negatively affects! expression of genes encoding sulfate transporters 
PHR1: !contributes to! homeostasis of sulfate and phosphate 
PSR1: !ortholog of! PHR1