Stromules are stroma-filled tubules extending from plastids whose rapid extension toward or retraction from other plastids has suggested a role in interplastidic communication and exchange of metabolites. Several studies point to sporadic dilations, kinks, and branches occurring along stromule length but have not elucidated the underlying basis for these occurrences. Similarly, although specific details on interacting partners have been missing, a consensus viewpoint suggests that stromules increase the interactive surface of a plastid with its cytoplasmic surroundings. Here, using live imaging, we show that the behavior of dynamic, pleomorphic stromules strongly coincides with that of cortical endoplasmic reticulum (ER) tubules. Covisualization of fluorescent protein-highlighted stromules and the ER in diverse cell types clearly suggests correlative dynamics of the two membrane-bound compartments. The extension and retraction, as well as directional changes in stromule branches occur in tandem with the behavior of neighboring ER tubules. Three-dimensional and four-dimensional volume rendering reveals that stromules that extend into cortical regions occupy channels between ER tubules possibly through multiple membrane contact sites. Our observations clearly depict coincidental stromule-ER behavior and suggest that either the neighboring ER tubules shape stromules directly or the behavior of both ER and stromules is simultaneously dictated by a shared cytoskeleton-based mechanism. These new observations strongly implicate the ER membrane in interactions with stromules and suggest that their interacting surfaces might serve as major conduits for bidirectional exchange of ions, lipids, and metabolites between the two organelles.

Stromules: !extend into! ER tubules 
ER tubules: !shape! stromules 
ER tubules: !dictate behavior of! stromules 
stromules: !occupy channels between! ER tubules 
ER tubules: !interact with! stromules 
stromules: !serve as conduits for! exchange of ions, lipids, and metabolites