Transgenic Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants containing a monomeric copy of the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) genome exhibited the generation of infectious, episomally replicating virus. The circular viral genome had been split within the nonessential gene II for integration into the Arabidopsis genome by Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation. Transgenic plants were assessed for episomal infections at flowering, seed set, and/or senescence. The infections were confirmed by western blot for the CaMV P6 and P4 proteins, electron microscopy for the presence of icosahedral virions, and through polymerase chain reaction across the recombination junction. By the end of the test period, a majority of the transgenic Arabidopsis plants had developed episomal infections. The episomal form of the virus was infectious to nontransgenic plants, indicating that no essential functions were lost after release from the Arabidopsis chromosome. An analysis of the viral genomes recovered from either transgenic Arabidopsis or nontransgenic turnip (Brassica rapa var rapa) revealed that the viruses contained deletions within gene II, and in some cases, the deletions extended to the beginning of gene III. In addition, many of the progeny viruses contained small regions of nonviral sequence derived from the flanking transformation vector. The nature of the nucleotide sequences at the recombination junctions in the circular progeny virus indicated that most were generated by nonhomologous recombination during the excision event. The release of the CaMV viral genomes from an integrated copy was not dependent upon the application of environmental stresses but occurred with greater frequency with either age or the late stages of plant maturation.

Transgenic Arabidopsis: !generates! Infectious, episomally replicating virus
CaMV genome: !splits within! Nonessential gene II
Transgenic plants: !assessed for! Episomal infections
Western blot: !confirms! CaMV P6 and P4 proteins
Electron microscopy: !detects! Icosahedral virions
Polymerase chain reaction: !across! Recombination junction
Progeny viruses: !contain! Deletions within gene II
Nonviral sequence: !derived from! Flanking transformation vector
Nucleotide sequences: !generated by! Nonhomologous recombination
Environmental stresses: !not dependent upon! Release of CaMV viral genomes