The amount of inorganic carbon is one of the main limiting environmental factors for photosynthetic organisms such as cyanobacteria. Using Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942, we characterized metabolic and transcriptomic changes in cells that had been shifted from high to low CO(2) levels. Metabolic phenotyping indicated an activation of glycolysis, the oxidative pentose phosphate cycle, and glycolate metabolism at lowered CO(2) levels. The metabolic changes coincided with a general reprogramming of gene expression, which included not only increased transcription of inorganic carbon transporter genes but also genes for enzymes involved in glycolytic and photorespiratory metabolism. In contrast, the mRNA content for genes from nitrogen assimilatory pathways decreased. These observations indicated that cyanobacteria control the homeostasis of the carbon-nitrogen ratio. Therefore, results obtained from the wild type were compared with the MP2 mutant of Synechococcus 7942, which is defective for the carbon-nitrogen ratio-regulating PII protein. Metabolites and genes linked to nitrogen assimilation were differentially regulated, whereas the changes in metabolite concentrations and gene expression for processes related to central carbon metabolism were mostly similar in mutant and wild-type cells after shifts to low-CO(2) conditions. The PII signaling appears to down-regulate the nitrogen metabolism at lowered CO(2), whereas the specific shortage of inorganic carbon is recognized by different mechanisms.

CO2: !limits! Photosynthetic organisms 
Metabolism: !activates! Glycolysis 
Metabolism: !activates! Oxidative pentose phosphate cycle 
Metabolism: !activates! Glycolate metabolism 
Gene expression: !increases! Inorganic carbon transporter genes 
Gene expression: !increases! Enzymes involved in glycolytic and photorespiratory metabolism 
Gene expression: !decreases! Genes from nitrogen assimilatory pathways 
PII protein: !regulates! Carbon-nitrogen ratio 
MP2 mutant: !differentially regulates! Metabolites and genes linked to nitrogen assimilation 
PII signaling: !down-regulates! Nitrogen metabolism at lowered CO2