The wild relatives of peanut are resistant to various economically important diseases including late leaf spot (LLS) caused by Phaeoisariopsis personata, compared with the susceptible cultivated peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.). The interaction of the late leaf spot pathogen, Phaeoisariopsis personata and the highly resistant, diploid peanut wild species, Arachis diogoi was analyzed at the molecular level by differential gene expression studies. Genes up-regulated with in 48 h of pathogen challenge were isolated as partial cDNAs. Some of the isolated genes, which are shown to be involved in the first line of defense in plants, were further characterized with respect to their transcriptional regulation in response to pathogen. Among the isolated clones, two were found to encode cyclophilin like proteins. One of the two isolated partial cDNAs encoding cyclophilin like proteins was extended using 5' RACE. The full length cDNA, designated as AdCyp, was 886 bp in length and encodes a polypeptide of 172 amino acids. Southern hybridization suggests that AdCyp is possibly coded by a single gene and at least one more identical gene is present in Arachis diogoi genome. AdCyp exhibits evolutionary conservation across the kingdoms. Phylogenetic analysis showed that AdCyp belongs to the subgroup I of Group I in cyclophilins. A translational fusion of GFP-AdCyp was found to localize to both cytosol and nucleus. AdCyp transcripts were found to accumulate in response to the treatments with pathogen as well as phytohormones. Constitutive heterologous expression of AdCyp resulted in enhanced resistance to Ralstonia solanacearum and reduced susceptibility towards Phytophthora parasitica var. nicotianae in transgenic tobacco and the resistance was associated with higher transcript levels of various defense related genes.

AdCyp: !encodes! polypeptide 
AdCyp: !localizes to! cytosol and nucleus 
AdCyp: !accumulates in response to! pathogen and phytohormones 
AdCyp: !enhances resistance to! Ralstonia solanacearum 
AdCyp: !reduces susceptibility to! Phytophthora parasitica var. nicotianae 
AdCyp: !associated with higher transcript levels of! defense related genes