To understand the complex drought response mechanism in crop plants, a systematic root proteomics approach was adopted to identify and analyze the expression patterns of differentially expressed major root proteins of Vigna radiata during short-term (3 days) and consecutive long-term water-deficit (6 days) as well as during recovery (6 days after re-watering). Photosynthetic gas exchange parameters of the plant were measured simultaneously during the stress treatment and recovery period. A total of 26 major protein spots were successfully identified by mass spectrometry, which were grouped according to their expression pattern during short-term stress as significantly up-regulated (9), down-regulated (10), highly down-regulated, beyond detection level of the software (2) and unchanged (5). The subsequent changes in the expression patterns of these proteins during long-term stress treatment and recovery period was analyzed to focus on the dynamic regulation of these functionally important proteins during progressive drought and recovery period. Cytoskeleton-related proteins were down-regulated initially (3d) but regained their expression levels during subsequent water-deficit (6d) while glycoprotein like lectins, which were primarily known to be involved in legume-rhizobia symbiosis, maintained their enhanced expression levels during both short and long-term drought treatment indicating their possible role in drought stress response of legumes. Oxidative stress-related proteins including Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase, oxidoreductase and aldehyde reductase were also up-regulated. The analyses of the dynamic regulation of these root proteins during short- and long-term water-deficit as well as recovery period may prove crucial for further understanding of drought response mechanisms in food legumes.

Cytoskeleton-related proteins: !down-regulated! 3d
Cytoskeleton-related proteins: !regained expression! 6d
Glycoprotein lectins: !maintained enhanced expression! Short & Long-term drought
Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase: !up-regulated! Oxidative stress