['21300919', 'We are studying a Galacturonosyltransferase-Like (GATL) gene family in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) that was identified bioinformatically as being  closely related to a group of 15 genes (Galacturonosyltransferase1 [GAUT1] to  -15), one of which (GAUT1) has been shown to encode a functional  galacturonosyltransferase. Here, we describe the phylogeny, gene structure,  evolutionary history, genomic organization, protein topology, and expression  pattern of this gene family in Arabidopsis. Expression studies (reverse  transcription-polymerase chain reaction) demonstrate that all 10 AtGATL genes are  transcribed, albeit to varying degrees, in Arabidopsis tissues.  Promoter::beta-glucuronidase expression studies show that individual AtGATL gene  family members have both overlapping and unique expression patterns. Nine of the  10 AtGATL genes are expressed in all major plant organs, although not always in  all cell types of those organs. AtGATL4 expression appears to be confined to  pollen grains. Most of the AtGATL genes are expressed strongly in vascular tissue  in both the stem and hypocotyl. Subcellular localization studies of several GATL  proteins using yellow fluorescent protein tagging provide evidence supporting the  Golgi localization of these proteins. Plants carrying T-DNA insertions in three  AtGATL genes (atgatl3, atgatl6, and atgatl9) have reduced amounts of GalA in  their stem cell walls. The xylose content increased in atgatl3 and atgatl6 stem  walls. Glycome profiling of cell wall fractions from these mutants using a  toolkit of diverse plant glycan-directed monoclonal antibodies showed that the  mutations affect both pectins and hemicelluloses and alter overall wall  structure, as indicated by altered epitope extractability patterns. The data  presented suggest that the AtGATL genes encode proteins involved in cell wall  biosynthesis, but their precise roles in wall biosynthesis remain to be  substantiated.', '2011 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.163220', 'Hahn']

Gene: !encodes! Functional Galacturonosyltransferase 
Gene: !transcribed in! Arabidopsis tissues 
Gene: !expressed in! Major plant organs 
Gene: !localized to! Golgi 
Gene: !reduces! GalA in stem cell walls 
Gene: !alters! Xylose content in stem walls 
Gene: !affects! Pectins and hemicelluloses 
Gene: !involves in! Cell wall biosynthesis