['21317376', 'TSPO, a stress-induced, posttranslationally regulated, early secretory  pathway-localized plant cell membrane protein, belongs to the TspO/MBR family of  regulatory proteins, which can bind porphyrins. This work finds that boosting  tetrapyrrole biosynthesis enhanced TSPO degradation in Arabidopsis thaliana and  that TSPO could bind heme in vitro and in vivo. This binding required the His  residue at position 91 (H91), but not that at position 115 (H115). The H91A and  double H91A/H115A substitutions stabilized TSPO and rendered the protein  insensitive to heme-regulated degradation, suggesting that heme binding regulates  At-TSPO degradation. TSPO degradation was inhibited in the autophagy-defective  atg5 mutant and was sensitive to inhibitors of type III phosphoinositide  3-kinases, which regulate autophagy in eukaryotic cells. Mutation of the two Tyr  residues in a putative ubiquitin-like ATG8 interacting motif of At-TSPO did not  affect heme binding in vitro but stabilized the protein in vivo, suggesting that  downregulation of At-TSPO requires an active autophagy pathway, in addition to  heme. Abscisic acid-dependent TSPO induction was accompanied by an increase in  unbound heme levels, and downregulation of TSPO coincided with the return to  steady state levels of unbound heme, suggesting that a physiological consequence  of active TSPO downregulation may be heme scavenging. In addition, overexpression  of TSPO attenuated aminolevulinic acid-induced porphyria in plant cells. Taken  together, these data support a role for TSPO in porphyrin binding and scavenging  during stress in plants.', '2011 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.110.081570', 'Batoko']

TSPO: !belongs to! TspO/MBR family 
TSPO: !binds! porphyrins 
heme: !regulates! TSPO degradation 
H91: !required for! heme binding 
H91A/H115A: !stabilizes! TSPO 
ATG8: !interacts with! At-TSPO 
autophagy: !downregulates! At-TSPO 
ABA: !induces! TSPO 
unbound heme: !increases with! TSPO induction 
TSPO: !scavenges! heme 
TSPO: !attenuates! porphyria