['21311034', 'L-proline (Pro) catabolism is activated in plants recovering from abiotic  stresses associated with water deprivation. In this catabolic pathway, Pro is  converted to glutamate by two reactions catalyzed by proline dehydrogenase  (ProDH) and Delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (P5CDH), with  Delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C) as the intermediate. Alternatively, under  certain conditions, the P5C derived from Pro is converted back to Pro by P5C  reductase, thus stimulating the Pro-P5C cycle, which may generate reactive oxygen  species (ROS) as a consequence of the ProDH activity. We previously observed that  Pro biosynthesis is altered in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) tissues that  induce the hypersensitive response (HR) in response to Pseudomonas syringae. In  this work, we characterized the Pro catabolic pathway and ProDH activity in this  model. Induction of ProDH expression was found to be dependent on salicylic acid,  and an increase in ProDH activity was detected in cells destined to die. To  evaluate the role of ProDH in the HR, ProDH-silenced plants were generated. These  plants displayed reduced ROS and cell death levels as well as enhanced  susceptibility in response to avirulent pathogens. Interestingly, the early  activation of ProDH was accompanied by an increase in P5C reductase but not in  P5CDH transcripts, with few changes occurring in the Pro and P5C levels.  Therefore, our results suggest that in wild-type plants, ProDH is a defense  component contributing to HR and disease resistance, which apparently potentiates  the accumulation of ROS. The participation of the Pro-P5C cycle in the latter  response is discussed.', '2011 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.167163', 'Alvarez']

ProDH: !activates! Pro catabolism 
ProDH: !induces! expression 
salicylic acid: !induces! ProDH expression 
ProDH: !increases! activity in cells destined to die 
ProDH-silenced plants: !display reduced! ROS and cell death levels 
ProDH: !contributes to! HR and disease resistance 
ProDH: !potentiates! accumulation of ROS