['21332848', "In plants, autophagy has been assigned 'pro-death' and 'pro-survival' roles in  controlling programmed cell death associated with microbial effector-triggered  immunity. The role of autophagy in basal immunity to virulent pathogens has not  been addressed systematically, however. Using several autophagy-deficient (atg)  genotypes, we determined the function of autophagy in basal plant immunity.  Arabidopsis mutants lacking ATG5, ATG10 and ATG18a develop spreading necrosis  upon infection with the necrotrophic fungal pathogen, Alternaria brassicicola,  which is accompanied by the production of reactive oxygen intermediates and by  enhanced hyphal growth. Likewise, treatment with the fungal toxin fumonisin B1  causes spreading lesion formation in atg mutant genotypes. We suggest that  autophagy constitutes a 'pro-survival' mechanism that controls the containment of  host tissue-destructive microbial infections. In contrast, atg plants do not show  spreading necrosis, but exhibit marked resistance against the virulent biotrophic  phytopathogen, Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato. Inducible defenses associated  with basal plant immunity, such as callose production or mitogen-activated  protein kinase activation, were unaltered in atg genotypes. However, phytohormone  analysis revealed that salicylic acid (SA) levels in non-infected and  bacteria-infected atg plants were slightly higher than those in Col-0 plants, and  were accompanied by elevated SA-dependent gene expression and camalexin  production. This suggests that previously undetected moderate infection-induced  rises in SA result in measurably enhanced bacterial resistance, and that  autophagy negatively controls SA-dependent defenses and basal immunity to  bacterial infection. We infer that the way in which autophagy contributes to  plant immunity to different pathogens is mechanistically diverse, and thus  resembles the complex role of this process in animal innate immunity.", '2011 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04546.x', 'Nurnberger']

ATG5: !controls! containment of host tissue-destructive microbial infections
ATG10: !controls! containment of host tissue-destructive microbial infections
ATG18a: !controls! containment of host tissue-destructive microbial infections
autophagy: !negatively controls! SA-dependent defenses and basal immunity to bacterial infection
SA: !enhances! bacterial resistance