Excitation energy transfer in the light-harvesting complex II of higher plants is modeled using excitonic couplings and local transition energies determined from structure-based calculations recently (Müh et al., 2010). A theory is introduced that implicitly takes into account protein induced dynamic localization effects of the exciton wavefunction between weakly coupled optical and vibronic transitions of different pigments. Linear and non-linear optical spectra are calculated and compared with experimental data reaching qualitative agreement. High-frequency intramolecular vibrational degrees of freedom are found important for ultrafast subpicosecond excitation energy transfer between chlorophyll (Chl) b and Chla, since they allow for fast dissipation of the excess energy. The slower ps component of this transfer is due to the monomeric excited state of Chlb 605. The majority of exciton relaxation in the Chla spectral region is characterized by slow ps exciton equilibration between the Chla domains within one layer and between the lumenal and stromal layers in the 10-20ps time range. Subpicosecond exciton relaxation in the Chla region is only found within the terminal emitter domain (Chls a 610/611/612) and within the Chla 613/614 dimer. Deviations between measured and calculated exciton state life times are obtained for the intermediate spectral region between the main absorbance bands of Chla and Chlb that indicate that besides Chlb 608 another pigment should absorb there. Possible candidates, so far not identified by structure-based calculations, but by fitting of optical spectra and mutagenesis studies, are discussed. Additional mutagenesis studies are suggested to resolve this issue.

Excitation energy transfer: !modeled using! excitonic couplings 
Chl b: !transfers to! Chla 
High-frequency intramolecular vibrational degrees of freedom: !allow for! fast dissipation of excess energy 
Chla domains: !equilibrate in! 10-20ps time range 
Chla region: !relaxes in! subpicosecond time range 
Chlb 608: !absorbs in! intermediate spectral region 
Optical spectra: !fitted with! mutagenesis studies