['21343429', 'Loss-of-function mutations in the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ENHANCED  DISEASE RESISTANCE1 (EDR1) gene confer enhanced resistance to powdery mildew  infection, enhanced senescence, and enhanced programmed cell death under both  abiotic and biotic stress conditions. All edr1-mediated phenotypes can be  suppressed by a specific missense mutation (keg-4) in the KEEP ON GOING (KEG)  gene, which encodes a multidomain protein that includes a RING E3 ligase domain,  a kinase domain, ankyrin repeats, and HERC2-like (for HECT and RCC1-like)  repeats. The molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying this suppression are  poorly understood. Using confocal laser scanning microscopy and fluorescent  protein fusions, we determined that KEG localizes to trans-Golgi network/early  endosome (TGN/EE) vesicles. Both the keg-4 mutation, which is located in the  carboxyl-terminal HERC2-like repeats, and deletion of the entire HERC2-like  repeats reduced endosomal localization of KEG and increased localization to the  endoplasmic reticulum and cytosol, indicating that the HERC2-like repeats  facilitate the TGN/EE targeting of KEG. EDR1 colocalized with KEG to the TGN/EE  when coexpressed but localized primarily to the endoplasmic reticulum when  expressed alone. Yeast two-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation analyses revealed  that EDR1 and KEG physically interact. Deletion of the HERC2-like repeats  abolished the interaction between KEG and EDR1 as well as the KEG-induced TGN/EE  localization of EDR1, indicating that the recruitment of EDR1 to the TGN/EE is  based on a direct interaction between EDR1 and KEG mediated by the HERC2-like  repeats. Collectively, these data suggest that EDR1 and KEG function together to  regulate endocytic trafficking and/or the formation of signaling complexes on  TGN/EE vesicles during stress responses.', '2011 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.171785', 'Innes']

EDR1: !enhances! Disease resistance
KEG: !suppresses! EDR1-mediated phenotypes
KEG: !localizes to! TGN/EE
KEG: !interacts with! EDR1
KEG: !requires! HERC2-like repeats
EDR1: !interacts with! KEG
KEG: !regulates! Endocytic trafficking