Both Gossypium hirsutum and G. barbadense probably originated from a common ancestor, but they have very different agronomic and fiber quality characters. Here we selected 17 fiber development-related genes to study their structures, tree topologies, chromosomal location and expression patterns to better understand the interspecific divergence of fiber development genes in the two cultivated tetraploid species. The sequence and structure of 70.59% genes were conserved with the same exon length and numbers in different species, while 29.41% genes showed diversity. There were 15 genes showing independent evolution between the A- and D-subgenomes after polyploid formation, while two evolved via different degrees of colonization. Chromosomal location showed that 22 duplicate genes were located in which at least one fiber quality QTL was detected. The molecular evolutionary rates suggested that the D-subgenome of the allotetraploid underwent rapid evolutionary differentiation, and selection had acted at the tetraploid level. Expression profiles at fiber initiation and early elongation showed that the transcripts levels of most genes were higher in Hai7124 than in TM-1. During the primary-secondary transition period, expression of most genes peaked earlier in TM-1 than in Hai7124. Homeolog expression profile showed that A-subgenome, or the combination of A- and D-subgenomes, played critical roles in fiber quality divergence of G. hirsutum and G. barbadense. However, the expression of D-subgenome alone also played an important role. Integrating analysis of the structure and expression to fiber development genes, suggests selective breeding for certain desirable fiber qualities played an important role in divergence of G. hirsutum and G. barbadense.

Gossypium hirsutum: !originated from! G. barbadense
17 fiber development-related genes: !studied to understand! interspecific divergence
70.59% genes: !conserved with! same exon length and numbers
29.41% genes: !showed diversity! between A- and D-subgenomes
22 duplicate genes: !located in! QTLs
D-subgenome: !underwent rapid evolutionary differentiation! at tetraploid level
Expression profiles: !higher in! Hai7124 than TM-1
A-subgenome: !played critical roles in! fiber quality divergence
D-subgenome: !also played important role! in divergence