N-acylethanolamines (NAEs) are bioactive fatty acid derivatives that occur in all eukaryotes. In plants, NAEs have potent negative growth-regulating properties, and fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH)-mediated hydrolysis is a primary catabolic pathway that operates during seedling establishment to deplete these compounds. Alternatively, polyunsaturated (PU)-NAEs may serve as substrates for lipid oxidation. In Arabidopsis, PU-NAEs (NAE 18:2 and NAE 18:3) were the most abundant NAE species in seeds, and their levels were depleted during seedling growth even in FAAH tDNA knock-out plants. Therefore, we hypothesized that lipoxygenase (LOX) participated in the metabolism of PU-NAEs through the formation of NAE-oxylipins. Comprehensive chromatographic and mass spectrometric methods were developed to identify NAE hydroperoxides and -hydroxides. Recombinant Arabidopsis LOX enzymes expressed in Escherichia coli utilized NAE 18:2 and NAE 18:3 as substrates with AtLOX1 and AtLOX5 exhibiting 9-LOX activity and AtLOX2, AtLOX3, AtLOX4, and AtLOX6 showing predominantly 13-LOX activity. Feeding experiments with exogenous PU-NAEs showed they were converted to hydroxide metabolites indicating that indeed Arabidopsis seedlings had the capacity for LOX-mediated metabolism of PU-NAEs in planta. Detectable levels of endogenous NAE-oxylipin metabolites were identified in FAAH fatty acid amide hydrolase seedlings but not in wild-type or FAAH overexpressors, suggesting that NAE hydroxide pools normally do not accumulate unless flux through hydrolysis is substantially reduced. These data suggest that Arabidopsis LOXs indeed compete with FAAH to metabolize PU-NAEs during seedling establishment. Identification of endogenous amide-conjugated oxylipins suggests potential significance of these metabolites in vivo, and FAAH mutants may offer opportunities to address this in the future.

N-acylethanolamines (NAEs): !metabolized by! FAAH 
NAEs: !metabolized by! LOXs 
FAAH: !competes with! LOXs 
NAE-oxylipins: !accumulate in! FAAH mutants