Leaf senescence of annual plants is a genetically programmed developmental phase. The onset of leaf senescence is however not exclusively determined by tissue age but is modulated by various environmental factors. Shading of individual attached leaves evokes dark-induced senescence. The initiation and progression of dark-induced senescence depend on the plant and the age of the affected leaf, however. In several plant species dark-induced senescence is fully reversible upon re-illumination and the leaves can regreen, but the regreening ability depends on the duration of dark incubation. We studied the ability of Arabidopsis thaliana leaves to regreen after dark-incubation with the aim to identify transcription factors (TFs) that are involved in the regulation of early dark-induced senescence and regreening. Two days shading of individual attached leaves triggers the transition into a pre-senescence state from which the leaves can largely recover. Longer periods of darkness result in irreversible senescence. Large scale qRT-PCR analysis of 1872 TF genes revealed that 649 of them are regulated in leaves during normal development, upon shading or re-illumination. Leaf shading triggered upregulation of 150 TF genes, some of which are involved in controlling senescence. Of those, 39 TF genes were upregulated after two days in the dark and regained pre-shading expression level after two days of re-illumination. Furthermore, a larger number of 422 TF genes were down regulated upon shading. In TF gene clusters with different expression patterns certain TF families are over-represented.

Leaf senescence: !triggered by! Shading 
Shading: !induces! Dark-induced senescence 
Dark-induced senescence: !reversible upon! Re-illumination 
Arabidopsis thaliana leaves: !studied to identify! Transcription factors 
Transcription factors: !regulated in leaves during! Normal development, shading or re-illumination 
Shading: !upregulates! 150 TF genes 
Re-illumination: !regains pre-shading expression level of! 39 TF genes 
Shading: !downregulates! 422 TF genes