['21386033', 'Land plant aerial organs are covered by a hydrophobic layer called the cuticle  that serves as a waterproof barrier protecting plants against desiccation,  ultraviolet radiation, and pathogens. Cuticle consists of a cutin matrix as well  as cuticular waxes in which very-long-chain (VLC) alkanes are the major  components, representing up to 70% of the total wax content in Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) leaves. However, despite its major involvement in cuticle  formation, the alkane-forming pathway is still largely unknown. To address this  deficiency, we report here the characterization of the Arabidopsis ECERIFERUM1  (CER1) gene predicted to encode an enzyme involved in alkane biosynthesis.  Analysis of CER1 expression showed that CER1 is specifically expressed in the  epidermis of aerial organs and coexpressed with other genes of the alkane-forming  pathway. Modification of CER1 expression in transgenic plants specifically  affects VLC alkane biosynthesis: waxes of TDNA insertional mutant alleles are  devoid of VLC alkanes and derivatives, whereas CER1 overexpression dramatically  increases the production of the odd-carbon-numbered alkanes together with a  substantial accumulation of iso-branched alkanes. We also showed that CER1  expression is induced by osmotic stresses and regulated by abscisic acid.  Furthermore, CER1-overexpressing plants showed reduced cuticle permeability  together with reduced soil water deficit susceptibility. However, CER1  overexpression increased susceptibility to bacterial and fungal pathogens. Taken  together, these results demonstrate that CER1 controls alkane biosynthesis and is  highly linked to responses to biotic and abiotic stresses.', '2011 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.172320', 'Joubes']

CER1: !synthesizes! VLC alkanes 
CER1: !localizes to! epidermis of aerial organs 
CER1: !coexpresses with! other genes of alkane-forming pathway 
CER1: !affects! wax production 
CER1: !induces by! osmotic stresses 
CER1: !regulated by! abscisic acid 
CER1: !enhances! cuticle permeability 
CER1: !represses! soil water deficit susceptibility 
CER1: !increases! susceptibility to bacterial and fungal pathogens