['21398259', 'Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) NON-RACE-SPECIFIC DISEASE RESISTANCE1 (NDR1),  a plasma membrane-localized protein, plays an essential role in resistance  mediated by the coiled-coil-nucleotide-binding site-leucine-rich repeat class of  resistance (R) proteins, which includes RESISTANCE TO PSEUDOMONAS SYRINGAE2  (RPS2), RESISTANCE TO PSEUDOMONAS SYRINGAE PV MACULICOLA1, and RPS5. Infection  with Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000 expressing the bacterial effector  proteins AvrRpt2, AvrB, and AvrPphB activates resistance by the aforementioned R  proteins. Whereas the genetic requirement for NDR1 in plant disease resistance  signaling has been detailed, our study focuses on determining a global,  physiological role for NDR1. Through the use of homology modeling and structure  threading, NDR1 was predicted to have a high degree of structural similarity to  Arabidopsis LATE EMBRYOGENESIS ABUNDANT14, a protein implicated in abiotic stress  responses. Specific protein motifs also point to a degree of homology with  mammalian integrins, well-characterized proteins involved in adhesion and  signaling. This structural homology led us to examine a physiological role for  NDR1 in preventing fluid loss and maintaining cell integrity through plasma  membrane-cell wall adhesions. Our results show a substantial alteration in  induced (i.e. pathogen-inoculated) electrolyte leakage and a compromised  pathogen-associated molecular pattern-triggered immune response in ndr1-1 mutant  plants. As an extension of these analyses, using a combination of genetic and  cell biology-based approaches, we have identified a role for NDR1 in mediating  plasma membrane-cell wall adhesions. Taken together, our data point to a broad  role for NDR1 both in mediating primary cellular functions in Arabidopsis through  maintaining the integrity of the cell wall-plasma membrane connection and as a  key signaling component of these responses during pathogen infection.', '2011 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.110.169656', 'Day']

NDR1: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
NDR1: !plays essential role in! resistance mediated by R proteins 
NDR1: !predicted to have high degree of structural similarity to! Arabidopsis LATE EMBRYOGENESIS ABUNDANT14 
NDR1: !has homology with! mammalian integrins 
NDR1: !mediates! plasma membrane-cell wall adhesions 
NDR1: !maintains integrity of! cell wall-plasma membrane connection 
NDR1: !key signaling component of! pathogen infection responses