['21409566', 'Dual-specificity phosphatases (DSPs) constitute a large protein tyrosine  phosphatase (PTP) family, with examples in distant evolutive phyla. PFA-DSPs  (Plant and Fungi Atypical DSPs) are a group of atypical DSPs present in plants,  fungi, kinetoplastids, and slime molds, the members of which share structural  similarity with atypical- and lipid phosphatase DSPs from mammals. The analysis  of the PFA-DSPs from the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (AtPFA-DSPs) showed  differential tissue mRNA expression, substrate specificity, and catalytic  activity for these proteins, suggesting different functional roles among plant  PFA-DSPs. Bioinformatic analysis revealed the existence of novel PFA-DSP-related  proteins in fungi (Oca1, Oca2, Oca4 and Oca6 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and  protozoa, which were segregated from plant PFA-DSPs. The closest yeast homolog  for these proteins was the PFA-DSP from S. cerevisiae ScPFA-DSP1/Siw14/Oca3.  Oca1, Oca2, Siw14/Oca3, Oca4, and Oca6 were involved in the yeast response to  caffeine and rapamycin stresses. Siw14/Oca3 was an active phosphatase in vitro,  whereas no phosphatase activity could be detected for Oca1. Remarkably,  overexpression of Siw14/Oca3 suppressed the caffeine sensitivity of oca1, oca2,  oca4, and oca6 deleted strains, indicating a genetic linkage and suggesting a  functional relationship for these proteins. Functional studies on mutations  targeting putative catalytic residues from the A. thaliana AtPFA-DSP1/At1g05000  protein indicated the absence of canonical amino acids acting as the general  acid/base in the phosphor-ester hydrolysis, which suggests a specific mechanism  of reaction for PFA-DSPs and related enzymes. Our studies demonstrate the  existence of novel phosphatase protein families in fungi and protozoa, with  active and inactive enzymes linked in common signaling pathways. This illustrates  the catalytic and functional complexity of the expanding family of atypical  dual-specificity phosphatases in non-metazoans, including parasite organisms  responsible for infectious human diseases.', '2011 Apr', 'Mol Genet Genomics', '10.1007/s00438-011-0611-6', 'Pulido']

PFA-DSPs: !present in! plants, fungi, kinetoplastids, and slime molds 
Oca1, Oca2, Siw14/Oca3, Oca4, and Oca6: !involved in! yeast response to caffeine and rapamycin stresses 
Siw14/Oca3: !active phosphatase in! vitro 
Oca1: !no phosphatase activity! detected 
Siw14/Oca3: !suppresses! caffeine sensitivity of oca1, oca2, oca4, and oca6 deleted strains 
AtPFA-DSP1/At1g05000 protein: !absence of! canonical amino acids acting as the general acid/base