['21413927', 'Protein modification by SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier) has emerged as an  essential regulatory mechanism in eukaryotes. Even though the molecular  mechanisms of SUMO conjugation/deconjugation are conserved, the number of SUMO  machinery components and their degree of conservation are specific to each  organism. In the present paper, we show data contributing to the notion that the  four expressed Arabidopsis SUMO paralogues, AtSUMO1, 2, 3 and 5, have  functionally diverged to a higher extent than their human orthologues. We have  explored the degree of conservation of these paralogues and found that the  surfaces involved in E1-activating enzyme recognition, and E2-conjugating enzyme  and SIM (SUMO-interacting motif) non-covalent interactions are well conserved in  AtSUMO1/2 isoforms, whereas AtSUMO3 shows a lower degree of conservation, and  AtSUMO5 is the most divergent isoform. These differences are functionally  relevant, since AtSUMO3 and 5 are deficient in establishing E2 non-covalent  interactions, which has not been reported for any naturally occurring SUMO  orthologue. In addition, AtSUMO3 is less efficiently conjugated than AtSUMO1/2,  and AtSUMO5 shows the lowest conjugation level. A mutagenesis analysis revealed  that decreases in conjugation rate and thioester-bond formation are the result of  the non-conserved residues involved in E1-activating enzyme recognition that are  present in AtSUMO3 and 5. The results of the present study support a role for the  E1-activating enzyme in SUMO paralogue discrimination, providing a new mechanism  to favour conjugation of the essential AtSUMO1/2 paralogues.', '2011 Jun 15', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BJ20101446', 'Lois']

AtSUMO1/2: !well conserved! 
AtSUMO3: !less conserved! 
AtSUMO5: !most divergent! 
AtSUMO3/5: !deficient in establishing E2 non-covalent interactions! 
AtSUMO3: !less efficiently conjugated than AtSUMO1/2! 
AtSUMO5: !lowest conjugation level! 
E1-activating enzyme: !discriminates SUMO paralogues!