['21426427', 'Agricultural productivity is limited by the removal of sap, alterations in  source-sink patterns, and viral diseases vectored by aphids, which are  phloem-feeding pests. Here we show that TREHALOSE PHOSPHATE SYNTHASE11 (TPS11)  gene-dependent trehalose metabolism regulates Arabidopsis thaliana defense  against Myzus persicae (Sulzer), commonly known as the green peach aphid (GPA).  GPA infestation of Arabidopsis resulted in a transient increase in trehalose and  expression of the TPS11 gene, which encodes a trehalose-6-phosphate  synthase/phosphatase. Knockout of TPS11 function abolished trehalose increases in  GPA-infested leaves of the tps11 mutant plant and attenuated defense against GPA.  Trehalose application restored resistance in the tps11 mutant, confirming that  the lack of trehalose accumulation is associated with the inability of the tps11  mutant to control GPA infestation. Resistance against GPA was also higher in the  trehalose hyper-accumulating tre1 mutant and in bacterial otsB gene-expressing  plants, further supporting the conclusion that trehalose plays a role in  Arabidopsis defense against GPA. Evidence presented here indicates that  TPS11-dependent trehalose regulates expression of the PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4  gene, which is a key modulator of defenses against GPA. TPS11 also promotes the  re-allocation of carbon into starch at the expense of sucrose, the primary  plant-derived carbon and energy source for the insect. Our results provide a  framework for the signaling function of TPS11-dependent trehalose in plant stress  responses, and also reveal an important contribution of starch in controlling the  severity of aphid infestation.', '2011 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04583.x', 'Shah']

TPS11: !synthesizes! trehalose 
TPS11: !enhances! defense against GPA 
trehalose: !affects! expression of PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 gene 
trehalose: !represses! severity of aphid infestation 
tre1 mutant: !hyper-accumulates! trehalose 
otsB gene: !expresses! bacterial gene 
starch: !reallocates! carbon from sucrose