Plants are often submitted, in their natural environment, to various abiotic stresses such as heat stress. However, elevated temperature has a detrimental impact on overall plant growth and development. We have examined the physiological response of the dgd1-2 and dgd1-3 Arabidopsis mutants lacking 30-40% of digalactosyl-diacylglycerol (DGDG) exposed to heat constraint. These mutants, which grow similarly to wild type under normal conditions, were previously reported to be defective in basal thermotolerance as measured by cotyledon development. However their functional properties were not described. Chlorophyll fluorescence measurements and absorbance changes at 820nm were used to monitor photosystem II (PSII) and PSI activity, respectively. It was observed that both mutants have similar photosystem activities with some differences. The mutants were less able to use near saturation light energy and elicited higher rates of cyclic PSI electron flow compare to wild type. Arabidopsis leaves exposed to short-term (5min) mild (40°C) or strong (44°C) heat treatment have shown a decline in the operating effective quantum yield of PSII and in the proportion of active PSI reaction centers. However, cyclic PSI electron flow was enhanced. The establishment of the energy-dependent non-photochemical quenching of chlorophyll fluorescence was accelerated but its decline under illumination was inhibited. Furthermore, heat stress affected the process implicated in the redistribution of light excitation energy between the photosystems known as the light state transitions. All the effects of heat stress mentioned above were more intense in the mutant leaves with dgd1-3 being even more susceptible. The decreased DGDG content of the thylakoid membranes together with other lipid changes are proposed to influence the thermo-sensitivity of the light reactions of photosynthesis towards heat stress.

dgd1-2/3 mutants: !less able to use! near saturation light energy 
dgd1-2/3 mutants: !elicit higher rates of! cyclic PSI electron flow 
heat stress: !declines! operating effective quantum yield of PSII 
heat stress: !accelerates! establishment of non-photochemical quenching 
heat stress: !inhibits! decline under illumination 
heat stress: !affects! light state transitions 
dgd1-3 mutant: !more susceptible to! heat stress 
DGDG content: !influences! thermo-sensitivity of light reactions