White lupin (Lupinus albus) is a legume that is very efficient in accessing unavailable phosphorus (Pi). It develops short, densely clustered tertiary lateral roots (cluster/proteoid roots) in response to Pi limitation. In this report, we characterize two glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase (GPX-PDE) genes (GPX-PDE1 and GPX-PDE2) from white lupin and propose a role for these two GPX-PDEs in root hair growth and development and in a Pi stress-induced phospholipid degradation pathway in cluster roots. Both GPX-PDE1 and GPX-PDE2 are highly expressed in Pi-deficient cluster roots, particularly in root hairs, epidermal cells, and vascular bundles. Expression of both genes is a function of both Pi availability and photosynthate. GPX-PDE1 Pi deficiency-induced expression is attenuated as photosynthate is deprived, while that of GPX-PDE2 is strikingly enhanced. Yeast complementation assays and in vitro enzyme assays revealed that GPX-PDE1 shows catalytic activity with glycerophosphocholine while GPX-PDE2 shows highest activity with glycerophosphoinositol. Cell-free protein extracts from Pi-deficient cluster roots display GPX-PDE enzyme activity for both glycerophosphocholine and glycerophosphoinositol. Knockdown of expression of GPX-PDE through RNA interference resulted in impaired root hair development and density. We propose that white lupin GPX-PDE1 and GPX-PDE2 are involved in the acclimation to Pi limitation by enhancing glycerophosphodiester degradation and mediating root hair development.

GPX-PDE1: !enhances! glycerophosphodiester degradation
GPX-PDE2: !enhances! glycerophosphodiester degradation
GPX-PDE1: !mediates! root hair development
GPX-PDE2: !mediates! root hair development
Pi deficiency: !induces! GPX-PDE1 expression
Photosynthate deprivation: !attenuates! GPX-PDE1 expression
Photosynthate deprivation: !enhances! GPX-PDE2 expression
GPX-PDE1: !catalyzes! glycerophosphocholine
GPX-PDE2: !catalyzes! glycerophosphoinositol
Knockdown of GPX-PDE: !impairs! root hair development