['21478444', 'L-Ara, an important constituent of plant cell walls, is found predominantly in  the furanose rather than in the thermodynamically more stable pyranose form.  Nucleotide sugar mutases have been demonstrated to interconvert  UDP-Larabinopyranose (UDP-Arap) and UDP-L-arabinofuranose (UDP-Araf) in rice  (Oryza sativa). These enzymes belong to a small gene family encoding the  previously named Reversibly Glycosylated Proteins (RGPs). RGPs are plant-specific  cytosolic proteins that tend to associate with the endomembrane system. In  Arabidopsis thaliana, the RGP protein family consists of five closely related  members. We characterized all five RGPs regarding their expression pattern and  subcellular localizations in transgenic Arabidopsis plants. Enzymatic activity  assays of recombinant proteins expressed in Escherichia coli identified three of  the Arabidopsis RGP protein family members as UDP-L-Ara mutases that catalyze the  formation of UDP-Araf from UDP-Arap. Coimmunoprecipitation and subsequent liquid  chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry analysis revealed  a distinct interaction network between RGPs in different Arabidopsis organs.  Examination of cell wall polysaccharide preparations from RGP1 and RGP2 knockout  mutants showed a significant reduction in total L-Ara content (12-31%) compared  with wild-type plants. Concomitant downregulation of RGP1 and RGP2 expression  results in plants almost completely deficient in cell wall-derived L-Ara and  exhibiting severe developmental defects.', '2011 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.111.083931', 'Scheller']

Nucleotide sugar mutases: !interconvert! UDP-Larabinopyranose and UDP-L-arabinofuranose 
RGPs: !belong to! small gene family 
RGPs: !associate with! endomembrane system 
RGP protein family: !consists of! five closely related members 
Enzymatic activity assays: !identify! three Arabidopsis RGP protein family members as UDP-L-Ara mutases 
Coimmunoprecipitation: !reveal! distinct interaction network between RGPs in different Arabidopsis organs 
RGP1 and RGP2 knockout mutants: !show! reduction in total L-Ara content 
Downregulation of RGP1 and RGP2 expression: !results in! plants almost completely deficient in cell wall-derived L-Ara