['21477884', 'Mobilization of seed storage reserves is essential for seed germination and  seedling establishment. Here, we report that AtDSEL, an Arabidopsis  thalianaDAD1-like Seedling Establishment-related Lipase, is involved in the  mobilization of storage oils for early seedling establishment. AtDSEL is a  cytosolic member of the DAD1-like acylhydrolase family encoded by At4g18550.  Bacterially expressed AtDSEL preferentially hydrolyzed 1,3-diacylglycerol and  1-monoacylglycerol, suggesting that AtDSEL is an sn-1-specific lipase.  AtDSEL-overexpressing transgenic Arabidopsis plants (35S:AtDSEL) were defective  in post-germinative seedling growth in medium without an exogenous carbon source.  This phenotype was rescued by the addition of sucrose to the growth medium. In  contrast, loss-of-function mutant plants (atdsel-1 and atdsel-2) had a mildly  fast-growing phenotype regardless of the presence of an exogenous carbon source.  Electron microscopy revealed that 5-day-old 35S:AtDSEL cotyledons retained  numerous peroxisomes and oil bodies, which were exhausted in wild-type and mutant  cotyledons. The impaired seedling establishment of 35S:AtDSEL was not rescued by  the addition of an exogenous fatty acid source, and 35S:AtDSEL seedling growth  was insensitive to 2,4-dichlorophenoxybutyric acid, indicating that beta-oxidation  was blocked in AtDSEL-overexpressers. These results suggest that AtDSEL is  involved in the negative regulation of seedling establishment by inhibiting the  breakdown of storage oils.', '2011 Sep 15', 'J Plant Physiol', '10.1016/j.jplph.2011.03.004', 'Kim']

AtDSEL: !involves in! mobilization of storage oils 
AtDSEL: !hydrolyzes! 1,3-diacylglycerol and 1-monoacylglycerol 
35S:AtDSEL: !defective in! post-germinative seedling growth 
atdsel-1/2: !mildly fast-growing! phenotype 
35S:AtDSEL: !retains! numerous peroxisomes and oil bodies 
35S:AtDSEL: !impaired! seedling establishment 
35S:AtDSEL: !insensitive to! 2,4-dichlorophenoxybutyric acid 
AtDSEL: !inhibits! breakdown of storage oils