Root hairs may play a critical role in nutrient acquisition of plants grown under elevated CO(2) . This study investigated how elevated CO(2) enhanced the development of root hairs in Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. The plants under elevated CO(2) (800 µL L(-1)) had denser and longer root hairs, and more H-positioned cells in root epidermis than those under ambient CO(2) (350 µL L(-1)). The elevated CO(2) increased auxin production in roots. Under elevated CO(2) , application of either 1-naphthoxyacetic acid (1-NOA) or N-1-naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA) blocked the enhanced development of root hairs. The opposite was true when the plants under ambient CO(2) were treated with 1-naphthylacetic acid (NAA), an auxin analogue. Furthermore, the elevated CO(2) did not enhance the development of root hairs in auxin-response mutants, axr1-3, and auxin-transporter mutants, axr4-1, aux1-7 and pin1-1. Both elevated CO(2) and NAA application increased expressions of caprice, triptychon and rho-related protein from plants 2, and decreased expressions of werewolf, GLABRA2, GLABRA3 and the transparent testa glabra 1, genes related to root-hair development, while 1-NOA and NPA application had an opposite effect. Our study suggests that elevated CO(2) enhanced the development of root hairs in Arabidopsis via the well-characterized auxin signalling and transport that modulate the initiation of root hairs and the expression of its specific genes.

CO2: !enhances! root hair development
CO2: !increases! auxin production
NAA: !enhances! root hair development
1-NOA/NPA: !blocks! root hair development
auxin-response mutants: !block! root hair development
auxin-transporter mutants: !block! root hair development
CO2/NAA: !increase! caprice, triptychon and rho-related protein expression
1-NOA/NPA: !decrease! caprice, triptychon and rho-related protein expression
CO2/NAA: !decrease! werewolf, GLABRA2, GLABRA3 and transparent testa glabra 1 expression
1-NOA/NPA: !increase! werewolf, GLABRA2, GLABRA3 and transparent testa glabra 1 expression