Perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne) is a high quality forage and turf grass mainly due to its excellent nutritive values and rapid establishment rate. However, this species has limited ability to perform in harsh winter climates. Though winter hardiness is a complex trait, it is commonly agreed that frost tolerance (FT) is its main component. Species growing in temperate regions can acquire FT through exposure to low, non-lethal temperatures, a phenomenon known as cold acclimation (CA). The research on molecular basis of FT has been performed on the model plants, but they are not well adapted to extreme winter climates. Thus, the mechanisms of cell response to low temperature in winter crops and agronomically important perennial grasses have yet to be revealed. Here, two L. perenne plants with contrasting levels of FT, high frost tolerant (HFT) and low frost tolerant (LFT) plants, were selected for comparative proteomic research. The work focused on analyses of leaf protein accumulation before and after 2, 8, 26 h, and 3, 5, 7, 14 and 21 days of CA, using a high-throughput two-dimensional electrophoresis, and on the identification of proteins which were accumulated differentially between the selected plants by the application of mass spectrometry (MS). Analyses of 580 protein profiles revealed a total of 42 (7.2%) spots that showed at a minimum of 1.5-fold differences in protein abundance, at a minimum of at one time point of CA between HFT and LFT genotypes. It was shown that significant differences in profiles of protein accumulation between the analyzed plants appeared most often on the 5th (18 proteins) and the 7th (19 proteins) day of CA. The proteins derived from 35 (83.3%) spots were successfully identified by the use of MS and chloroplast proteins were shown to be the major group selected as differentially accumulated during CA. The functions of the identified proteins and their probable influence on the level of FT in L. perenne are discussed.

Lolium perenne: !exhibits! FT 
HFT/LFT plants: !selected for! comparative proteomic research 
2D electrophoresis: !used to analyze! protein accumulation 
MS: !applied to identify! proteins 
HFT/LFT plants: !showed! 1.5-fold differences in protein abundance 
35 spots: !identified by! MS 
Chloroplast proteins: !major group selected as! differentially accumulated