After darkening, isoprene emission continues for 20 to 30 min following biphasic kinetics. The initial dark release of isoprene (postillumination emission), for 200 to 300 s, occurs mainly at the expense of its immediate substrate, dimethylallyldiphosphate (DMADP), but the origin and controls of the secondary burst of isoprene release (dark-induced emission) between approximately 300 and 1,500 s, are not entirely understood. We used a fast-response gas-exchange system to characterize the controls of dark-induced isoprene emission by light, temperature, and CO(2) and oxygen concentrations preceding leaf darkening and the effects of short light pulses and changing gas concentrations during dark-induced isoprene release in hybrid aspen (Populus tremula × Populus tremuloides). The effect of the 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate pathway inhibitor fosmidomycin was also investigated. The integral of postillumination isoprene release was considered to constitute the DMADP pool size, while the integral of dark-induced emission was defined as the "dark" pool. Overall, the steady-state emission rate in light and the maximum dark-induced emission rate responded similarly to variations in preceding environmental drivers and atmospheric composition, increasing with increasing light, having maxima at approximately 40 °C and close to the CO(2) compensation point, and were suppressed by lack of oxygen. The DMADP and dark pool sizes were also similar through their environmental dependencies, except for high temperatures, where the dark pool significantly exceeded the DMADP pool. Isoprene release could be enhanced by short lightflecks early during dark-induced isoprene release, but not at later stages. Fosmidomycin strongly suppressed both the isoprene emission rates in light and in the dark, but the dark pool was only moderately affected. These results demonstrate a strong correspondence between the steady-state isoprene emission in light and the dark-induced emission and suggest that the dark pool reflects the total pool size of 2-C-methyl-d-erythritol-4-phosphate pathway metabolites upstream of DMADP. These metabolites are converted to isoprene as soon as ATP and NADPH become available, likely by dark activation of chloroplastic glycolysis and chlororespiration.

Light: !affects! Isoprene emission 
Temperature: !affects! Isoprene emission 
CO2: !affects! Isoprene emission 
Oxygen: !represses! Isoprene emission 
Lightflecks: !enhances! Isoprene emission 
Fosmidomycin: !represses! Isoprene emission 
ATP: !synthesizes! Isoprene 
NADPH: !synthesizes! Isoprene