The gene encoding stilbene synthase (STS) plays a central role in many biochemical and physiological actions, and its metabolite resveratrol possesses broad-spectrum resistance to pathogens, as well as diverse pharmacological properties, notably an anticancer effect. Here, we report the expression analysis of the gene encoding STS and its promoter function from a powdery mildew (PM)-resistant Chinese wild Vitis pseudoreticulata, and compare it with two PM-susceptible cultivated grapevines, Vitis vinifera cvs. Carignane and Thompson Seedless. We show an unusual expression pattern of STS in V. pseudoreticulata, which differs markedly from that of the cultivated species. Sequence comparisons reveal that the genomic DNA sequences encoding STS in the three grapevines are highly conserved, but a novel residue mutation within the key motif of STS is solely present in V. pseudoreticulata. Moreover, the STS promoter in V. pseudoreticulata displays a significantly different structure from that found in the two V. vinifera. The three promoter-driven GUS differential expression patterns in transformed tobacco plants induced with Alternaria alternata, methyl jasmonate, and wounding indicated that the structurally different STS promoter of V. pseudoreticulata is responsible for its specific regulatory function. We also demonstrate that the expression of STS genes from their native promoters are functional in transformed tobacco and retain pathogen inducibility. Importantly, the genomic DNA-2 of V. pseudoreticulata under its native promoter shows good induction and the maximum level of resveratrol content. These findings further our understanding of the regulation of STS expression in a resistant grapevine and provide a new pathogen-inducible promoter system for the genetic improvement of plant disease resistance.

STS: !encodes! V. pseudoreticulata 
STS: !mutates! V. pseudoreticulata 
STS: !promotes! GUS 
STS: !induces! Tobacco 
STS: !regulates! Resistance 
STS: !enhances! Resveratrol