In response to Fe-deficiency, various dicots increase their root branching which contributes to the enhancement of ferric-chelate reductase activity. Whether this Fe-deficiency-induced response eventually enhances the ability of the plant to tolerate Fe-deficiency or not is still unclear and evidence is also scarce about the signals triggering it. In this study, it was found that the SPAD-chlorophyll meter values of newly developed leaves of four tomato (Solanum lycocarpum) lines, namely line227/1 and Roza and their two reciprocal F(1) hybrid lines, were positively correlated with their root branching under Fe-deficient conditions. It indicates that Fe-deficiency-induced root branching is critical for plant tolerance to Fe-deficiency. In another tomato line, Micro-Tom, the increased root branching in Fe-deficient plants was accompanied by the elevation of endogenous auxin and nitric oxide (NO) levels, and was suppressed either by the auxin transport inhibitors NPA and TIBA or the NO scavenger cPTIO. On the other hand, root branching in Fe-sufficient plants was induced either by the auxin analogues NAA and 2,4-D or the NO donors NONOate or SNP. Further, in Fe-deficient plants, NONOate restored the NPA-terminated root branching, but NAA did not affect the cPTIO-terminated root branching. Fe-deficiency-induced root branching was inhibited by the NO-synthase (NOS) inhibitor L-NAME, but was not affected by the nitrate reductase (NR) inhibitor NH(4)(+), tungstate or glycine. Taking all of these findings together, a novel function and signalling pathway of Fe-deficiency-induced root branching is presented where NOS-generated rather than NR-generated NO acts downstream of auxin in regulating this Fe-deficiency-induced response, which enhances the plant tolerance to Fe-deficiency.

Fe-deficiency: !enhances! root branching 
root branching: !induced by! Fe-deficiency 
Fe-deficiency: !elevates! auxin and NO levels 
auxin: !transported by! NPA and TIBA 
NO: !scavenged by! cPTIO 
Fe-sufficient plants: !induced by! auxin analogues NAA and 2,4-D or NO donors NONOate or SNP 
NONOate: !restores! NPA-terminated root branching 
NAA: !does not affect! cPTIO-terminated root branching 
Fe-deficiency-induced root branching: !inhibited by! NOS inhibitor L-NAME 
NR inhibitor NH(4)(+), tungstate or glycine: !does not affect! root branching 
NOS-generated NO: !acts downstream of! auxin