The husk surrounding the ear of corn/maize (Zea mays) has widely spaced veins with a number of interveinal mesophyll (M) cells and has been described as operating a partial C(3) photosynthetic pathway, in contrast to its leaves, which use the C(4) photosynthetic pathway. Here, we characterized photosynthesis in maize husk and leaf by measuring combined gas exchange and carbon isotope discrimination, the oxygen dependence of the CO(2) compensation point, and photosynthetic enzyme activity and localization together with anatomy. The CO(2) assimilation rate in the husk was less than that in the leaves and did not saturate at high CO(2), indicating CO(2) diffusion limitations. However, maximal photosynthetic rates were similar between the leaf and husk when expressed on a chlorophyll basis. The CO(2) compensation points of the husk were high compared with the leaf but did not vary with oxygen concentration. This and the low carbon isotope discrimination measured concurrently with gas exchange in the husk and leaf suggested C(4)-like photosynthesis in the husk. However, both Rubisco activity and the ratio of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase to Rubisco activity were reduced in the husk. Immunolocalization studies showed that phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase is specifically localized in the layer of M cells surrounding the bundle sheath cells, while Rubisco and glycine decarboxylase were enriched in bundle sheath cells but also present in M cells. We conclude that maize husk operates C(4) photosynthesis dispersed around the widely spaced veins (analogous to leaves) in a diffusion-limited manner due to low M surface area exposed to intercellular air space, with the functional role of Rubisco and glycine decarboxylase in distant M yet to be explained.

CO2 assimilation rate: !less in! husk 
Maximal photosynthetic rate: !similar in! husk and leaf 
CO2 compensation point: !high in! husk 
Carbon isotope discrimination: !low in! husk and leaf 
Rubisco activity: !reduced in! husk 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase: !localized to! M cells 
Rubisco: !enriched in! bundle sheath cells 
Glycine decarboxylase: !present in! M and bundle sheath cells