The mechanism of inorganic carbon (C(i)) uptake was examined in the marine green microalgae Stichococcus cylindricus and Stichococcus minor. External carbonic anhydrase (CA) activity was not detected in either species, by potentiometric assay or by mass spectrometry. Photosynthetic characteristics of C(i) uptake indicate that both species have high apparent affinity for CO(2) with a low K(1/2) (CO(2)) of about 10 µm. The O(2) evolution rates in light exceeded the spontaneous CO(2) formation rate by 2.5-fold in both species, which thus have active bicarbonate uptake. Mass spectrometric monitoring of CO(2) and O(2) fluxes showed that rates of O(2) evolution exceeded those of CO(2) depletion by about three- and twofold in S. minor and S. cylindricus, respectively, and also showed, in cells photosynthesizing at pH 8.2, a rapid depletion of CO(2) upon illumination to a CO(2) compensation concentration of 15.42 and 12.03 µm in S. minor and S. cylindricus, respectively. Both species also exhibit active CO(2) uptake: addition of bovine CA at CO(2) compensation concentration caused a rapid rise in CO(2) as the CO(2) -HCO(3) (-) equilibrium was restored. Accumulation of unfixed C(i) by cells at pH 8.2 was calculated to be 84.33 mm in S. cylindricus, and 30.37 mm in S. minor to give internal accumulations of 23- and 8-fold, respectively, compared to the external C(i) concentration.

Stichococcus cylindricus: !has high affinity for! CO2 
Stichococcus cylindricus: !evolves O2 at rate! 2.5-fold higher than CO2 formation rate 
Stichococcus cylindricus: !accumulates C(i)! 23-fold compared to external C(i) concentration 
Stichococcus minor: !has high affinity for! CO2 
Stichococcus minor: !evolves O2 at rate! 3-fold higher than CO2 formation rate 
Stichococcus minor: !accumulates C(i)! 8-fold compared to external C(i) concentration 
External carbonic anhydrase: !not detected in! Stichococcus cylindricus or Stichococcus minor 
Bovine CA: !causes rapid rise in! CO2 when added at CO2 compensation concentration