['21533644', 'The nodulin/glutamine synthetase-like protein (NodGS) that we identified  proteomically in Arabidopsis thaliana is a fusion protein composed of an  N-terminal amidohydrolase domain that shares homology with nodulins and a  C-terminal domain of prokaryotic glutamine synthetase type I. The protein is  homologous to the FluG protein, a morphogenetic factor in fungi. Although genes  encoding NodGS homologues are present in many plant genomes, their products have  not yet been characterized. The Arabidopsis NodGS was present in an oligomeric  form of ~700-kDa, mainly in the cytosol, and to a lesser extent in the microsomal  membrane fraction. The oligomeric NodGS was incorporated into large heterogeneous  protein complexes >700 kDa and partially co-immunoprecipitated with gamma-tubulin. In  situ and in vivo microscopic analyses revealed a NodGS signal in the cytoplasm,  with endomembranes, particularly in the perinuclear area. NodGS had no detectable  glutamine synthetase activity. Downregulation of NodGS by RNAi resulted in plants  with a short main root, reduced meristematic activity and disrupted development  of the root cap. Y2H analysis and publicly available microarray data indicated a  role for NodGS in biotic stress signalling. We found that flagellin enhanced the  expression of the NodGS protein, which was then preferentially localized in the  nuclear periphery. Our results point to a role for NodGS in root morphogenesis  and microbial elicitation. These data might help in understanding the family of  NodGS/FluG-like fusion genes that are widespread in prokaryotes, fungi and  plants.', '2011 Sep', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-011-1419-7', 'Binarova']

NodGS: !composes of! N-terminal amidohydrolase domain, C-terminal prokaryotic glutamine synthetase type I 
NodGS: !present in! oligomeric form, cytosol, microsomal membrane fraction 
NodGS: !incorporated into! large heterogeneous protein complexes 
NodGS: !co-immunoprecipitates with! gamma-tubulin 
NodGS: !localized in! cytoplasm, endomembranes, nuclear periphery 
NodGS: !downregulation results in! short main root, reduced meristematic activity, disrupted root cap development 
NodGS: !enhanced by! flagellin 
NodGS: !role in! biotic stress signalling, root morphogenesis, microbial elicitation