['21540435', 'ATP acts as an extracellular signal molecule in plants. However, the nature of  the mechanisms that export this compound into the apoplast are under debate. We  identified the protein PM-ANT1 as a candidate transporter able to mediate ATP  export. PM-ANT1 joins the mitochondrial carrier family, lacks an N-terminal amino  acid extension required for organelle localization, and locates to the plasma  membrane. Recombinant PM-ANT1 transports ATP, and the gene is substantially  expressed in mature pollen grains. Artificial microRNA (amiRNA) mutants show  reduced silique length and less seeds per silique but increased seed weight  associated with unchanged pollen viability. Anthers from amiRNA mutants exhibited  a normal early development, but stomium breakage is inhibited, leading to  impaired anther dehiscence. This results in reduced self-pollination and thus  decreased fertilization efficiency. amiRNA pollen grains showed increased  intracellular ATP levels but decreased extracellular ATP levels. The latter  effects are in line with transport properties of recombinant PM-ANT1, supporting  in planta that functional PM-ANT1 resides in the plasma membrane and concur with  the PM-ANT1 expression pattern. We assume that PM-ANT1 contributes to ATP export  during pollen maturation. ATP export may serve as an extracellular signal  required for anther dehiscence and is a novel factor critical for pollination and  autogamy.', '2011 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.111.084574', 'Neuhaus']

PM-ANT1: !locates to! plasma membrane 
PM-ANT1: !transports! ATP 
PM-ANT1: !expressed in! mature pollen grains 
amiRNA mutants: !show reduced! silique length 
amiRNA mutants: !have less! seeds per silique 
amiRNA mutants: !have increased! seed weight 
amiRNA mutants: !inhibit! stomium breakage 
amiRNA mutants: !decrease! fertilization efficiency 
amiRNA pollen grains: !have increased! intracellular ATP levels 
amiRNA pollen grains: !have decreased! extracellular ATP levels 
PM-ANT1: !contributes to! ATP export 
ATP export: !serves as! extracellular signal