Nonphosphorylating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (np-Ga3PDHase) is a cytosolic unconventional glycolytic enzyme of plant cells regulated by phosphorylation in heterotrophic tissues. After interaction with 14-3-3 proteins, the phosphorylated enzyme becomes less active and more sensitive to regulation by adenylates and inorganic pyrophosphate. Here, we acknowledge that in wheat (Triticum aestivum), np-Ga3PDHase is specifically phosphorylated by the SnRK (SNF1-related) protein kinase family. Interestingly, only the kinase present in heterotrophic tissues (endosperm and shoots, but not in leaves) was found active. The specific SnRK partially purified from endosperm exhibited a requirement for Mg(2+) or Mn(2+) (being Ca(2+) independent), having a molecular mass of approximately 200 kD. The kinase also phosphorylated standard peptides SAMS, AMARA, and SP46, as well as endogenous sucrose synthase, results suggesting that it could be a member of the SnRK1 subfamily. Concurrently, the partially purified wheat SnRK was recognized by antibodies raised against a peptide conserved between SnRK1s from sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) and maize (Zea mays) developing seeds. The wheat kinase was allosterically inhibited by ribose-5-phosphate and, to a lesser extent, by fructose-1,6-bisphosphate and 3-phosphoglycerate, while glucose-6-phosphate (the main effector of spinach [Spinacia oleracea] leaves, SnRK1) and trehalose-6-phosphate produced little or no effect. Results support a distinctive allosteric regulation of SnRK1 present in photosynthetic or heterotrophic plant tissues. After in silico analysis, we constructed two np-Ga3PDHase mutants, S404A and S447A, identifying serine-404 as the target of phosphorylation. Results suggest that both np-Ga3PDHase and the specific kinase could be under control, critically affecting the metabolic scenario involving carbohydrates and reducing power partition and storage in heterotrophic plant cells.

np-Ga3PDHase: !interacts with! 14-3-3 proteins
SnRK: !phosphorylates! np-Ga3PDHase
SnRK: !requires! Mg(2+) or Mn(2+)
SnRK: !phosphorylates! SAMS, AMARA, SP46, and sucrose synthase
SnRK: !recognized by! antibodies
SnRK: !allosterically inhibited by! ribose-5-phosphate
SnRK: !allosterically inhibited by! fructose-1,6-bisphosphate
SnRK: !allosterically inhibited by! 3-phosphoglycerate
np-Ga3PDHase mutants: !target of phosphorylation! serine-404