['21558543', "The most abundant posttranslational modification in nature is the attachment of  preassembled high-mannose-type glycans, which determines the fate and  localization of the modified protein and modulates the biological functions of  glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored and N-glycosylated proteins. In eukaryotes,  all mannose residues attached to glycoproteins from the luminal side of the  endoplasmic reticulum (ER) derive from the polyprenyl monosaccharide carrier,  dolichol P-mannose (Dol-P-Man), which is flipped across the ER membrane to the  lumen. We show that in plants, Dol-P-Man is synthesized when Dol-P-Man synthase1  (DPMS1), the catalytic core, interacts with two binding proteins, DPMS2 and  DPMS3, that may serve as membrane anchors for DPMS1 or provide catalytic  assistance. This configuration is reminiscent of that observed in mammals but is  distinct from the single DPMS protein catalyzing Dol-P-Man biosynthesis in  bakers' yeast and protozoan parasites. Overexpression of DPMS1 in Arabidopsis  thaliana results in disorganized stem morphology and vascular bundle  arrangements, wrinkled seed coat, and constitutive ER stress response.  Loss-of-function mutations and RNA interference-mediated reduction of DPMS1  expression in Arabidopsis also caused a wrinkled seed coat phenotype and most  remarkably enhanced hypersensitivity to ammonium that was manifested by extensive  chlorosis and a strong reduction of root growth. Collectively, these data reveal  a previously unsuspected role of the prenyl-linked carrier pathway for plant  development and physiology that may help integrate several aspects of candidate  susceptibility genes to ammonium stress.", '2011 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.111.083634', 'Bouvier']

Dol-P-Man synthase1: !synthesizes! Dol-P-Man 
DPMS2/DPMS3: !interact with! Dol-P-Man synthase1 
Dol-P-Man: !determines fate and localization of! modified protein 
Dol-P-Man: !modulates biological functions of! glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored and N-glycosylated proteins 
DPMS1: !affects! stem morphology and vascular bundle arrangements 
DPMS1: !enhances! hypersensitivity to ammonium