Soil bacteria such as pseudomonads may reduce pathogen pressure for plants, both by activating plant defence mechanisms and by inhibiting pathogens directly due to the production of antibiotics. These effects are hard to distinguish under field conditions, impairing estimations of their relative contributions to plant health. A split-root system was set up with barley to quantify systemic and local effects of pre-inoculation with Pseudomonas fluorescens on the subsequent infection process by the fungal pathogen Fusarium graminearum. One root half was inoculated with F. graminearum in combination with P. fluorescens strain CHA0 or its isogenic antibiotic-deficient mutant CHA19. Bacteria were inoculated either together with the fungal pathogen or in separate halves of the root system to separate local and systemic effects. The short-term plant response to fungal infection was followed by using the short-lived isotopic tracer (11)CO(2) to track the delivery of recent photoassimilates to each root half. In the absence of bacteria, fungal infection diverted carbon from the shoot to healthy roots, rather than to infected roots, although the overall partitioning from the shoot to the entire root system was not modified. Both local and systemic pre-inoculation with P. fluorescens CHA0 prevented the diversion of carbon as well as preventing a reduction in plant biomass in response to F. graminearum infection, whereas the non-antibiotic-producing mutant CHA19 lacked this ability. The results suggest that the activation of plant defences is a central feature of biocontrol bacteria which may even surpass the effects of direct pathogen inhibition.

Pseudomonas fluorescens: !activates! Plant defence mechanisms
Pseudomonas fluorescens: !inhibits! Pathogens
Fusarium graminearum: !diverts! Carbon from shoot to healthy roots
Pseudomonas fluorescens CHA0: !prevents! Diversion of carbon
Pseudomonas fluorescens CHA0: !prevents! Reduction in plant biomass
Pseudomonas fluorescens CHA19: !lacks! Ability to prevent diversion of carbon