In this study, attempt has been made to produce a selected cultivar of tea with low-caffeine content using RNAi technology. The caffeine biosynthetic pathway in tea has been proposed to involve three N-methyltransferases such as xanthosine methyltransferase, 7-N-methylxanthine methyltransferase and 3, 7-dimethylxanthine methyltransferase. Last two steps of caffeine biosynthesis in tea have been known to be catalyzed by a bifunctional enzyme known as caffeine synthase. To suppress the caffeine synthesis in the selected tea [Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze] cv. Kangra jat, we isolated a partial fragment of caffeine synthase (CS) from the same cultivar and used to design RNAi construct (pFGC1008-CS). Somatic embryos were transformed with the developed construct using biolistic method. Transformed somatic embryos showed reduction in the levels of CS transcript expression as well as in caffeine content. Plants were regenerated from the transformed somatic embryos. Transgenic plants showed a significant suppression of CS transcript expression and also showed a reduction of 44-61% in caffeine and 46-67% in theobromine contents as compared to the controls. These results suggest that the RNAi construct developed here using a single partial fragment of CS gene reduced the expression of the targeted endogenous gene significantly. However, the reduction in theobromine content in addition to caffeine documented the involvement of this single CS in the catalysis of last two methyl transfer steps in caffeine biosynthesis of tea.

xanthosine methyltransferase: !catalyzes! caffeine biosynthesis
7-N-methylxanthine methyltransferase: !catalyzes! caffeine biosynthesis
3, 7-dimethylxanthine methyltransferase: !catalyzes! caffeine biosynthesis
caffeine synthase: !catalyzes! last two steps of caffeine biosynthesis
RNAi construct: !suppresses! caffeine synthesis
CS gene fragment: !isolated from! tea cultivar
transformed somatic embryos: !show reduction in! CS transcript expression
transgenic plants: !show reduction in! caffeine content
RNAi construct: !reduces! expression of targeted endogenous gene