['21571669', "Light is an important environmental factor that modulates acclimation strategies  and defense responses in plants. We explored the functional role of the  regulatory subunit B'gamma (B'gamma) of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) in light-dependent  stress responses of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). The predominant form of  PP2A consists of catalytic subunit C, scaffold subunit A, and highly variable  regulatory subunit B, which determines the substrate specificity of PP2A  holoenzymes. Mutant leaves of knockdown pp2a-b'gamma plants show disintegration of  chloroplasts and premature yellowing conditionally under moderate light  intensity. The cell-death phenotype is accompanied by the accumulation of  hydrogen peroxide through a pathway that requires CONSTITUTIVE EXPRESSION OF PR  GENES5 (CPR5). Moreover, the pp2a-b'gamma cpr5 double mutant additionally displays  growth suppression and malformed trichomes. Similar to cpr5, the pp2a-b'gamma mutant  shows constitutive activation of both salicylic acid- and jasmonic acid-dependent  defense pathways. In contrast to cpr5, however, pp2a-b'gamma leaves do not contain  increased levels of salicylic acid or jasmonic acid. Rather, the constitutive  defense response associates with hypomethylation of DNA and increased levels of  methionine-salvage pathway components in pp2a-b'gamma leaves. We suggest that the  specific B'gamma subunit of PP2A is functionally connected to CPR5 and operates in  the basal repression of defense responses under low irradiance.", '2011 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.178442', 'Kangasjarvi']

Light: !modulates! Acclimation Strategies 
PP2A: !consists of! Catalytic Subunit C, Scaffold Subunit A, Regulatory Subunit B
pp2a-b'gamma plants: !show! Disintegration of Chloroplasts
pp2a-b'gamma plants: !require! CPR5
pp2a-b'gamma cpr5 double mutant: !displays! Growth Suppression
pp2a-b'gamma: !constitutively activates! Salicylic Acid- and Jasmonic Acid-dependent Defense Pathways
pp2a-b'gamma: !associates with! Hypomethylation of DNA
PP2A B'gamma: !operates in! Basal Repression of Defense Responses