['21605210', 'Arabidopsis thaliana exhibits durable resistance, called nonhost resistance,  against non-adapted fungal pathogens that typically terminates pathogen entry.  The PEN2-dependent indole glucosinolate metabolism pathway is involved in  preventing the entry of a range of non-adapted fungi. Here, we report that  ENHANCED DISEASE RESISTANCE 1 (EDR1) functions in pre-invasive nonhost  resistance. Plants lacking EDR1 exhibit impaired entry resistance to the  non-adapted hemibiotrophic Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, in contrast to the  enhanced resistance of edr1 against biotrophic infection of a host-adapted  powdery mildew fungus. Analysis of the edr1 pen2 double mutant indicates that  EDR1 acts in a defense pathway independent from the PEN2 indole glucosinolate  pathway. The edr1 mutant also exhibited enhanced susceptibility to host-adapted  pathogens, including Colletotrichum higginsianum and necrotrophic Alternaria  brassicicola. Comparative transcript profiling revealed that upon  C. gloeosporioides inoculation, the expression of four plant defensin genes was  severely impaired in edr1, indicating that EDR1 is required for the induced  expression of these antifungal proteins. Inactivation of the MYC2-encoded  transcription factor fully restored defensin expression in edr1, implying that  EDR1 interferes with MYC2 function to abrogate repression of defensin expression.  Furthermore, constitutive expression of plant defensin PDF1.2b largely rescued  pre-invasive resistance responses in edr1 plants. These results indicate that  EDR1 exerts a positive and critical role in resistance responses to  hemibiotrophic/necrotrophic fungi, in part by inducing antifungal protein  expression through derepression of MYC2 function.', '2011 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04651.x', 'Takano']

EDR1: !enhances! Nonhost resistance 
EDR1: !interacts with! MYC2 
MYC2: !represses! Defensin expression 
EDR1: !enhances! Defensin expression 
Defensin: !enhances! Pre-invasive resistance