Diatoms host chlorophyll a/c chloroplasts distinct from green chloroplasts. Diatoms now dominate the eukaryotic oceanic phytoplankton, in part through their exploitation of environments with variable light. We grew marine diatoms across a range of temperatures and then analyzed their PSII function and subunit turnover during an increase in light to mimic an upward mixing event. The small diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana initially responds to increased photoinactivation under blue or white light with rapid acceleration of the photosystem II (PSII) repair cycle. Increased red light provoked only modest PSII photoinactivation but triggered a rapid clearance of a subpool of PsbA. Furthermore, PsbD and PsbB content was greater than PsbA content, indicating a large pool of partly assembled PSII repair cycle intermediates lacking PsbA. The initial replacement rates for PsbD (D2) were, surprisingly, comparable to or higher than those for PsbA (D1), and even the supposedly stable PsbB (CP47) dropped rapidly upon the light shift, showing a novel aspect of rapid protein subunit turnover in the PSII repair cycle in small diatoms. Under sustained high light, T. pseudonana induces sustained nonphotochemical quenching, which correlates with stabilization of PSII function and the PsbA pool. The larger diatom Coscinodiscus radiatus showed generally similar responses but had a smaller allocation of PSII complexes relative to total protein content, with nearly equal stiochiometries of PsbA and PsbD subunits. Fast turnover of multiple PSII subunits, pools of PSII repair cycle intermediates, and photoprotective induction of nonphotochemical quenching are important interacting factors, particularly for small diatoms, to withstand and exploit high, fluctuating light.

PsbA: !turns over rapidly! increased red light 
PsbD: !turns over rapidly! increased red light 
PsbB: !turns over rapidly! increased red light 
PsbA: !stabilized! sustained high light 
PsbD: !equal stiochiometries! Coscinodiscus radiatus 
PSII: !accelerated repair cycle! increased blue/white light 
PSII: !partly assembled intermediates! increased blue/white light 
PSII: !nonphotochemical quenching! sustained high light