['21633512', 'On water deficit, abscisic acid (ABA) induces stomata closure to reduce water  loss by transpiration. To identify Arabidopsis thaliana mutants which transpire  less on drought, infrared thermal imaging of leaf temperature has been used to  screen for suppressors of an ABA-deficient mutant (aba3-1) cold-leaf phenotype.  Three novel mutants, called hot ABA-deficiency suppressor (has), have been  identified with hot-leaf phenotypes in the absence of the aba3 mutation. The  defective genes imparted no apparent modification to ABA production on water  deficit, were inherited recessively and enhanced ABA responses indicating that  the proteins encoded are negative regulators of ABA signalling. All three mutants  showed ABA-hypersensitive stomata closure and inhibition of root elongation with  little modification of growth and development in non-stressed conditions. The  has2 mutant also exhibited increased germination inhibition by ABA, while  ABA-inducible gene expression was not modified on dehydration, indicating the  mutated gene affects early ABA-signalling responses that do not modify transcript  levels. In contrast, weak ABA-hypersensitivity relative to mutant developmental  phenotypes suggests that HAS3 regulates drought responses by both ABA-dependent  and independent pathways. has1 mutant phenotypes were only apparent on stress or  ABA treatments, and included reduced water loss on rapid dehydration. The HAS1  locus thus has the required characteristics for a targeted approach to improving  resistance to water deficit. In contrast to has2, has1 exhibited only minor  changes in susceptibility to Dickeya dadantii despite similar  ABA-hypersensitivity, indicating that crosstalk between ABA responses to this  pathogen and drought stress can occur through more than one point in the  signalling pathway.', '2011', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0020243', 'North']

ABA: !induces! stomata closure 
has mutants: !exhibit! hot-leaf phenotypes 
has2 mutant: !increases! germination inhibition by ABA 
has3 mutant: !regulates! drought responses by ABA-dependent and independent pathways 
has1 mutant: !reduces! water loss on rapid dehydration 
has1 locus: !improves! resistance to water deficit 
ABA responses: !crosstalk! with pathogen resistance