['21632657', 'The actin cytoskeleton plays a crucial role in many aspects of plant cell  development. During male gametophyte development, the actin arrays are  conspicuously remodeled both during pollen maturation in the anther and after  pollen hydration on the receptive stigma and pollen tube elongation. Remodeling  of actin arrays results from the highly orchestrated activities of numerous actin  binding proteins (ABPs). A key player in actin remodeling is the actin  depolymerizing factor (ADF), which increases actin filament treadmilling rates.  We prepared fluorescent protein fusions of two Arabidopsis pollen-specific ADFs,  ADF7 and ADF10. We monitored the expression and subcellular localization of these  proteins during male gametophyte development, pollen germination and pollen tube  growth. ADF7 and ADF10 were differentially expressed with the ADF7 signal  appearing in the microspore stage and that of ADF10 only during the polarized  microspore stage. ADF7 was associated with the microspore nucleus and the  vegetative nucleus of the mature grain during less metabolically active stages,  but in germinating pollen grains and elongating pollen tubes, it was associated  with the subapical actin fringe. On the other hand, ADF10 was associated with  filamentous actin in the developing gametophyte, in particular with the arrays  surrounding the apertures of the mature pollen grain. In the shank of elongating  pollen tubes, ADF10 was associated with thick actin cables. We propose possible  specific functions of these two ADFs based on their differences in expression and  localization.', '2011 Jul', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcr068', 'Geitmann']

Actin cytoskeleton: !plays crucial role in! plant cell development
ADF7: !expressed in! microspore stage
ADF7: !localizes to! microspore nucleus, vegetative nucleus
ADF10: !expressed in! polarized microspore stage
ADF10: !localizes to! filamentous actin, apertures of mature pollen grain
ADF10: !localizes to! thick actin cables in shank of elongating pollen tubes