['21637781', "Floral organs display tremendous variation in their exterior that is essential  for organogenesis and the interaction with the environment. This diversity in  surface characteristics is largely dependent on the composition and structure of  their coating cuticular layer. To date, mechanisms of flower organ initiation and  identity have been studied extensively, while little is known regarding the  regulation of flower organs surface formation, cuticle composition, and its  developmental significance. Using a synthetic microRNA approach to simultaneously  silence the three SHINE (SHN) clade members, we revealed that these transcription  factors act redundantly to shape the surface and morphology of Arabidopsis  flowers. It appears that SHNs regulate floral organs' epidermal cell elongation  and decoration with nanoridges, particularly in petals. Reduced activity of SHN  transcription factors results in floral organs' fusion and earlier abscission  that is accompanied by a decrease in cutin load and modified cell wall  properties. SHN transcription factors possess target genes within four cutin- and  suberin-associated protein families including, CYP86A cytochrome P450s, fatty  acyl-CoA reductases, GSDL-motif lipases, and BODYGUARD1-like proteins. The  results suggest that alongside controlling cuticular lipids metabolism, SHNs act  to modify the epidermis cell wall through altering pectin metabolism and  structural proteins. We also provide evidence that surface formation in petals  and other floral organs during their growth and elongation or in abscission and  dehiscence through SHNs is partially mediated by gibberellin and the DELLA  signaling cascade. This study therefore demonstrates the need for a defined  composition and structure of the cuticle and cell wall in order to form the  archetypal features of floral organs surfaces and control their cell-to-cell  separation processes. Furthermore, it will promote future investigation into the  relation between the regulation of organ surface patterning and the broader  control of flower development and biological functions.", '2011 May', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1001388', 'Aharoni']

SHN: !regulates! floral organs' epidermal cell elongation 
SHN: !modifies! cell wall properties
SHN: !controls! cuticular lipids metabolism
SHN: !alters! pectin metabolism
SHN: !influences! structural proteins
SHN: !mediates! surface formation
Gibberellin/DELLA: !influences! SHN