Adventitious bud clusters of date palm 'Barhee' were successfully established from juvenile leaves (<1cm) using reduced amounts of 2,4-D (0.2mgL(-1)) to limit the risk of somaclonal variation. An average of 8.4 adventitious buds per explant were obtained. Histological examination showed that the superficial cell layers of leaves had the highest caulogenic capacity. High sucrose concentration (70gL(-1)) was used for the conversion of initial buds to multiple bud clusters. The promoting effect of temporary immersion on shoot proliferation was found to be significant when compared to cultivation on solid media. Elongation of shoots was also better using a thin film of PGR-free liquid medium instead of a solid medium. Anatomical observations indicated that roots from vitroplants were potentially functional at various developmental stages. However, only 12-month-old vitroplants were found to be physiologically able to control transpirational vapor loss. Additionally, the photochemical activity of photosystem II in these vitroplants was close to that measured in plants that were already acclimatized. As a result, 83.3% of regenerated plants were successfully acclimatized. No phenotypic variation was observed among more than 500 adventitious bud-derived plants. All regenerants survived after field transplantation. We found that the production of adventitious bud clusters in small bioreactors was able to provide an efficient micropropagation system for date palm cv. 'Barhee'. An in vitro hardening step was a prerequisite for the successful transfer of vitroplants in soil.

2,4-D: !limits! Somaclonal variation
Leaves: !have highest! Caulogenic capacity
Sucrose: !converts! Initial buds to multiple bud clusters
Temporary immersion: !promotes! Shoot proliferation
Thin film of PGR-free liquid medium: !enhances! Elongation of shoots
Roots: !potentially functional at! Various developmental stages
12-month-old vitroplants: !physiologically able to control! Transpirational vapor loss
Photosystem II: !close to! Acclimatized plants
Adventitious bud clusters: !provide efficient! Micropropagation system
In vitro hardening step: !prerequisite for successful transfer! Vitroplants in soil