Global DNA methylation was assessed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for the first time in Eucalyptus urophylla×Eucalyptus grandis shoot tips comparing three outdoor and one in vitro sources of related genotypes differing in their physiological age. The DNA methylation levels found were consistent with those reported for other Angiosperms using the same HPLC technology. Notwithstanding noticeable time-related fluctuations within each source of plant material, methylation rate was overall higher for the mature clone (13.7%) than for the rejuvenated line of the same clone (12.6%) and for the juvenile offspring seedlings (11.8%). The in vitro microshoots of the mature clone were less methylated (11.3%) than the other outdoor origins, but the difference with the juvenile seedlings was not significant. Immunofluorescence investigations on shoot apices established that the mature source could be distinguished from the rejuvenated and juvenile origins by a higher density of cells with methylated nuclei in leaf primordia. Shoot apical meristems (SAMs) from the mature clone also showed a greater proportion and more methylated cells than SAMs from the rejuvenated and juvenile origins. The nuclei of these latter were characterized by fewer and more dispersed labeled spots than for the mature source. Our findings establish that physiological ageing induced quantitative and qualitative variations of DNA methylation at shoot tip, SAM and even cellular levels. Overall this DNA methylation increased with maturation and conversely decreased with rejuvenation to reach the lower scores and to show the immunolabeling patterns that characterized juvenile material nuclei.

DNA methylation: !increases with! maturation 
DNA methylation: !decreases with! rejuvenation 
DNA methylation: !higher in! mature clone 
DNA methylation: !lower in! juvenile seedlings 
DNA methylation: !characterizes! juvenile material nuclei 
DNA methylation: !distinguishes! mature source from rejuvenated and juvenile origins