['21641974', 'Mob1 genes are primarily involved in the cell cycle progression and mitosis exit  in yeasts and animals. The function of a Mob1-like gene (At5g45550) from  Arabidopsis thaliana was investigated using RNAi and immunological staining.  AtMob1-like RNAi silenced lines showed a reduced radial expansion of the  inflorescence stem and a reduced elongation zone of the primary root.  Morphological features of plant organs were accompanied by a reduction in cell  size. The fertility of AtMob1-like RNAi silenced lines was very low as seed  production was strongly reduced. About 2% of the progeny of AtMob1-like RNAi  silenced plants were tetraploid. The female and male sporogenesis was affected  differentially. The ovules developed irregularly and one third of the megaspores  and embryo sacs degenerated prematurely. Up to 20% of the ovules produced  binucleated megaspores that failed to develop further, being their degeneration  likely accompanied with a delayed programmed cell death. The anthers produced  about 30% of aborted pollen grains, showing also a strong variation in their  size. Together, the results show that Arabidopsis MOB1-like is required to  regulate cell expansion and cell division, presumably by affecting the mitotic as  well as the meiotic cell cycle.', '2011 Sep 15', 'Gene', '10.1016/j.gene.2011.05.009', 'Barcaccia']

AtMob1-like: !regulates! cell expansion 
AtMob1-like: !regulates! cell division 
AtMob1-like: !affects! mitotic cell cycle 
AtMob1-like: !affects! meiotic cell cycle 
AtMob1-like: !reduces! radial expansion of inflorescence stem 
AtMob1-like: !reduces! elongation zone of primary root 
AtMob1-like: !reduces! cell size 
AtMob1-like: !reduces! fertility 
AtMob1-like: !causes! tetraploid progeny 
AtMob1-like: !affects! female sporogenesis 
AtMob1-like: !affects! male sporogenesis 
AtMob1-like: !causes! irregular ovules 
AtMob1-like: !causes! premature degeneration of megaspores and embryo sacs 
AtMob1-like: !causes! binucleated megaspores 
AtMob1-like: !causes! aborted pollen grains 
AtMob1-like: !causes!