To understand the transcriptional responses to flooding stress in roots including hypocotyl of soybean seedlings, genome-wide changes in gene expression were analyzed using a soybean microarray chip containing 42,034 60-mer oligonucleotide probes. More than 6,000 of flooding-responsive genes in the roots including hypocotyl of soybean seedlings were identified. The transcriptional analysis showed that genes related to photosynthesis, glycolysis, Ser-Gly-Cys group amino acid synthesis, regulation of transcription, ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation and cell death were significantly up-regulated by flooding. Meanwhile, genes related to cell wall synthesis, secondary metabolism, metabolite transport, cell organization, chromatin structure synthesis, and degradation of aspartate family amino acid were significantly down-regulated. Comparison of the responses with other plants showed that genes encoding pyrophosphate dependent phosphofructokinase were down-regulated in flooded soybean seedlings, however, those in tolerant plants were up-regulated. Additionally, genes related to RNA processing and initiation of protein synthesis were not up-regulated in soybean, however, those in tolerant plants were up-regulated. Furthermore, we found that flooding-specific up-regulation of genes encoding small proteins which might have roles in acclimation to flooding. These results suggest that functional disorder of acclimative responses to flooding through transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations is involved in occurring flooding injury to soybean seedlings.

Photosynthesis: !enhances! Glycolysis 
Ser-Gly-Cys group amino acid synthesis: !enhances! Regulation of transcription 
Ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation: !enhances! Cell death 
Cell wall synthesis: !represses! Secondary metabolism 
Metabolite transport: !represses! Cell organization 
Chromatin structure synthesis: !represses! Degradation of aspartate family amino acid 
Pyrophosphate dependent phosphofructokinase: !represses! Tolerant plants 
RNA processing: !represses! Initiation of protein synthesis 
Tolerant plants: !enhances! Small proteins