Arabidopsis presumably has few sensors for gamma-rays and few signal transduction systems that respond to them. In an effort to assess their radiation sensitivity, wild-type (Ler) Arabidopsis plants were irradiated with various doses of gamma-rays at the vegetative (VE) and reproductive (RE) stages. 100Gy treatment induced the higher production of siliques during both the VE and RE stages compared with non-irradiation. Treatments at doses over 200Gy repressed shoot growth, and the plants perished under 800Gy treatment. The results of physiological analysis using electron spin resonance (ESR) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed that increased doses of gamma-rays induce greater ROS generation. To establish the gene expression profiles after gamma irradiation and for an analysis of the antioxidant response, we employed an oligonucleotide microarray system. Different responses of genes related with ROS scavenging and signal transduction pathways by a gamma irradiation were observed. At least 33 and 42 out of all genes with significantly altered expression were associated with ROS scavenging and signal transduction pathways having an induction or repression ratio cutoff of at least 2-fold, respectively. CAT3 (At1g20620), Ferritin1 (At5g01600), Blue copper binding protein (At5g20230), and AOX putative (At1g32350) were up-regulated regardless of dosage at the VE stage. Reactive oxygen species signaling genes encoding phospholipase, zinc finger protein, WRKY DNA-binding protein, and calcium binding protein were highly expressed, evidencing changes greater than 2-fold. Our transcriptomic profile of the responses of Arabidopsis genes to gamma irradiation showed that plants evidenced altered expressions of many signal transduction and antioxidant genes, as have been seen with other environmental stresses.

Gamma-rays: !induce! ROS generation
Gamma-rays: !alter expression of! signal transduction genes
Gamma-rays: !alter expression of! antioxidant genes
CAT3: !up-regulated by! gamma-rays
Ferritin1: !up-regulated by! gamma-rays
Blue copper binding protein: !up-regulated by! gamma-rays
AOX putative: !up-regulated by! gamma-rays
Phospholipase: !highly expressed by! gamma-rays
Zinc finger protein: !highly expressed by! gamma-rays
WRKY DNA-binding protein: !highly expressed by! gamma-rays
Calcium binding protein: !highly expressed by! gamma-rays