['21668538', 'TCP transcription factors constitute a small family of plant-specific  bHLH-containing, DNA-binding proteins that have been implicated in the control of  cell proliferation in plants. Despite the significant role that is likely to be  played by genes that control cell division in the elaboration of plant  architecture, functional analysis of this family by forward and reverse genetics  has been hampered by genetic redundancy. Here we show that mutants in two related  class I TCP genes display a range of growth-related phenotypes, consistent with  their dynamic expression patterns; these phenotypes are enhanced in the double  mutant. Together, the two genes influence plant stature by promoting cell  division in young internodes. Reporter gene analysis and use of SRDX fusions  suggested that TCP14 and TCP15 modulate cell proliferation in the developing leaf  blade and specific floral tissues; a role that was not apparent in our phenotypic  analysis of single or double mutants. However, when the relevant mutants were  subjected to computer-aided morphological analysis of the leaves, the  consequences of loss of either or both genes became obvious. The effects on cell  proliferation of perturbing the function of TCP14 and TCP15 vary with tissue, as  has been suggested for other TCP factors. These findings indicate that the  precise elaboration of plant form is dependent on the cumulative influence of  many TCP factors acting in a context-dependent fashion. The study highlights the  need for advanced methods of phenotypic analysis in order to characterize  phenotypes and to construct a dynamic model for TCP gene function.', '2011 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04674.x', 'Davies']

TCP14: !promotes! cell division 
TCP15: !promotes! cell division 
TCP14: !modulates! cell proliferation 
TCP15: !modulates! cell proliferation 
TCP14: !influences! plant stature 
TCP15: !influences! plant stature 
TCP14: !affects! leaf blade 
TCP15: !affects! leaf blade 
TCP14: !impacts! floral tissues 
TCP15: !impacts! floral tissues