['21670741', 'Subcellular trafficking is required for a multitude of functions in eukaryotic  cells. It involves regulation of cargo sorting, vesicle formation, trafficking  and fusion processes at multiple levels. Adaptor protein (AP) complexes are key  regulators of cargo sorting into vesicles in yeast and mammals but their  existence and function in plants have not been demonstrated. Here we report the  identification of the protein-affected trafficking 4 (pat4) mutant defective in  the putative delta subunit of the AP-3 complex. pat4 and pat2, a mutant isolated from  the same GFP imaging-based forward genetic screen that lacks a functional  putative AP-3 beta, as well as dominant negative AP-3 mu transgenic lines display  undistinguishable phenotypes characterized by largely normal morphology and  development, but strong intracellular accumulation of membrane proteins in  aberrant vacuolar structures. All mutants are defective in morphology and  function of lytic and protein storage vacuoles (PSVs) but show normal sorting of  reserve proteins to PSVs. Immunoprecipitation experiments and genetic studies  revealed tight functional and physical associations of putative AP-3 beta and AP-3 delta  subunits. Furthermore, both proteins are closely linked with putative AP-3 mu and  sigma subunits and several components of the clathrin and dynamin machineries. Taken  together, these results demonstrate that AP complexes, similar to those in other  eukaryotes, exist in plants, and that AP-3 plays a specific role in the  regulation of biogenesis and function of vacuoles in plant cells.', '2011 Dec', 'Cell Res', '10.1038/cr.2011.99', 'Friml']

Adaptor protein (AP): !regulates! Cargo sorting 
pat4: !defective in! Putative delta subunit of AP-3 complex 
pat2: !defective in! Putative AP-3 beta 
Dominant negative AP-3 mu transgenic lines: !display! Aberrant vacuolar structures 
pat4/pat2 mutants: !defective in! Morphology and function of lytic and protein storage vacuoles 
Putative AP-3 beta/delta subunits: !tightly associated with! Putative AP-3 mu/sigma subunits 
Putative AP-3 beta/delta subunits: !closely linked with! Clathrin/dynamin machineries