['21670223', 'ACBP3 is one of six Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genes, designated ACBP1 to  ACBP6, that encode acyl-coenzyme A (CoA)-binding proteins (ACBPs). These ACBPs  bind long-chain acyl-CoA esters and phospholipids and are involved in diverse  cellular functions, including acyl-CoA homeostasis, development, and stress  tolerance. Recombinant ACBP3 binds polyunsaturated acyl-CoA esters and  phospholipids in vitro. Here, we show that ACBP3 plays a role in the plant  defense response to the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000.  ACBP3 mRNA was up-regulated upon pathogen infection and treatments using pathogen  elicitors and defense-related phytohormones. Transgenic Arabidopsis ACBP3  overexpressors (ACBP3-OEs) showed constitutive expression of pathogenesis-related  genes (PR1, PR2, and PR5), cell death, and hydrogen peroxide accumulation in  leaves. Consequently, ACBP3-OEs displayed enhanced resistance to the bacterial  pathogen P. syringae DC3000. In contrast, the acbp3 T-DNA insertional mutant was  more susceptible and exhibited lower PR gene transcript levels upon infection.  Using the ACBP3 OE-1 line in combination with nonexpressor of PR genes1 (npr1-5)  or coronatine-insensitive1 (coi1-2), we concluded that the enhanced PR gene  expression and P. syringae DC3000 resistance in the ACBP3-OEs are dependent on  the NPR1-mediated, but not the COI1-mediated, signaling pathway. Given that  ACBP3-OEs showed greater susceptibility to infection by the necrotrophic fungus  Botrytis cinerea while the acbp3 mutant was less susceptible, we suggest that  ACBP3 plays a role in the plant defense response against biotrophic pathogens  that is distinct from necrotrophic pathogens. ACBP3 function in plant defense was  supported further by bioinformatics data showing up-regulation of many biotic and  abiotic stress-related genes in ACBP3 OE-1 in comparison with the wild type.', '2011 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.176933', 'Chye']

ACBP3: !binds! polyunsaturated acyl-CoA esters and phospholipids 
ACBP3: !upregulates! pathogenesis-related genes 
ACBP3: !enhances! resistance to P. syringae DC3000 
ACBP3: !depends on! NPR1-mediated signaling pathway 
ACBP3: !plays a role in! defense response against biotrophic pathogens 
acbp3 mutant: !exhibits lower! PR gene transcript levels 
acbp3 mutant: !is less susceptible! to necrotrophic fungus