['21689171', 'The ectopic expression of a MADS box gene FOREVER YOUNG FLOWER (FYF) caused a  significant delay of senescence and a deficiency of abscission in flowers of  transgenic Arabidopsis. The defect in floral abscission was found to be due to a  deficiency in the timing of cell separation of the abscission zone cells.  Down-regulation of INFLORESCENCE DEFICIENT IN ABSCISSION (IDA) may contribute to  the delay of the floral abscission in 35S:FYF flowers. FYF was found to be highly  expressed in young flowers prior to pollination and was significantly decreased  after pollination, a pattern that correlated with its function. Ethylene  insensitivity in senescence/abscission and the down-regulation of ETHYLENE  RESPONSE DNA-BINDING FACTOR 1 (EDF1) and EDF2, downstream genes in the ethylene  response, in 35S:FYF Arabidopsis suggested a role for FYF in regulating  senescence/abscission by suppressing the ethylene response. This role was further  supported by the fact that 35S:FYF enhanced the delay of flower  senescence/abscission in ethylene response 1 (etr1), ethylene-insensitive 2  (ein2) and constitutive triple response 1 (ctr1) mutants, which have defects in  upstream genes of the ethylene signaling pathway. The presence of a repressor  domain in the C-terminus of FYF and the enhancement of the delay of  senescence/abscission in FYF+SRDX (containing a suppression motif) transgenic  plants suggested that FYF acts as a repressor. Indeed, in FYF-DR+VP16 transgenic  dominant-negative mutant plants, in which FYF was converted to a potent activator  by fusion to a VP16-AD motif, the senescence/abscission of the flower organs was  significantly promoted, and the expression of BOP2, IDA and EDF1/2 was  up-regulated. Our data suggest a role for FYF in controlling floral  senescence/abscission by repressing ethylene responses and regulating the  expression of BOP2 and IDA in Arabidopsis.', '2011 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04677.x', 'Yang']

FYF: !affects! Senescence/Abscission
FYF: !represses! Ethylene Response
FYF: !regulates! BOP2 expression
FYF: !regulates! IDA expression
FYF: !down-regulates! EDF1/2 expression
IDA: !contributes to! Delay of Floral Abscission
Ethylene Response: !suppressed by! FYF
Etr1, Ein2, Ctr1: !enhanced by! 35S:FYF