['21693505', 'Small peptides derived from the CLAVATA3/EMBRYO SURROUNDING REGION-related (CLE)  gene family play a key role in various cell-cell communications in land plants.  Among them, tracheary element differentiation inhibition factor (TDIF;  CLE41/CLE44 peptide) and CLE42 peptide of Arabidopsis have almost identical amino  acid sequences and act as inhibitors of tracheary element differentiation. In  this study, we report a novel function of TDIF and CLE42. We found by the GUS  (beta-glucuronidase) reporter gene assay that while CLE41 and CLE44 are expressed  preferentially in vascular bundles, CLE42 is expressed strongly in the shoot  apical meristem (SAM) and axillary meristems. Overexpression of CLE42 and CLE41  enhanced axillary bud formation in the leaf and cotyledon axils. Before floral  transition, the emergence of axillary buds in these plants occurred in an  acropetal order. Exogenous supply of either TDIF or CLE42 peptide to the wild  type induced similar excess bud emergence. In vascular bundles, the TDIF RECEPTOR  (TDR) acts as the main receptor for TDIF. The axillary bud emergence of tdr  mutants was little affected by either of the peptides. It was confirmed by  scanning electron microscopy that peptide-treated wild-type plants form an  axillary meristem-like structure earlier than non-treated plants. SHOOT  MERISTEMLESS (STM), a marker gene for meristems, was up-regulated in  peptide-treated plants before the axillary meristem becomes morphologically  distinguishable. These results indicate that CLE42 peptide and TDIF have an  activity to enhance axillary bud formation via the TDR. Judging from its  expression pattern, CLE42 may play an important role in the regulation of  secondary shoot development.', '2011 Aug', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcr081', 'Fukuda']

CLE41/CLE44: !inhibit! tracheary element differentiation 
CLE42: !localizes to! shoot apical meristem 
CLE42: !enhances! axillary bud formation 
TDIF: !interacts with! TDIF Receptor 
TDIF Receptor: !mediates! TDIF activity 
CLE42: !regulates! secondary shoot development