['21695238', 'Centromere behavior is specialized in meiosis I, so that sister chromatids of  homologous chromosomes are pulled toward the same side of the spindle (through  kinetochore mono-orientation) and chromosome number is reduced. Factors required  for mono-orientation have been identified in yeast. However, comparatively little  is known about how meiotic centromere behavior is specialized in animals and  plants that typically have large tandem repeat centromeres. Kinetochores are  nucleated by the centromere-specific histone CENH3. Unlike conventional histone  H3s, CENH3 is rapidly evolving, particularly in its N-terminal tail domain. Here  we describe chimeric variants of CENH3 with alterations in the N-terminal tail  that are specifically defective in meiosis. Arabidopsis thaliana cenh3 mutants  expressing a GFP-tagged chimeric protein containing the H3 N-terminal tail and  the CENH3 C-terminus (termed GFP-tailswap) are sterile because of random meiotic  chromosome segregation. These defects result from the specific depletion of  GFP-tailswap protein from meiotic kinetochores, which contrasts with its normal  localization in mitotic cells. Loss of the GFP-tailswap CENH3 variant in meiosis  affects recruitment of the essential kinetochore protein MIS12. Our findings  suggest that CENH3 loading dynamics might be regulated differently in mitosis and  meiosis. As further support for our hypothesis, we show that GFP-tailswap protein  is recruited back to centromeres in a subset of pollen grains in GFP-tailswap  once they resume haploid mitosis. Meiotic recruitment of the GFP-tailswap CENH3  variant is not restored by removal of the meiosis-specific cohesin subunit REC8.  Our results reveal the existence of a specialized loading pathway for CENH3  during meiosis that is likely to involve the hypervariable N-terminal tail.  Meiosis-specific CENH3 dynamics may play a role in modulating meiotic centromere  behavior.', '2011 Jun', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1002121', 'Chan']

CENH3: !nucleates! Kinetochores 
GFP-tailswap: !depletes from! Meiotic Kinetochores 
MIS12: !recruited by! CENH3 
REC8: !does not restore! GFP-tailswap recruitment 
N-terminal tail: !regulates! CENH3 loading dynamics