['21712381', 'Heterotrimeric G protein complexes are conserved from plants to mammals, but the  complexity of each system varies. Arabidopsis thaliana contains one Galpha, one Gbeta  (AGB1), and at least three Ggamma subunits, allowing it to form three versions of the  heterotrimer. This plant model is ideal for genetic studies because mammalian  systems contain hundreds of unique heterotrimers. The activation of these  complexes promotes interactions between both the Galpha subunit and the Gbetagamma dimer  with enzymes and scaffolds to propagate signaling to the cytoplasm. However,  although effectors of Galpha and Gbeta are known in mammals, no Gbeta effectors were  previously known in plants. Toward identifying AGB1 effectors, we genetically  screened for dominant mutations that suppress Gbeta-null mutant (agb1-2) phenotypes.  We found that overexpression of acireductone dioxygenase 1 (ARD1) suppresses the  2-day-old etiolated phenotype of agb1-2. ARD1 is homologous to prokaryotic and  eukaryotic ARD proteins; one function of ARDs is to operate in the methionine  salvage pathway. We show here that ARD1 is an active metalloenzyme, and AGB1 and  ARD1 both control embryonic hypocotyl length by modulating cell division; they  also may contribute to the production of ethylene, a product of the methionine  salvage pathway. ARD1 physically interacts with AGB1, and ARD enzymatic activity  is stimulated by AGB1 in vitro. The binding interface on AGB1 was deduced using a  comparative evolutionary approach and tested using recombinant AGB1 mutants. A  possible mechanism for AGB1 activation of ARD1 activity was tested using directed  mutations in a loop near the substrate-binding site.', '2011 Aug 26', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M111.227256', 'Jones']

Gbeta: !interacts with! ARD1 
Gbeta: !controls! embryonic hypocotyl length 
Gbeta: !contributes to! ethylene production 
ARD1: !physically interacts with! Gbeta 
ARD1: !stimulated by! Gbeta 
AGB1: !binds to! ARD1 
AGB1: !activates! ARD1