Proteomics facilitates our understanding of cellular processes and network functions in the plant defense response during abiotic and biotic stresses. Here, we demonstrate that the ectopic expression of the Capsicum annuum antimicrobial protein CaAMP1 gene in Arabidopsis thaliana confers enhanced tolerance to methyl viologen (MV)-induced oxidative stress, which is accompanied by lower levels of lipid peroxidation. Quantitative comparative proteome analyses using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis coupled with mass spectrometry identified some of the oxidative stress- and disease-related proteins that are differentially regulated by CaAMP1 overexpression in Arabidopsis leaves. Antioxidant- and defense-related proteins, such as 2-cys peroxiredoxin, L-ascorbate peroxidase, peroxiredoxin, glutathione S-transferase and copper homeostasis factor, were up-regulated in the CaAMP1 transgenic leaf tissues. In contrast, GSH-dependent dehydroascorbate reductase and WD-40 repeat family protein were down-regulated by CaAMP1 overexpression. In addition, CaAMP1 overexpression enhanced resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Pst) DC3000 infection and also H(2)O(2) accumulation in Arabidopsis. The identified antioxidant- and defense-related genes were differentially expressed during MV-induced oxidative stress and Pst DC3000 infection. Taken together, we conclude that CaAMP1 overexpression can regulate the differential expression of defense-related proteins in response to environmental stresses to maintain reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis.

CaAMP1: !enhances! tolerance to MV-induced oxidative stress 
CaAMP1: !upregulates! 2-cys peroxiredoxin 
CaAMP1: !upregulates! L-ascorbate peroxidase 
CaAMP1: !upregulates! peroxiredoxin 
CaAMP1: !upregulates! glutathione S-transferase 
CaAMP1: !upregulates! copper homeostasis factor 
CaAMP1: !downregulates! GSH-dependent dehydroascorbate reductase 
CaAMP1: !downregulates! WD-40 repeat family protein 
CaAMP1: !enhances! resistance to Pst DC3000 infection 
CaAMP1: !enhances! H2O2 accumulation