['21737456', 'HSP100 proteins are molecular chaperones involved in protein quality control.  They assist in protein (un)folding, prevent aggregation, and are thought to  participate in precursor translocation across membranes. Caseinolytic proteins  ClpC and ClpD from plant chloroplasts belong to the HSP100 family. Their role has  hitherto been investigated by means of physiological studies and reverse  genetics. In the present work, we employed an in vitro approach to delve into the  structural and functional characteristics of ClpC2 and ClpD from Arabidopsis  thaliana (AtClpC2 and AtClpD). They were expressed in Escherichia coli and  purified to near-homogeneity. The proteins were detected mainly as dimers in  solution, and, upon addition of ATP, the formation of hexamers was observed. Both  proteins exhibited basal ATPase activity (K(m), 1.42 mm, V(max), 0.62 nmol/(min x  mug) for AtClpC2 and K(m)  approximately 19.80 mm, V(max)  approximately 0.19 nmol/(min x mug) for AtClpD).  They were able to reactivate the activity of heat-denatured luciferase ( approximately 40% for  AtClpC2 and  approximately 20% for AtClpD). The Clp proteins tightly bound a fusion protein  containing a model transit peptide. This interaction was detected by binding  assays, where the chaperones were selectively trapped by the transit  peptide-containing fusion, immobilized on glutathione-agarose beads. Association  of HSP100 proteins to import complexes with a bound transit peptide-containing  fusion was also observed in intact chloroplasts. The presented data are useful to  understand protein quality control and protein import into chloroplasts in  plants.', '2011 Aug 26', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M110.211946', 'Ceccarelli']

HSP100 proteins: !assist in! protein (un)folding 
ClpC and ClpD: !belong to! HSP100 family 
AtClpC2 and AtClpD: !form! dimers 
AtClpC2 and AtClpD: !form! hexamers 
AtClpC2 and AtClpD: !exhibit! ATPase activity 
AtClpC2 and AtClpD: !reactivate! heat-denatured luciferase 
Clp proteins: !bind! fusion protein containing model transit peptide 
HSP100 proteins: !associate with! import complexes