The phytohormones ethylene and abscisic acid (ABA) play essential roles in the abiotic stress adaptation of plants, with both cross-talk of ethylene signalling and ABA biosynthesis and signalling reported. Any reciprocal effects on each other's biosynthesis, however, remain elusive. ACC synthase (ACS) acts as the key enzyme in ethylene biosynthesis. A pilot study on changes in ACS promoter activities in response to abiotic stresses revealed the unique involvement in abiotic stress responses of the only type 3 ACC synthase, ACS7, among all nine ACSs of Arabidopsis. Hence an acs7 mutant was characterized and its abiotic stress responses were analysed. The acs7 mutant germinated slightly faster than the wild type and subsequently maintained a higher growth rate at the vegetative growth stage. Ethylene emission of acs7 was merely one-third of that of the wild type. acs7 exhibited enhanced tolerance to salt, osmotic, and heat stresses. Furthermore, acs7 seeds were hypersensitive to both ABA and glucose during germination. Transcript analyses revealed that acs7 had elevated transcript levels of the stress-responsive genes involved in the ABA-dependent pathway under salt stress. The ABA level was also higher in acs7 following salt treatment. Our data suggest that ACS7 acts as a negative regulator of ABA sensitivity and accumulation under stress and appears as a node in the cross-talk between ethylene and ABA.

ethylene: !plays essential role in! abiotic stress adaptation
ABA: !plays essential role in! abiotic stress adaptation
ACS: !acts as key enzyme in! ethylene biosynthesis
ACS7: !uniquely involved in! abiotic stress responses
acs7 mutant: !exhibits enhanced tolerance to! salt, osmotic, and heat stresses
acs7 mutant: !hypersensitive to! ABA and glucose during germination
acs7 mutant: !elevated transcript levels of! stress-responsive genes under salt stress
acs7 mutant: !higher ABA level following! salt treatment
ACS7: !negative regulator of! ABA sensitivity and accumulation under stress
ACS7: !node in! cross-talk between ethylene and ABA