Besides regulating meristem formation and maintenance in vivo, SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM) has been shown to affect embryogenesis. While the over-expression of Brassica napus (Bn)STM enhances the number of microspore-derived embryos produced in culture and their ability to regenerate viable plants, a down-regulation of this gene represses the embryogenic process (Elhiti et al., J Exp Bot, 61:4069-4085, 2010). Synthesis and degradation of pyrimidine and purine nucleotides were measured in developing microspore-derived embryos (MDEs) generated from B. napus lines ectopically expressing or down-regulating BnSTM. Pyrimidine metabolism was investigated by following the metabolic fate of exogenously supplied (14)C-uridine, uracil and orotic acid, whereas purine metabolism was estimated by using (14)C-adenine, adenosine and inosine. The improvement in embryo number and quality affected by the ectopic expression of BnSTM was linked to the increased pyrimidine and purine salvage activity during the early phases of embryogenesis and the enlargement of the adenylate pool (ATP + ADP) required for the active growth of the embryos. This was due to an increase in transcriptional and enzymatic activity of several salvage enzymes, including adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) and adenosine kinase (ADK). The highly operative salvage pathway induced by the ectopic expression of BnSTM was associated with a slow catabolism of nucleotides, suggesting the presence of an antagonist mechanism controlling the rate of salvage and degradation pathways. During the second half of embryogenesis utilization of uridine for UTP + UDPglucose (UDPG) synthesis increased in the embryos over-expressing BnSTM, and this coincided with a better post-germination performance. All these events were precluded by the down-regulation of BnSTM which repressed the formation of the embryos and their post-embryonic performance. Overall, this work provides evidence that precise metabolic changes are associated with proper embryo development in culture.

STM: !affects! embryogenesis
STM: !enhances! microspore-derived embryo production
STM: !represses! embryogenic process
STM: !increases! transcriptional and enzymatic activity of salvage enzymes
STM: !controls! rate of salvage and degradation pathways
STM: !associated with! proper embryo development in culture