Majority of transmembrane signal transduction in response to diverse external stimuli is mediated by G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) and are the principal signal transducers. GPCRs are characterized by seven membrane-spanning domains with an extracellular N-terminus and a cytoplasmic C-terminus which functions along with GTP-binding protein in a highly coordinated fashion. Role of heterotrimeric G-proteins in abiotic stresses has been reported, but the response of GPCR is not yet well characterized. In the present study we report the isolation of one putative GPCR (966 bp) from Indica rice (Oryza sativa cv. Indica group Swarna) and described its transcriptional regulation under abiotic stresses. Amino acid sequence analyses shows the presence of typical heptahelical transmembrane spanning domains with extracellular N-terminus involved in ligand binding and cytoplasm facing C-terminus that binds with heterotrimeric G-protein. Sequence analysis also confirmed the presence of all signature motifs required for functional GPCR. Domain and site prediction shows the presence of myristoylation sites for membrane association, and protein kinase C sites for its desensitization. The transcript levels of rice GPCR was induced following NaCl and ABA treatments. However, in drought condition the expression profile of GPCR up regulated during early exposure which subsequently decreased. On the other hand it seems no significant effect due to cold and heat stress. These findings provide a direct evidence for transcriptional regulation of rice GPCR under abiotic stress conditions. These findings also suggest that GPCR can be exploited for promoting stress tolerance in plants.

GPCR: !mediates! transmembrane signal transduction 
GPCR: !characterized by! seven membrane-spanning domains 
GPCR: !binds with! heterotrimeric G-protein 
GPCR: !contains! myristoylation sites 
GPCR: !contains! protein kinase C sites 
NaCl/ABA: !induces! transcript levels of rice GPCR 
Drought: !up regulates! expression profile of GPCR 
Cold/Heat: !no effect on! expression profile of GPCR