['21784786', 'The 26S proteasome plays fundamental roles in the degradation of short-lived  regulatory proteins, thereby controlling diverse cellular processes. In  Arabidopsis, the essential RPT2 subunit is encoded by two highly homologous  genes: RPT2a and RPT2b. Currently, only RPT2a has been reported to regulate  various developmental processes, including the maintenance of the root apical  meristem (RAM), although the roles of RPT2a in the RAM are still obscure. Here,  we analyzed the cell type-specific requirement for RPT2a. When RPT2a was  expressed locally in the rpt2a mutant, pleiotropic defects in the RAM, such as  cell death and distorted cellular organization, were rescued differently,  suggesting that RPT2a regulates various specific activities, which converge to  maintain the RAM. On the other hand, the homologous RPT2b was also expressed in  meristems, and the expression of RPT2b protein under the control of the RPT2a  promoter complemented the rpt2a RAM defects, although the rpt2b mutant showed no  obvious defect in all developmental aspects we examined. These results show that  RPT2b might work in the RAM, but is dispensable for RAM maintenance in the  presence of RPT2a. In contrast, the rpt2a rpt2b double mutant was lethal in male  and female gametophytes, suggesting that RPT2a and RPT2b are redundantly required  for gametogenesis. Furthermore, we showed that similar meristematic and  gametophytic defects were caused by mutations in other subunit genes, RPT5a and  RPT5b, suggesting that proper activity of the proteasome, not an RPT2-specific  function, is required. Taken together, our results suggest that RPT2a and RPT2b  contribute differently to the proteasome activity required for each developmental  context.', '2011 Sep', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcr093', 'Okada']

RPT2a: !regulates! various developmental processes 
RPT2b: !works in! RAM 
RPT2a: !redundantly required with! RPT2b 
RPT2a/RPT2b: !required for! gametogenesis 
RPT5a/RPT5b: !required for! proper proteasome activity