['21782461', 'From the five genes which code for cytosolic fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolases  in Arabidopsis thaliana L., the cDNA clone of cAld2 (At2g36460), was  heterologously expressed in E. coli and incubated under various oxidizing and  reducing conditions. Covalent binding of a GSH moiety to the enzyme was shown by  incorporation of biotinylated GSH (BioGEE) and by immunodetection with monoclonal  anti-GSH serum. Nitrosylation after incubation with GSNO or SNP was demonstrated  using the biotin-switch assay. Mass-spectrometry analysis showed  glutathionylation and/or nitrosylation at two different cysteine residues: GSH  was found to be attached to C68 and C173, while the nitroso-group was  incorporated only into C173. Non-reducing SDS-PAGE conducted with purified  wild-type and various Cys-mutant proteins revealed the presence of disulfide  bridges in the oxidized enzyme, as described for rabbit muscle aldolase.  Incubation of the purified enzyme with GSSG (up to 25 mM) led to partial and  reversible inactivation of enzyme activity; NADPH, in the presence of the  components of the cytosolic NADP-dependent thioredoxin system, could reactivate  the aldolase as did DTT. Total and irreversible inactivation occurred with low  concentrations (0.1 mM) of nitrosoglutathione (GSNO). Inactivation was prevented  by co-incubation of cAld2 with fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP). Nuclear  localization of cAld2 and interaction with thioredoxins was shown by transient  expression of fusion constructs with fluorescent proteins in isolated  protoplasts.', '2011 Sep', 'Plant Physiol Biochem', '10.1016/j.plaphy.2011.06.009', 'Scheibe']

cAld2: !heterologously expressed in! E. coli 
cAld2: !incorporated with! biotinylated GSH 
cAld2: !nitrosylated with! GSNO or SNP 
GSH: !attached to! C68 and C173 
Nitroso-group: !incorporated into! C173 
Wild-type protein: !revealed presence of! disulfide bridges 
GSSG: !inactivated! cAld2 
NADPH: !reactivated! cAld2 
DTT: !reactivated! cAld2 
GSNO: !inactivated! cAld2 
FBP: !prevented inactivation of! cAld2 
cAld2: !localized to! nucleus 
cAld2: !interacted with! thioredoxins