['21802295', 'BACKGROUND: The division of plant zygotes is typically asymmetric, generating  daughter cells with different developmental fates. In Arabidopsis, the apical  daughter cell produces the proembryo, whereas the basal daughter cell forms the  mostly extraembryonic suspensor. Establishment of apical and basal fates is known  to depend on the YODA (YDA) mitogen-associated protein (MAP) kinase cascade and  WUSCHEL-LIKE HOMEOBOX (WOX) homeodomain transcription factors. RESULTS: Mutations  in GROUNDED (GRD) cause anatomical defects implying a partial loss of  developmental asymmetry in the first division. Subsequently, suspensor-specific  WOX8 expression disappears while proembryo-specific ZLL expression expands in the  mutants, revealing that basal fates are confounded. GRD encodes a small nuclear  protein of the RWP-RK family and is broadly transcribed in the early embryo. Loss  of GRD eliminates the dominant effects of hyperactive YDA variants, indicating  that GRD is required for YDA-dependent signaling in the embryo. However, GRD  function is not regulated via direct phosphorylation by MAP kinases, and forced  expression of GRD does not suppress the effect of yda mutations. In a strong  synthetic interaction, grd;wox8;wox9 triple mutants arrest as zygotes or one-cell  embryos lacking apparent polarity. CONCLUSIONS: The predicted transcription  factor GRD acts cooperatively with WOX homeodomain proteins to establish  embryonic polarity in the first division. Like YDA, GRD promotes zygote  elongation and basal cell fates. GRD function is required for YDA-dependent  signaling but apparently not regulated by the YDA MAP kinase cascade. Similarity  of GRD to Chlamydomonas MID suggests a conserved role for small RWP-RK proteins  in regulating the transcriptional programs of generative cells and the zygote.', '2011 Aug 9', 'Curr Biol', '10.1016/j.cub.2011.06.049', 'Lukowitz']

YDA: !promotes! zygote elongation
YDA: !regulates! GRD
GRD: !required for! YDA-dependent signaling
GRD: !cooperates with! WOX homeodomain proteins
WOX: !establishes! embryonic polarity