Effects of exogenous calcium chloride (CaCl(2)) (20 mM) on photosynthetic gas exchange, photosystem II photochemistry, and the activities of antioxidant enzymes in tobacco plants under high temperature stress (43°C for 2 h) were investigated. Heat stress resulted in a decrease in net photosynthetic rate (P(n)), stomatal conductance as well as the apparent quantum yield (AQY) and carboxylation efficiency (CE) of photosynthesis. Heat stress also caused a decrease of the maximal photochemical efficiency of primary photochemistry (F(v)/F(m)). On the other hand, CaCl(2) application improved P(n), AQY, and CE as well as F(v)/F(m) under high temperature stress. Heat stress reduced the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), peroxidase (POD), whereas the activities of these enzymes either decreased less or increased in plants pretreated with CaCl(2); glutathione reductase (GR) activity increased under high temperature, and it increased more in plants pretreated with CaCl(2). There was an obvious accumulation of H(2)O(2) and O(2)(-) under high temperature, but CaCl(2) application decreased the contents of H(2)O(2) and O(2)(-) under heat stress conditions. Heat stress induced the level of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), while CaCl(2) pretreatment enhanced it. These results suggested that photosynthesis was improved by CaCl(2) application in heat-stressed plants and such an improvement was associated with an improvement in stomatal conductance and the thermostability of oxygen-evolving complex (OEC), which might be due to less accumulation of reactive oxygen species.

Heat stress: !decreases! P(n)
Heat stress: !decreases! stomatal conductance
Heat stress: !decreases! AQY
Heat stress: !decreases! CE
Heat stress: !decreases! F(v)/F(m)
Heat stress: !decreases! SOD activity
Heat stress: !decreases! CAT activity
Heat stress: !decreases! APX activity
Heat stress: !decreases! POD activity
Heat stress: !increases! GR activity
Heat stress: !increases! H(2)O(2) content
Heat stress: !increases! O(2)(-) content
Heat stress: !increases! HSP70 level
CaCl(2): !improves! P(n)
CaCl(2): !improves! AQY
CaCl(2): !improves! CE
CaCl(2): !improves! F(v)/F(m)
CaCl(2): !decreases! SOD activity
CaCl(2): !decreases! CAT activity
CaCl(2): !decreases