Plants may exhibit some degree of acclimation after experiencing drought, but physiological adjustments to consecutive cycles of drought and re-watering (recovery) have scarcely been studied. The Mediterranean evergreen holm oak (Q. ilex) and the semi-deciduous rockrose (C. albidus) showed some degree of acclimation after the first of three drought cycles (S1, S2, and S3). For instance, during S2 and S3 both species retained higher relative leaf water contents than during S1, despite reaching similar leaf water potentials. However, both species showed remarkable differences in their photosynthetic acclimation to repeated drought cycles. Both species decreased photosynthesis to a similar extent during the three cycles (20-40% of control values). However, after S1 and S2, photosynthesis recovered only to 80% of control values in holm oak, due to persistently low stomatal (g(s)) and mesophyll (g(m)) conductances to CO(2). Moreover, leaf intrinsic water use efficiency (WUE) was kept almost constant in this species during the entire experiment. By contrast, photosynthesis of rockrose recovered almost completely after each drought cycle (90-100% of control values), while the WUE was largely and permanently increased (by 50-150%, depending on the day) after S1. This was due to a regulation which consisted in keeping g(s) low (recovering to 50-60% of control values after re-watering) while maintaining a high g(m) (even exceeding control values during re-watering). While the mechanisms to achieve such particular regulation of water and CO(2) diffusion in leaves are unknown, it clearly represents a unique acclimation feature of this species after a drought cycle, which allows it a much better performance during successive drought events. Thus, differences in the photosynthetic acclimation to repeated drought cycles can have important consequences on the relative fitness of different Mediterranean species or growth forms within the frame of climate change scenarios.

Q. ilex: !retains! higher relative leaf water content
Q. ilex: !decreases! photosynthesis
Q. ilex: !maintains! constant WUE
C. albidus: !recovers! almost completely after drought cycle
C. albidus: !regulates! water and CO2 diffusion
C. albidus: !increases! WUE by 50-150%