['21828250', 'Prenylated Rab acceptors (PRAs), members of the Ypt-interacting protein family of  small membrane proteins, are thought to aid the targeting of prenylated Rabs to  their respective endomembrane compartments. In plants, the Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) PRA1 family contains 19 members that display varying  degrees of sequence homology to animal PRA1 and localize to the endoplasmic  reticulum (ER) and/or endosomes. However, the exact role of these proteins  remains to be fully characterized. In this study, the effect of AtPRA1.B6, a  member of the AtPRA1 family, on the anterograde trafficking of proteins targeted  to various endomembrane compartments was investigated. High levels of AtPRA1.B6  resulted in differential inhibition of coat protein complex II vesicle-mediated  anterograde trafficking. The trafficking of the vacuolar proteins sporamin:GFP  (for green fluorescent protein) and AALP:GFP, the secretory protein  invertase:GFP, and the plasma membrane proteins PMP:GFP and H+-ATPase:GFP was  inhibited in a dose-dependent manner, while the trafficking of the  Golgi-localized proteins ST:GFP and KAM1(DeltaC):mRFP was not affected. Conversely,  in RNA interference plants displaying lower levels of AtPRA1.B6 transcripts, the  trafficking efficiency of sporamin:GFP and AALP:GFP to the vacuole was increased.  Localization and N-glycan pattern analyses of cargo proteins revealed that  AtPRA1.B6-mediated inhibition of anterograde trafficking occurs at the ER. In  addition, AtPRA1.B6 levels were controlled by cellular processes, including 26S  proteasome-mediated proteolysis. Based on these results, we propose that  AtPRA1.B6 is a negative regulator of coat protein complex II vesicle-mediated  anterograde trafficking for a subset of proteins at the ER.', '2011 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.180810', 'Hwang']

PRA1: !aids! targeting of prenylated Rabs 
AtPRA1.B6: !inhibits! anterograde trafficking 
AtPRA1.B6: !increases! trafficking efficiency of cargo proteins 
AtPRA1.B6: !controlled by! cellular processes 
AtPRA1.B6: !regulates! coat protein complex II vesicle-mediated anterograde trafficking