Chinese flowering cabbage is one of the main leafy vegetables produced in China. They have a rapid leaf yellowing due to chlorophyll degradation after harvest that limits their marketing. In the present study, leaf senescence of the cabbages was manipulated by ethylene and 6-benzyl aminopurine (6-BA) treatment to investigate the correlation of leaf senescence and chlorophyll degradation related to gene expression/activities in the darkness. The patterns of several senescence associated markers, including a typical marker, the expression of senescence-associated gene SAG(12), demonstrated that ethylene accelerated leaf senescence of the cabbages, while 6-BA retarded this progress. Similar to the trends of BrSAG(12) gene expression, strong activation in the expression of three chlorophyll degradation related genes, pheophytinase (BrPPH), pheophorbide a oxygenase (BrPAO) and red chlorophyll catabolite reductase (BrRCCR), was detected in ethylene treated and control leaves during the incubation, while no evident increase was recorded in 6-BA treated leaves. The overall dynamics of Mg-dechelatase activities in all treatments displayed increasing trends during the senescence process, and a delayed increase in the activities was observed for 6-BA treated leaves. However, chlorophyllase activity as well as the expression of BrChlase1 and BrChlase2 decreased with the incubation in all treatments. Taken together, the expression of BrPPH, BrPAO and BrRCCR, and the activity of Mg-dechelatase was closely associated with the chlorophyll degradation during the leaf senescence process in harvested Chinese flowering cabbages under dark conditions.

SAG(12): !expresses! in ethylene/control
6-BA: !retards! SAG(12) expression
BrPPH: !expresses! in ethylene/control
6-BA: !inhibits! BrPPH expression
BrPAO: !expresses! in ethylene/control
6-BA: !inhibits! BrPAO expression
BrRCCR: !expresses! in ethylene/control
6-BA: !inhibits! BrRCCR expression
Mg-dechelatase: !activates! in all treatments
6-BA: !delays! Mg-dechelatase activation
Chlorophyllase: !decreases! in all treatments
BrChlase1: !decreases! in all treatments
BrChlase2: !decreases! in all treatments