Fructans are soluble fructosyl-oligosaccharides deposited in many cool-season grass species as a carbon reserve; they are synthesised by fructosyltransferases. In wheat and barley fructans can accumulate in mature stems at a very high level and serve as an important carbon source for grain filling. Fructan synthesis in temperate cereals is regulated by sucrose level and developmental signals, and functions as a metabolic adjustment for carbon balance between carbon supply and sink demand. In this study the expression levels of a highly homologous group of Triticum aestivumMYB genes (TaMYB13-1, TaMYB13-2 and TaMYB13-3) were found to be positively correlated with the mRNA levels of sucrose:sucrose 1-fructosyltransferase (1-SST) and sucrose:fructan 6-fructosyltransferase (6-SFT) in wheat stems among recombinant inbred lines with a wide range of fructan concentrations through Affymetrix array expression analysis. This expression correction extended to expression profiles during stem development. TaMYB13 contains an R2R3-type MYB domain. In vitro random DNA-binding site selection followed by base substitution mutagenesis revealed that TaMYB13 bound to a (A/G/T)TT(A/T/C)GGT core sequence, which was present in the promoters of wheat Ta1-SST and Ta6-SFT genes as well as a barley Hv6-SFT gene. Transactivation analysis showed that TaMYB13 was a transcriptional activator and could markedly enhance the expression of 1-SST and 6-SFT promoter-driven reporter genes in wheat. Elimination of TaMYB13-binding sites in Ta6-SFT and Ta1-SST promoters markedly reduced TaMYB13-mediated reporter gene transactivation. These data suggest that TaMYB13 and its orthologues are positive regulators for controlling the expression of major fructosyltransferases involved in the fructan synthetic pathway in temperate cereals.

TaMYB13: !enhances! expression of 1-SST and 6-SFT 
TaMYB13: !binds to! (A/G/T)TT(A/T/C)GGT core sequence 
TaMYB13: !activates! Ta6-SFT and Ta1-SST promoters 
TaMYB13: !regulates! fructan synthesis in temperate cereals