The analysis of cell polarity in plants is fueled by the discovery and analysis of auxin efflux carrier PIN proteins that show polar localizations in various plant cell types in line with their roles in directional cell to cell auxin transport. As this asymmetry in cellular PIN localization drives directional auxin fluxes, abnormalities in PIN localizations modify auxin transport culminating into range of auxin distribution defective phenotypes. Because of this influence of PIN localization on plant development via changes in auxin distribution, mechanisms establishing, maintaining and altering PIN polarity are of intense interest in the plant field during the recent years. Recent findings suggest that two categories of molecules, namely AGC-3 kinase family members PINOID, WAG1, WAG2 and ARF-GEF family member GNOM predominantly influence the polar localization of PINs. The emerging mechanism for AGC-3 kinases and ARF-GEF action suggest that AGC-3 kinases predominantly phosphorylate PINs at the plasma membrane for eventual PIN internalization and PIN sorting into ARF-GEF GNOM independent polar recycling pathways. In case of mutant for AGC-3 kinases or mutations in AGC-3 kinase-targeted PIN residues, much less phosphorylated PINs are recruited into ARFGEF GNOM-dependent polar recycling pathway. When ARF-GEF GNOM is inactive, the bias is shifted for rerouting less efficiently phosphorylated PINs into GNOM-independent polar recycling pathways that generally prefer efficiently phosphorylated PINs. Thus, balance shifts between the extent of AGC-3 kinase mediated PIN phosphorylation and the functioning of ARFGEF instruct PIN polarity establishment and/or PIN polarity alterations. Recent studies report utilization of this AGC-3 kinase and ARF-GEF PIN polarity regulation module during diverse developmental and response programs including shoot patterning, root growth, phototropism, gravitropism, organogenesis, leaf epidermal cell indentations and fruit valve margin formation. Based on these findings the same theme of phosphorylated PIN sorting into differential polar recycling pathways for PIN polarity establishment and alteration seems to be employed in a context-dependent manner.

PIN: !localizes to! plant cell types 
AGC-3 kinase: !phosphorylates! PINs 
ARF-GEF: !influences! PIN localizations 
AGC-3 kinase: !modifies! auxin transport 
ARF-GEF: !directs! PIN polarity establishment 
AGC-3 kinase: !reroutes! PINs