['21856645', 'Lipid-derived molecules produced by acylhydrolases play important roles in the  regulation of diverse cellular functions in plants. In Arabidopsis, the DAD1-like  phospholipase A1 family consists of 12 members, all of which possess a lipase 3  domain. In this study, the biochemical and cellular functions of AtDLAH, an  Arabidopsis thaliana DAD1-like acylhydrolase, were examined. Bacterially  expressed AtDLAH contained phospholipase A1 activity for catalysing the  hydrolysis of phospholipids at the sn-1 position. However, AtDLAH displayed an  even stronger preference for 1-lysophosphatidylcholine, 1-monodiacylglycerol, and  phosphatidic acid, suggesting that AtDLAH is a sn-1-specific acylhydrolase. The  AtDLAH gene was highly expressed in young seedlings, and its encoded protein was  exclusively localized to the mitochondria. AtDLAH-overexpressing transgenic seeds  (35S:AtDLAH) were markedly tolerant to accelerated-ageing treatment and thus had  higher germination percentages than wild-type seeds. In contrast, the atdlah  loss-of-function knockout mutant seeds were hypersusceptible to  accelerated-ageing conditions. The 35S:AtDLAH seeds, as opposed to the atdlah  seeds, exhibited a dark red staining pattern following tetrazolium treatment  under both normal and accelerated-ageing conditions, suggesting that AtDLAH  expression is positively correlated with seed viability. The enhanced viability  of 35S:AtDLAH seeds was accompanied by more densely populated epidermal cells,  lower levels of accumulated lipid hydroperoxides, and higher levels of polar  lipids as compared with wild-type and atdlah mutant seeds. These results suggest  that AtDLAH, a mitochondrial-localized sn-1-specific acylhydrolase, plays an  important role in Arabidopsis seed viability.', '2011 Nov', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/err250', 'Kim']

AtDLAH: !synthesizes! Lipid-derived molecules 
AtDLAH: !localizes to! Mitochondria 
AtDLAH: !enhances! Seed viability 
AtDLAH: !represses! Accumulated lipid hydroperoxides 
35S:AtDLAH: !affects! Germination percentage 
35S:AtDLAH: !enhances! Polar lipids