The cold stability of microtubules during seasons of active and dormant cambium was analyzed in the conifers Abies firma, Abies sachalinensis and Larix leptolepis by immunofluorescence microscopy. Samples were fixed at room temperature and at a low temperature of 2-3°C to examine the effects of low temperature on the stability of microtubules. Microtubules were visible in cambium, xylem cells and phloem cells after fixation at room temperature during seasons of active and dormant cambium. By contrast, fixation at low temperature depolymerized microtubules in cambial cells, differentiating tracheids, differentiating xylem ray parenchyma and phloem ray parenchyma cells during the active season. However, similar fixation did not depolymerize microtubules during cambial dormancy in winter. Our results indicate that the stability of microtubules in cambial cells and cambial derivatives at low temperature differs between seasons of active and dormant cambium. Moreover, the change in the stability of microtubules that we observed at low temperature might be closely related to seasonal changes in the cold tolerance of conifers. In addition, low-temperature fixation depolymerized microtubules in cambial cells and differentiating cells that had thin primary cell walls, while such low-temperature fixation did not depolymerize microtubules in differentiating secondary xylem ray parenchyma cells and tracheids that had thick secondary cell walls. The stability of microtubules at low temperature appears to depend on the structure of the cell wall, namely, primary or secondary. Therefore, we propose that the secondary cell wall might be responsible for the cold stability of microtubules in differentiating secondary xylem cells of conifers.

microtubules: !stabilize at! low temperature
cambial cells: !stabilize at! low temperature
primary cell walls: !depolymerize! microtubules
secondary cell walls: !stabilize! microtubules
season of active cambium: !differs from! season of dormant cambium
conifers: !exhibit! cold tolerance