Grape berries of Muscat cultivars (Vitis vinifera L.) contain high levels of monoterpenols and exhibit a distinct aroma related to this composition of volatiles. A structural gene of the plastidial methyl-erythritol-phosphate (MEP) pathway, 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase (VvDXS), was recently suggested as a candidate gene for this trait, having been co-localized with a major quantitative trait locus for linalool, nerol, and geraniol concentrations in berries. In addition, a structured association study discovered a putative causal single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) responsible for the substitution of a lysine with an asparagine at position 284 of the VvDXS protein, and this SNP was significantly associated with Muscat-flavoured varieties. The significance of this nucleotide difference was investigated by comparing the monoterpene profiles with the expression of VvDXS alleles throughout berry development in Moscato Bianco, a cultivar heterozygous for the SNP mutation. Although correlation was detected between the VvDXS transcript profile and the accumulation of free monoterpenol odorants, the modulation of VvDXS expression during berry development appears to be independent of nucleotide variation in the coding sequence. In order to assess how the non-synonymous mutation may enhance Muscat flavour, an in vitro characterization of enzyme isoforms was performed followed by in vivo overexpression of each VvDXS allele in tobacco. The results showed that the amino acid non-neutral substitution influences the enzyme kinetics by increasing the catalytic efficiency and also dramatically affects monoterpene levels in transgenic lines. These findings confirm a functional effect of the VvDXS gene polymorphism and may pave the way for metabolic engineering of terpenoid contents in grapevine.

VvDXS: !co-localizes with! major quantitative trait locus 
VvDXS: !associated with! Muscat-flavoured varieties 
VvDXS: !correlated with! monoterpene profiles 
VvDXS: !influenced by! nucleotide variation 
VvDXS: !modulates! monoterpene levels 
VvDXS: !increases! catalytic efficiency