['21862516', 'We have demonstrated that an Arabidopsis serine/arginine rich-like protein,  atSR45a, interacts with other splicing factors and its expression is markedly  induced by high-light stress, suggesting the involvement of atSR45a in the  regulation of stress-responsive alternative splicing. A whole-genome tiling array  identified the alternative splicing of genes regulated by atSR45a by comparing  gene expression profiles in wild-type and knockout atSR45a (KO-sr45a) plants  under high-light stress. The expression levels of genomic regions within 217  genes were significantly altered in the KO-sr45a plants compared with the  wild-type plants. Many genes encoded factors involved in signal transduction,  cell cycle and DNA processing, protein fate and transcription. A  semi-quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) analysis confirmed changes  in the transcript levels and/or alternative splicing efficiency under high-light  stress in 18 genes, suggesting that atSR45a affects directly or indirectly not  only alternative splicing efficiency but also the transcription of these target  genes. Changes in the expression of atSR45a in response to high-light stress  temporally correlated with changes in the alternative splicing efficiency and  transcript levels of three and one target genes, respectively. Sequencing of the  alternatively spliced variants of three target genes showed that atSR45a  suppresses the splicing efficiency of intron retention-type alternative splicing  events. These findings indicated the importance of atSR45a to the diversification  of the transcriptome under high-light stress.', '2011 Oct', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcr115', 'Shigeoka']

atSR45a: !interacts with! other splicing factors 
atSR45a: !induces! expression of genes 
atSR45a: !alters expression levels of! 217 genes 
atSR45a: !affects! signal transduction, cell cycle, DNA processing, protein fate and transcription 
atSR45a: !confirms changes in! transcript levels and/or alternative splicing efficiency 
atSR45a: !correlates with! changes in alternative splicing efficiency and transcript levels 
atSR45a: !suppresses! splicing efficiency of intron retention-type alternative splicing events