Buckwheat is one of the field crops with the highest concentration of rutin, an important flavonoid of medicinal value. Two species of buckwheat, Fagopyrum esculentum and Fagopyrum tataricum, are the major sources of rutin. Seeds of latter contain 40-50× higher rutin compared to the former. The physiological and molecular bases of rutin content variation between Fagopyrum species are not known. The current study investigated the differences in rutin content in seeds and in other tissues and growth stages of two Fagopyrum species, and also correlated those differences with the expression of flavonoid pathway genes. The analysis of rutin content dynamics at different growth stages, S1-S9 (from seed germination to mature seed formation) of Fagopyrum species revealed that rutin content was higher during seedling stages of F. tataricum (3.5 to 4.6-fold) compared to F. esculentum and then increased exponentially from stages S3 to S6 (different leaf maturing stages and inflorescence) of F. esculentum, whereas it fluctuated in F. tataricum. The rutin content was highest in the inflorescence stage (S6) of both species, with a relatively higher biosynthesis and accumulation during post-flowering stages of F. tataricum compared to F. esculentum. The expression of flavonoid pathway genes, through qRT-PCR, in different growth stages vis-à-vis rutin content variation showed differential expression for four genes, PAL, CHS, CHI and FLS with the amounts of transcripts relatively higher in F. tataricum compared to F. esculentum, thereby, correlating these genes with the biosynthesis and accumulation of rutin. The expression of PAL was highest, 7.69 and 8.96-fold in Stages 2 (seedling stage) and 9 (fully developed seeds) of F. tataricum compared to F. esculentum, respectively. The expression of the CHS gene correlated with the rutin content because it was highest in the flowers (S6) and fully developed seeds (S9) of both Fagopyrum species, with relatively higher transcript amounts (2.13 and 3.19-fold, respectively) in F. tataricum (IC-329457) compared to F. esculentum (IC-540858). This study provides useful information on molecular and physiological dynamics of rutin biosynthesis and accumulation in Fagopyrum species and the correlation of expression of flavonoid biosynthesis genes with the rutin content can be useful in planning for genetic improvement.

F. tataricum: !contains! 40-50× higher rutin
PAL: !expresses! 7.69-8.96x higher in F. tataricum
CHS: !expresses! 2.13-3.19x higher in F. tataricum
CHI: !expresses! higher in F. tataricum
FLS: !expresses! higher in F. tataricum
rutin: !accumulates! higher in F. tataricum
rutin: !synthesizes! higher in F. tataricum