In this report a full-length cDNA, SPCAT1, was isolated from ethephon-treated mature L3 leaves of sweet potato. SPCAT1 contained 1479 nucleotides (492 amino acids) in its open reading frame, and exhibited high amino acid sequence identities (ca. 71.2-80.9%) with several plant catalases, including Arabidopsis, eggplant, grey mangrove, pea, potato, tobacco and tomato. Gene structural analysis showed that SPCAT1 encoded a catalase and contained a putative conserved internal peroxisomal targeting signal PTS1 motif and calmodulin binding domain around its C-terminus. RT-PCR showed that SPCAT1 gene expression was enhanced significantly in mature L3 and early senescent L4 leaves and was much reduced in immature L1, L2 and completely yellowing senescent L5 leaves. In dark- and ethephon-treated L3 leaves, SPCAT1 expression was significantly enhanced temporarily from 0 to 24h, then decreased gradually until 72h after treatment. SPCAT1 gene expression levels also exhibited approximately inverse correlation with the qualitative and quantitative H(2)O(2) amounts. Effector treatment showed that ethephon-enhanced SPCAT1 expression was repressed by antioxidant reduced glutathione, NADPH oxidase inhibitor diphenylene iodonium (DPI), calcium ion chelator EGTA and de novo protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide. These data suggest that elevated reactive oxygen species H(2)O(2), NADPH oxidase, external calcium influx and de novo synthesized proteins are required and associated with ethephon-mediated enhancement of sweet potato catalase SPCAT1 expression. Exogenous application of expressed catalase SPCAT1 fusion protein delayed or alleviated ethephon-mediated leaf senescence and H(2)O(2) elevation. Based on these data we conclude that sweet potato SPCAT1 is an ethephon-inducible peroxisomal catalase, and its expression is regulated by reduced glutathione, DPI, EGTA and cycloheximide. Sweet potato catalase SPCAT1 may play a physiological role or function in cope with H(2)O(2) homeostasis in leaves caused by developmental cues and environmental stimuli.

SPCAT1: !synthesizes! catalase 
SPCAT1: !enhanced by! ethephon 
SPCAT1: !repressed by! reduced glutathione 
SPCAT1: !repressed by! NADPH oxidase inhibitor DPI 
SPCAT1: !repressed by! calcium ion chelator EGTA 
SPCAT1: !repressed by! de novo protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide 
SPCAT1: !associated with! H2O2 homeostasis 
SPCAT1: !delays/alleviates! ethephon-mediated leaf senescence