In plants, many mRNAs and non-coding RNAs are cleaved by RNA-induced silencing complexes. After cleavage, only a limited number of RNAs are processed into trans-acting siRNAs (tasiRNAs). One reason is that 22 nt small RNAs, but not the more common 21 nt small RNAs, can efficiently trigger tasiRNA formation. The characteristics of the target transcripts may also affect tasiRNA production. Here we report the effects of target site location and sequence complementarity on tasiRNA formation. A synthetic sequence that included a miR173 target site and two siRNAs targeting an endogenous mRNA encoding PHYTOENE DESATURASE3 was introduced into a protein-coding (GFP) gene in the coding region or 3' UTR. tasiRNAs were generated in the transgenic seedlings, and the PDS3 mRNA level was reduced, leading to a photobleaching phenotype. It was found that tasiRNAs were most efficiently produced when the miR173 target site was placed immediately after the stop codon. Introducing premature stop codons caused a dramatic reduction of tasiRNAs and over-accumulation of 3' cleavage products, suggesting positive effects of translation on processing the 3' cleavage products into tasiRNAs. By systematically mutating the miR173 target site, we found that perfect complementarity between the 3' end of miR173 and the 5' end of the target sequence was crucial. Mismatches at that position abolished tasiRNA formation, but mismatches at the 5' end of miR173 had less effect. These data suggest important roles for translation and specific sequence complementarity in tasiRNA formation, providing new insights into tasiRNA biogenesis as well as a strategy for improving the efficiency of RNA interference (RNAi) using tasiRNAs.

RNA-induced silencing complexes: !cleave! mRNAs and non-coding RNAs 
22 nt small RNAs: !trigger! tasiRNA formation 
Target transcripts: !affect! tasiRNA production 
miR173 target site: !localizes to! coding region or 3' UTR 
PDS3 mRNA: !reduced! leading to photobleaching phenotype 
Translation: !enhances! processing of 3' cleavage products into tasiRNAs 
Complementarity: !crucial! between 3' end of miR173 and 5' end of target sequence