['21917546', 'Since research on plant interactions with herbivores and pathogens is often  constrained by the analysis of already known compounds, there is a need to  identify new defense-related plant metabolites. The uncommon nonprotein amino  acid N(delta)-acetylornithine was discovered in a targeted search for Arabidopsis  thaliana metabolites that are strongly induced by the phytohormone methyl  jasmonate (MeJA). Stable isotope labeling experiments show that, after MeJA  elicitation, Arg, Pro, and Glu are converted to Orn, which is acetylated by NATA1  to produce N(delta)-acetylornithine. MeJA-induced N(delta)-acetylornithine accumulation  occurs in all tested Arabidopsis accessions, other Arabidopsis species, Capsella  rubella, and Boechera stricta, but not in less closely related Brassicaceae. Both  insect feeding and Pseudomonas syringae infection increase NATA1 expression and  N(delta)-acetylornithine accumulation. NATA1 transient expression in Nicotiana  tabacum and the addition of N(delta)-acetylornithine to an artificial diet both  decrease Myzus persicae (green peach aphid) reproduction, suggesting a direct  toxic or deterrent effect. However, since broad metabolic changes that are  induced by MeJA in wild-type Arabidopsis are attenuated in a nata1 mutant strain,  there may also be indirect effects on herbivores and pathogens. In the case of P.  syringae, growth on a nata1 mutant is reduced compared with wild-type  Arabidopsis, but growth in vitro is unaffected by N(delta)-acetylornithine addition.', '2011 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.111.088989', 'Jander']

MeJA: !induces! N(delta)-acetylornithine
NATA1: !converts! Arg, Pro, Glu to Orn
MeJA: !induces! NATA1 expression
Insect feeding: !increases! NATA1 expression
Pseudomonas syringae infection: !increases! NATA1 expression
NATA1: !synthesizes! N(delta)-acetylornithine
N(delta)-acetylornithine: !decreases! Myzus persicae reproduction
MeJA: !attenuates! broad metabolic changes in nata1 mutant strain
P. syringae: !reduced growth! on nata1 mutant