Spectro-microscopy, a combination of fluorescence microscopy with spatially resolved spectroscopic techniques, provides new and exciting tools for functional cell biology in living organisms. This review focuses on recent developments in spectro-microscopic applications for the investigation of living plant cells in their native tissue context. The application of spectro-microscopic methods led to the recent discovery of a fast signal response pathway for the brassinosteroide receptor BRI1 in the plasma membrane of living plant cells. Moreover, the competence of different plant cell types to respond to environmental or endogenous stimuli was determined in vivo by correlation analysis of different optical and spectroscopic readouts such as fluorescence lifetime (FLT). Furthermore, a new spectro-microscopic technique, fluorescence intensity decay shape analysis microscopy (FIDSAM), has been developed. FIDSAM is capable of imaging low-expressed fluorophore-tagged proteins at high spatial resolution and precludes the misinterpretation of autofluorescence artifacts. In addition, FIDSAM provides a very effective and sensitive tool on the basis of Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) for the qualitative and quantitative determination of protein-protein interaction. Finally, we report on the quantitative analysis of the photosystem I and II (PSI/PSII) ratio in the chloroplasts of living Arabidopsis plants at room temperature, using high-resolution, spatially resolved fluorescence spectroscopy. With this technique, it was not only possible to measure PSI/PSII ratios, but also to demonstrate the differential competence of wild-type and carbohydrate-deficient plants to adapt the PSI/PSII ratio to different light conditions. In summary, the information content of standard microscopic images is extended by several dimensions by the use of spectro-microscopic approaches. Therefore, novel cell physiological and molecular topics can be addressed and valuable insights into molecular and subcellular processes can be obtained in living plants.

BRI1: !responds to! brassinosteroide receptor 
different plant cell types: !respond to! environmental/endogenous stimuli 
FIDSAM: !capable of imaging! low-expressed fluorophore-tagged proteins 
FIDSAM: !determines! protein-protein interaction 
PSI/PSII ratio: !measured by! high-resolution fluorescence spectroscopy 
wild-type/carbohydrate-deficient plants: !adapt! PSI/PSII ratio to different light conditions