Cyclic electron flow around photosystem I drives additional proton pumping into the thylakoid lumen, which enhances the protective non-photochemical quenching and increases ATP synthesis. It involves several pathways activated independently. In whole barley leaves, P700 oxidation under far-red illumination and subsequent P700(+) dark reduction kinetics provide a major probe of the activation of cyclic pathways. Two 'intermediate' and 'slow' exponential reduction phases are always observed and they become faster after high light illumination, but dark inactivation of the Benson-Calvin cycle causes the emergence of both a transient in the P700 oxidation and a 'fast' phase in the P700(+) reduction. We investigate here the afterglow (AG) thermoluminescence emission as another tool to detect the activation of cyclic electron pathways from stroma reductants to the acceptor side of photosystem II. This transfer is activated by warming, yielding an AG band at about 45°C. However, treatments that accelerate the 'intermediate' and 'slow' P700(+) reduction phases (brief anoxia, hexose infiltration, fast dehydration of excised leaves) also produced a downshift of this AG band. This pathway ascribable to NADPH dehydrogenase (NDH) would be triggered by a deficit in ATP, while the 'fast' reduction phase corresponding to the ferredoxin plastoquinone reductase pathway is triggered by an overreduction of the photosystem I acceptor pool and is undetected in thermoluminescence. Contrastingly, slow dehydration of unwatered plants did not cause faster reduction of P700(+) nor temperature downshift of the AG band, that is no induction of the NDH pathway, whereas an increased intensity of the AG band indicated a strong NADPH + ATP assimilatory potential.

Cyclic electron flow: !drives! proton pumping 
P700 oxidation: !provides probe of! cyclic pathways activation 
High light illumination: !causes emergence of! transient in P700 oxidation 
Afterglow thermoluminescence emission: !detects activation of! cyclic electron pathways 
Warming: !yields! AG band at 45°C 
Brief anoxia/hexose infiltration/fast dehydration: !downshifts! AG band 
NADPH dehydrogenase pathway: !triggered by! deficit in ATP 
Ferredoxin plastoquinone reductase pathway: !triggered by! overreduction of photosystem I acceptor pool 
Slow dehydration of unwatered plants: !indicates! strong NADPH + ATP assimilatory potential