Our understanding of plant growth in response to nitrogen (N) supply is mainly based on studies of mutants and transformants. This study explored the natural variability of Arabidopsis thaliana first to find out its global response to N availability and secondly to characterize the plasticity for growth and N metabolism among 23 genetically distant accessions under normal (N+), limited (N-), and starved (N0) N supplies. Plant growth was estimated by eight morphological traits characterizing shoot and root growth and 10 metabolic parameters that represented N and carbon metabolism. Most of the studied traits showed a large variation linked to genotype and nutrition. Furthermore, Arabidopsis growth was coordinated by master traits such as the shoot to root ratio of nitrate content in N+, root fresh matter and root amino acids in N-, and shoot fresh matter together with root thickness in N0. The 23 accessions could be gathered into four different groups, according to their growth in N+, N-, and N0. Phenotypic profiling characterized four different adaptative responses to N- and N0. Class 1 tolerated N limitation with the smallest decrease in shoot and root biomass compared with N+, while class 2 presented the highest resistance to N starvation by preferential increased root growth, huge starch accumulation, and high shoot nitrate content. In contrast, class 3 plants could tolerate neither N limitation nor N starvation. Small plants of class 4 were different, with shoot biomass barely affected in N- and root biomass unaffected in N0.

N+: !affects! Plant Growth 
N-: !affects! Plant Growth 
N0: !affects! Plant Growth 
Genotype: !affects! Plant Growth 
Nutrition: !affects! Plant Growth 
Shoot to Root Ratio: !localizes to! Nitrate Content 
Root Fresh Matter: !localizes to! N- 
Root Amino Acids: !localizes to! N- 
Shoot Fresh Matter: !localizes to! N0 
Root Thickness: !localizes to! N0 
Starch Accumulation: !enhances! Resistance to N Starvation 
Shoot Nitrate Content: !enhances! Resistance to N Starvation