['21922322', 'Form I of Rubisco (ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase) is composed  of eight large (RbcL) and eight small (RbcS) subunits. Assembly of these subunits  into a functional holoenzyme requires the assistance of additional assembly  factors. One such factor is RbcX, which has been demonstrated to act as a  chaperone in the assembly of most cyanobacterial Rubisco complexes expressed in  heterologous system established in Escherichia coli cells. Analysis of  Arabidopsis thaliana genomic sequence revealed the presence of two genes encoding  putative homologues of cyanobacterial RbcX protein: AtRbcX1 (At4G04330) and  AtRbcX2 (At5G19855). In general, both RbcX homologues seem to have the same  function which is chaperone activity during Rubisco biogenesis. However, detailed  analysis revealed slight differences between them. AtRbcX2 is localized in the  stromal fraction of chloroplasts whereas AtRbcX1 was found in the insoluble  fraction corresponding with thylakoid membranes. Search for putative "partners"  using mass spectrometry analysis suggested that apart from binding to RbcL,  AtRbcX1 may also interact with beta subunit of chloroplast ATP synthase.  Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of AtRbcX1 and AtRbcX2 expression under various  stress conditions indicated that AtRbcX2 is transcribed at a relatively stable  level, while the transcription level of AtRbcX1 varies significantly. In  addition, we present the attempts to elucidate the secondary structure of AtRbcX  proteins using CD spectroscopy. Presented results are the first known approach to  elucidate the role of RbcX proteins in Rubisco assembly in higher plants.', '2011 Nov', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-011-9823-8', 'Szczepaniak']

Form I of Rubisco: !composed of! 8 large and 8 small subunits 
RbcX: !acts as a chaperone in! Rubisco biogenesis 
AtRbcX1: !localized in! thylakoid membranes 
AtRbcX1: !interacts with! beta subunit of chloroplast ATP synthase 
AtRbcX2: !localized in! stromal fraction of chloroplasts 
AtRbcX2: !transcribed at! relatively stable level 
AtRbcX1: !transcribed at! varying levels