['21926169', 'A novel Arabidopsis thaliana inhibitor of apoptosis was identified by sequence  homology to other known inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins. Arabidopsis  IAP-like protein (AtILP) contained a C-terminal RING finger domain but lacked a  baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR) domain, which is essential for anti-apoptotic  activity in other IAP family members. The expression of AtILP in HeLa cells  conferred resistance against tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha/ActD-induced apoptosis  through the inactivation of caspase activity. In contrast to the C-terminal RING  domain of AtILP, which did not inhibit the activity of caspase-3, the N-terminal  region, despite displaying no homology to known BIR domains, potently inhibited  the activity of caspase-3 in vitro and blocked TNF-alpha/ActD-induced apoptosis. The  anti-apoptotic activity of the AtILP N-terminal domain observed in plants was  reproduced in an animal system. Transgenic Arabidopsis lines overexpressing AtILP  exhibited anti-apoptotic activity when challenged with the fungal toxin fumonisin  B1, an agent that induces apoptosis-like cell death in plants. In AtIPL  transgenic plants, suppression of cell death was accompanied by inhibition of  caspase activation and DNA fragmentation. Overexpression of AtILP also attenuated  effector protein-induced cell death and increased the growth of an avirulent  bacterial pathogen. The current results demonstrated the existence of a novel  plant IAP-like protein that prevents caspase activation in Arabidopsis and showed  that a plant anti-apoptosis gene functions similarly in plant and animal systems.', '2011 Dec 9', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M111.262204', 'Lee']

AtILP: !inhibits! caspase-3 
AtILP: !resists! TNF-alpha/ActD-induced apoptosis 
AtILP: !blocks! TNF-alpha/ActD-induced apoptosis 
AtILP: !inhibits! caspase activation 
AtILP: !prevents! DNA fragmentation 
AtILP: !attenuates! effector protein-induced cell death 
AtILP: !increases! growth of avirulent bacterial pathogen