['21934147', 'The interconversion of chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b, referred to as the  chlorophyll cycle, plays a crucial role in the processes of greening, acclimation  to light intensity, and senescence. The chlorophyll cycle consists of three  reactions: the conversions of chlorophyll a to chlorophyll b by chlorophyllide a  oxygenase, chlorophyll b to 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a by chlorophyll b  reductase, and 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a to chlorophyll a by 7-hydroxymethyl  chlorophyll a reductase. We identified 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase,  which is the last remaining unidentified enzyme of the chlorophyll cycle, from  Arabidopsis thaliana by genetic and biochemical methods. Recombinant  7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase converted 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a  to chlorophyll a using ferredoxin. Both sequence and biochemical analyses showed  that 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase contains flavin adenine dinucleotide  and an iron-sulfur center. In addition, a phylogenetic analysis elucidated the  evolution of 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase from divinyl chlorophyllide  vinyl reductase. A mutant lacking 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase was  found to accumulate 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a and pheophorbide a.  Furthermore, this accumulation of pheophorbide a in the mutant was rescued by the  inactivation of the chlorophyll b reductase gene. The downregulation of  pheophorbide a oxygenase activity is discussed in relation to 7-hydroxymethyl  chlorophyll a accumulation.', '2011 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.111.089714', 'Tanaka']

Chlorophyllide a oxygenase: !converts! chlorophyll a to chlorophyll b 
Chlorophyll b reductase: !converts! chlorophyll b to 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a 
7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase: !converts! 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a to chlorophyll a 
7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase: !contains! flavin adenine dinucleotide and an iron-sulfur center 
7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase: !evolved from! divinyl chlorophyllide vinyl reductase 
7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase mutant: !accumulates! 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a and pheophorbide a 
Chlorophyll b reductase gene: !rescues! accumulation of pheophorbide a in mutant