To elucidate the genetic and biochemical regulation of elicitor-induced p-coumaraldehyde accumulation in plants, we undertook a multifaceted approach to characterize the metabolic flux through the phenylpropanoid pathway via the characterization and chemical analysis of the metabolites in the p-coumaryl, coniferyl, and sinapyl alcohol branches of this pathway. Here, we report the identification and characterization of four cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenases (CADs) from cucumber (Cucumis sativus) with low activity toward p-coumaraldehyde yet exhibiting significant activity toward other phenylpropanoid hydroxycinnamaldehydes. As part of this analysis, we identified and characterized the activity of a hydroxycinnamoyl-coenzyme A:shikimate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase (HCT) capable of utilizing shikimate and p-coumaroyl-coenzyme A to generate p-coumaroyl shikimate. Following pectinase treatment of cucumber, we observed the rapid accumulation of p-coumaraldehyde, likely the result of low aldehyde reductase activity (i.e. alcohol dehydrogenase in the reverse reaction) of CsCAD enzymes on p-coumaraldehyde. In parallel, we noted a concomitant reduction in the activity of CsHCT. Taken together, our findings support the hypothesis that the up-regulation of the phenylpropanoid pathway upon abiotic stress greatly enhances the overall p-coumaryl alcohol branch of the pathway. The data presented here point to a role for CsHCT (as well as, presumably, p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase) as a control point in the regulation of the coniferyl and sinapyl alcohol branches of this pathway. This mechanism represents a potentially evolutionarily conserved process to efficiently and quickly respond to biotic and abiotic stresses in cucurbit plants, resulting in the rapid lignification of affected tissues.

CAD: !exhibits activity towards! hydroxycinnamaldehydes 
HCT: !utilizes! shikimate and p-coumaroyl-coenzyme A 
HCT: !controls! coniferyl and sinapyl alcohol branches 
Aldehyde reductase: !low activity on! p-coumaraldehyde 
HCT: !reduction in activity! upon abiotic stress