['21949211', 'The major RNA polymerase activity in mature chloroplasts is a multisubunit,  Escherichia coli-like protein complex called PEP (for plastid-encoded RNA  polymerase). Its subunit structure has been extensively investigated by  biochemical means. Beside the "prokaryotic" subunits encoded by the  plastome-located RNA polymerase genes, a number of additional nucleus-encoded  subunits of eukaryotic origin have been identified in the PEP complex. These  subunits appear to provide additional functions and regulation modes necessary to  adapt transcription to the varying functional situations in chloroplasts.  However, despite the enormous progress in genomic data and mass spectrometry  techniques, it is still under debate which of these subunits belong to the core  complex of PEP and which ones represent rather transient or peripheral  components. Here, we present a catalog of true PEP subunits that is based on  comparative analyses from biochemical purifications, protein mass spectrometry,  and phenotypic analyses. We regard reproducibly identified protein subunits of  the basic PEP complex as essential when the corresponding knockout mutants reveal  an albino or pale-green phenotype. Our study provides a clearly defined subunit  catalog of the basic PEP complex, generating the basis for a better understanding  of chloroplast transcription regulation. In addition, the data support a model  that links PEP complex assembly and chloroplast buildup during early seedling  development in vascular plants.', '2011 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.184515', 'Pfannschmidt']

PEP: !encoded by! plastome-located RNA polymerase genes 
PEP: !contains! nucleus-encoded subunits of eukaryotic origin 
PEP: !provides additional functions and regulation modes! chloroplasts 
PEP: !based on! comparative analyses from biochemical purifications, protein mass spectrometry, and phenotypic analyses 
PEP: !essential for! albino or pale-green phenotype 
PEP: !links! PEP complex assembly and chloroplast buildup during early seedling development in vascular plants