The genetic basis of stem cell specification in somatic embryogenesis and organogenesis is still obscure. SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE (SERK) genes are involved in embryogenesis and organogenesis in numerous species. In vitro culture of Cyclamen persicum immature ovules provides a system for investigating stem cell formation and maintenance, because lines forming either organs or embryos or callus without organs/embryos are available for the same cultivar and plant growth regulator conditions. The present aim was to exploit this property of cyclamen cultures to understand the role of SERK(s) in stem cell formation and maintenance in somatic embryogenesis and organogenesis in vitro, in comparison with expression in planta. CpSERK1 and CpSERK2 were isolated from embryogenic callus. CpSERK1 and CpSERK2 levels by RT-PCR showed that expression is high in embryogenic, moderate in organogenic, and null in recalcitrant calli. in situ hybridizations showed that the expression of both genes started in clumps of pluripotent stem cells, from which both pre-embryogenic aggregates and organ meristemoids derived, and continued in their trans-amplifying, meristem-like, derivatives. Expression declined in organ meristemoids, in parallel with a partial loss of meristematization. In mature somatic embryos, and in shoot and root primordia, CpSERK1 and CpSERK2 were expressed in meristems, and similar patterns occurred in zygotic embryo and primary meristems in planta. The results point to SERK1 and SERK2 as markers of pluripotency in cyclamen. It is proposed that the high expression of these genes in the trans-amplifying derivatives of the stem cells maintains a pluripotent condition leading to totipotency and, consequently, somatic embryogenesis.

CpSERK1: !localizes to! pluripotent stem cells 
CpSERK2: !localizes to! pluripotent stem cells 
CpSERK1: !enhances! totipotency 
CpSERK2: !enhances! totipotency 
CpSERK1: !maintains! pluripotent condition 
CpSERK2: !maintains! pluripotent condition