['21976480', 'Protein phosphorylation, catalyzed by the opposing actions of protein kinases and  phosphatases, is a cornerstone of cellular signaling and regulation. Since their  discovery, protein phosphatases have emerged as highly regulated enzymes with  specificity that rivals their counteracting kinase partners. However, despite  years of focused characterization in mammalian and yeast systems, many protein  phosphatases in plants remain poorly or incompletely characterized. Here, we  describe a bioinformatic, biochemical, and cellular examination of an ancient,  Bacterial-like subclass of the phosphoprotein phosphatase (PPP) family designated  the Shewanella-like protein phosphatases (SLP phosphatases). The SLP phosphatase  subcluster is highly conserved in all plants, mosses, and green algae, with  members also found in select fungi, protists, and bacteria. As in other plant  species, the nucleus-encoded Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) SLP phosphatases  (AtSLP1 and AtSLP2) lack genetic redundancy and phylogenetically cluster into two  distinct groups that maintain different subcellular localizations, with SLP1  being chloroplastic and SLP2 being cytosolic. Using heterologously expressed and  purified protein, the enzymatic properties of both AtSLP1 and AtSLP2 were  examined, revealing unique metal cation preferences in addition to a complete  insensitivity to the classic serine/threonine PPP protein phosphatase inhibitors  okadaic acid and microcystin. The unique properties and high conservation of the  plant SLP phosphatases, coupled to their exclusion from animals, red algae,  cyanobacteria, archaea, and most bacteria, render understanding the function(s)  of this new subclass of PPP family protein phosphatases of particular interest.', '2011 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.182493', 'Moorhead']

AtSLP1: !localizes to! chloroplastic 
AtSLP2: !localizes to! cytosolic 
AtSLP1: !synthesizes! unique metal cation preferences 
AtSLP2: !synthesizes! unique metal cation preferences 
AtSLP1: !insensitive to! okadaic acid 
AtSLP2: !insensitive to! microcystin 
SLP phosphatases: !highly conserved in! plants, mosses, green algae, fungi, protists, bacteria