['21985558', 'Two aspects of light are very important for plant development: the length of the  light phase or photoperiod and the quality of incoming light. Photoperiod  detection allows plants to anticipate the arrival of the next season, whereas  light quality, mainly the red to far-red ratio (R:FR), is an early signal of  competition by neighbouring plants. phyB represses flowering by antagonising CO  at the transcriptional and post-translational levels. A low R:FR decreases active  phyB and consequently increases active CO, which in turn activates the expression  of FT, the plant florigen. Other phytochromes like phyD and phyE seem to have  redundant roles with phyB. PFT1, the MED25 subunit of the plant Mediator complex,  has been proposed to act in the light-quality pathway that regulates flowering  time downstream of phyB. However, whether PFT1 signals through CO and its  specific mechanism are unclear. Here we show that CO-dependent and -independent  mechanisms operate downstream of phyB, phyD and phyE to promote flowering, and  that PFT1 is equally able to promote flowering by modulating both CO-dependent  and -independent pathways. Our data are consistent with the role of PFT1 as an  activator of CO transcription, and also of FT transcription, in a CO-independent  manner. Our transcriptome analysis is also consistent with CO and FT genes being  the most important flowering targets of PFT1. Furthermore, comparison of the pft1  transcriptome with transcriptomes after fungal and herbivore attack strongly  suggests that PFT1 acts as a hub, integrating a variety of interdependent  environmental stimuli, including light quality and jasmonic acid-dependent  defences.', '2012 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04815.x', 'Cerdan']

phyB: !represses! flowering 
phyD/E: !redundant roles with! phyB 
PFT1: !promotes flowering by modulating! CO-dependent/independent pathways 
CO: !transcriptionally activated by! PFT1 
FT: !transcriptionally activated by! PFT1 
PFT1: !integrates! environmental stimuli