['21984725', 'Subcellular sugar partitioning in plants is strongly regulated in response to  developmental cues and changes in external conditions. Besides transitory starch,  the vacuolar sugars represent a highly dynamic pool of instantly accessible  metabolites that serve as energy source and osmoprotectant. Here, we present the  molecular identification and functional characterization of the vacuolar glucose  (Glc) exporter Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) Early Responsive to  Dehydration-Like6 (AtERDL6). We demonstrate tonoplast localization of AtERDL6 in  plants. In Arabidopsis, AtERDL6 expression is induced in response to factors that  activate vacuolar Glc pools, like darkness, heat stress, and wounding. On the  other hand, AtERDL6 transcript levels drop during conditions that trigger Glc  accumulation in the vacuole, like cold stress and external sugar supply.  Accordingly, sugar analyses revealed that Aterdl6 mutants have elevated vacuolar  Glc levels and that Glc flux across the tonoplast is impaired under stress  conditions. Interestingly, overexpressor lines indicated a very similar function  for the ERDL6 ortholog Integral Membrane Protein from sugar beet (Beta vulgaris).  Aterdl6 mutant plants display increased sensitivity against external Glc, and  mutant seeds exhibit a 10% increase in seed weight due to enhanced levels of seed  sugars, proteins, and lipids. Our findings underline the importance of vacuolar  Glc export during the regulation of cellular Glc homeostasis and the composition  of seed reserves.', '2011 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.186825', 'Buttner']

AtERDL6: !localizes to! tonoplast 
AtERDL6: !is induced by! darkness, heat stress, and wounding 
AtERDL6: !is repressed by! cold stress and external sugar supply 
AtERDL6: !impairs! Glc flux across the tonoplast 
Integral Membrane Protein: !has similar function to! AtERDL6 
Aterdl6 mutants: !exhibit increased sensitivity to! external Glc 
Aterdl6 mutants: !have increased seed weight due to! enhanced levels of seed sugars, proteins, and lipids