['21998587', 'Bacterial infection of plants often begins with colonization of the plant  surface, followed by entry into the plant through wounds and natural openings  (such as stomata), multiplication in the intercellular space (apoplast) of the  infected tissues, and dissemination of bacteria to other plants. Historically,  most studies assess bacterial infection based on final outcomes of disease and/or  pathogen growth using whole infected tissues; few studies have genetically  distinguished the contribution of different host cell types in response to an  infection. The phytotoxin coronatine (COR) is produced by several pathovars of  Pseudomonas syringae. COR-deficient mutants of P. s. tomato (Pst) DC3000 are  severely compromised in virulence, especially when inoculated onto the plant  surface. We report here a genetic screen to identify Arabidopsis mutants that  could rescue the virulence of COR-deficient mutant bacteria. Among the  susceptible to coronatine-deficient Pst DC3000 (scord) mutants were two that were  defective in stomatal closure response, two that were defective in apoplast  defense, and four that were defective in both stomatal and apoplast defense.  Isolation of these three classes of mutants suggests that stomatal and apoplastic  defenses are integrated in plants, but are genetically separable, and that COR is  important for Pst DC3000 to overcome both stomatal guard cell- and apoplastic  mesophyll cell-based defenses. Of the six mutants defective in  bacterium-triggered stomatal closure, three are defective in salicylic acid  (SA)-induced stomatal closure, but exhibit normal stomatal closure in response to  abscisic acid (ABA), and scord7 is compromised in both SA- and ABA-induced  stomatal closure. We have cloned SCORD3, which is required for salicylic acid  (SA) biosynthesis, and SCORD5, which encodes an ATP-binding cassette (ABC)  protein, AtGCN20/AtABCF3, predicted to be involved in stress-associated protein  translation control. Identification of SCORD5 begins to implicate an important  role of stress-associated protein translation in stomatal guard cell signaling in  response to microbe-associated molecular patterns and bacterial infection.', '2011 Oct', 'PLoS Pathog', '10.1371/journal.ppat.1002291', 'He']

Gene: !affects! Virulence 
Gene: !localizes to! Stomata 
Gene: !interacts with! Apoplast 
Gene: !enhances! Bacterial Infection 
Gene: !represses! Stomatal Closure 
Gene: !synthesizes! Salicylic Acid