['22002057', 'FMN hydrolases catalyze dephosphorylation of FMN to riboflavin. Although these  enzymes have been described in many organisms, few had their corresponding genes  cloned and their recombinant proteins biochemically characterized, and none had  their physiological roles determined. We found previously that FMN hydrolase  activity in pea chloroplasts is Mg(2+)-dependent, suggesting an enzyme of the  haloacid dehalogenase (HAD) superfamily. In this study, a new FMN hydrolase was  purified by multistep chromatography after ammonium sulfate precipitation. The  molecular weight of the native protein was estimated at  approximately 59,400, a dimer of about  twice the predicted molecular weight of most HAD superfamily phosphatases. After  SDS-PAGE of the partially purified material, two separate protein bands within  25-30 kDa were extracted from the gel and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. Peptide  sequence matching to the protein samples suggested the presence of three HAD-like  hydrolases. cDNAs for sequence homologs from Arabidopsis thaliana of these  proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli. Activity screening of the encoded  proteins showed that the At1g79790 gene encodes an FMN hydrolase (AtcpFHy1).  Plastid localization of AtcpFHy1 was confirmed using fluorescence microscopy of  A. thaliana protoplasts transiently expressing the N-terminal fusion of AtcpFHy1  to enhanced green fluorescent protein. Phosphatase activity of AtcpFHy1 is  FMN-specific, as assayed with 19 potential substrates. Kinetic parameters and pH  and temperature optima for AtcpFHy1 were determined. A phylogenetic analysis of  putative phosphatases of the HAD superfamily suggested distinct evolutionary  origins for the plastid AtcpFHy1 and the cytosolic FMN hydrolase characterized  previously.', '2011 Dec 9', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M111.260885', 'Roje']

FMN hydrolase: !catalyzes! dephosphorylation 
At1g79790 gene: !encodes! FMN hydrolase 
AtcpFHy1: !localizes to! plastid 
AtcpFHy1: !enhances! phosphatase activity 
AtcpFHy1: !has! FMN-specificity 
AtcpFHy1: !has! kinetic parameters 
AtcpFHy1: !has! pH and temperature optima 
AtcpFHy1: !evolved from! cytosolic FMN hydrolase