Plants are able to discriminately allocate greater biomass to organs that grow under higher resource levels. Recent evidence demonstrates that split-root plants also discriminately allocate more resources to roots that grow under dynamically improving nutrient levels, even when their other roots grow in richer patches. Here, we further tested whether, besides their responsiveness to the direction of resource gradients, plants are also sensitive to the steepness of environmental trajectories. Split-root Pisum sativum plants were grown so that one of their roots developed under constantly-high nutrient levels and the other root was subjected to dynamically improving nutrient levels of variable steepness. As expected, plants usually allocated a greater proportion of their biomass to roots that developed under constantly high resource availability; however, when given a choice, they allocated greater biomass to roots that initially experienced relatively low but steeply improving nutrient availabilities than to roots that developed under continuously-high nutrient availability. Such discrimination was not observed when the roots in the poor patch experienced only gentler improvements in nutrient availability. The results are compatible with the notion that responsiveness to the direction and steepness of environmental gradients could assist annual plants to increase their performance by anticipating resource availabilities foreseeable before the end of their growing season. The results exemplify the ability of plants to integrate and utilize environmental information and execute adaptive behaviours which, until recently, were attributed only to animals with central nervous systems.

Plants: !discriminately allocate! Biomass
Plants: !allocate more! Roots with dynamically improving nutrient levels
Plants: !allocate greater biomass! Roots with steeply improving nutrient availabilities
Plants: !integrate and utilize! Environmental information
Plants: !execute adaptive behaviours! Central nervous systems