['22025558', 'In Arabidopsis, the NMD-defective mutants upf1-5 and upf3-1 are characterized by  dwarfism, curly leaves and late flowering. These phenotypes are similar to those  of mutants showing constitutive pathogenesis-related (PR) gene expression,  salicylic acid (SA) accumulation and, subsequently, resistance to pathogens. The  disease symptoms of upf1-5 and upf3-1 mutants were observed following infection  with the virulent pathogen Pst DC3000 with the aim of determining whether the  loss of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is involved in disease resistance.  These mutant plants showed not only enhanced resistance to Pst DC3000, but also  elevated levels of endogenous SA, PR gene transcripts and WRKY transcripts. UPF1  and UPF3 expression was down-regulated in Pst DC3000-infected Arabidopsis plants,  but the expression of various NMD target genes was up-regulated. The expression  of 10 defense-related genes was elevated in cycloheximide (CHX)-treated plants.  The transcriptional ratios of eight of these 10 defense-related genes in  CHX-treated to non-treated plants were lower in NMD-defective mutants than in the  wild-type plants. These eight defense-related genes are possibly regulated by the  NMD mechanism, and it is clear that an alternatively spliced transcript of  WRKY62, which contains a premature termination codon, was regulated by this  mechanism. Taken together, our results suggest that UPF1 and UPF3, which are key  NMD factors, may act as defense-related regulators associated with plant  immunity.', '2011 Dec', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcr144', 'Shin']

UPF1: !regulates! defense-related genes
UPF3: !regulates! defense-related genes
NMD-defective mutants: !show! enhanced resistance to Pst DC3000
NMD-defective mutants: !show! elevated levels of SA, PR gene transcripts and WRKY transcripts
CHX-treated plants: !have! lower transcriptional ratios of 8 defense-related genes in NMD-defective mutants than wild-type plants
WRKY62: !regulated by! NMD mechanism