The effects of an abscisic acid (ABA) 8'-hydroxylase inhibitor (Abz-F1) on ABA catabolism, stomatal aperture, and water potential were examined in apple seedlings under dehydration and rehydration conditions. In this study, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxigenase (MdNCED) and ABA 8'-hydroxylase (MdCYP707A) genes were isolated and their expressions were investigated under dehydration and rehydration conditions. The stomatal aperture decreased up to 4 h after spraying with Abz-F1 and the stomatal aperture in the Abz-F1-treated leaves was generally lower than that in the untreated control-leaves during the dehydration condition. Although the water potential in untreated control-leaves decreased with the progress of dehydration, it was maintained at a higher level in the Abz-F1 treated-leaves than in the untreated control-leaves during dehydration. Endogenous ABA concentrations increased with dehydration in both the Abz-F1 treated- and untreated-control-leaves, but the ABA levels in the Abz-F1 treated-leaves were higher than those in the untreated control-leaves throughout dehydration. In contrast, the phaseic acid (PA) concentrations in the Abz-F1 treated-leaves were lower than those in the untreated control-leaves during dehydration. The expressions of MdNCEDs in the Abz-F1 treated-leaves were lower than those in the untreated control-leaves regardless of the higher endogenous ABA concentrations. Moreover, the expressions of MdCYP707As in the Abz-F1 treated-leaves were also lower than those in the untreated control-leaves. Higher 50% effective concentrations (EC(50)) and ascorbic acid concentrations were observed in the Abz-F1 treated-leaves, which show that the oxidative damage under dehydration may be reduced by Abz-F1 application. These results suggest that prompt stomata closure is required for survival under dehydration, and Abz-F1 application may therefore be of practical use. The increase of endogenous ABA, which induced prompt stomata closure in Abz-F1 treated-leaves may depend on inhibition of the expression of MdCYP707As. Furthermore, the results showed the close relationship between MdNCEDs and MdCYP707As on ABA catabolism.

MdNCED: !inhibits expression of! MdCYP707A
MdCYP707A: !inhibits expression of! MdNCED
Abz-F1: !increases! endogenous ABA
Abz-F1: !reduces! oxidative damage
Abz-F1: !prompts! stomata closure
ABA: !induces! stomata closure