['22040291', 'The process of chloroplast biogenesis requires a multitude of pathways and  processes to establish chloroplast function. In cotyledons of seedlings,  chloroplasts develop either directly from proplastids (also named eoplasts) or,  if germinated in the dark, via etioplasts, whereas in leaves chloroplasts derive  from proplastids in the apical meristem and are then multiplied by division. The  snowy cotyledon 2, sco2, mutations specifically disrupt chloroplast biogenesis in  cotyledons. SCO2 encodes a chloroplast-localized protein disulphide isomerase,  hypothesized to be involved in protein folding. Analysis of co-expressed genes  with SCO2 revealed that genes with similar expression patterns encode chloroplast  proteins involved in protein translation and in chlorophyll biosynthesis. Indeed,  sco2-1 accumulates increased levels of the chlorophyll precursor,  protochlorophyllide, in both dark grown cotyledons and leaves. Yeast two-hybrid  analyses demonstrated that SCO2 directly interacts with the chlorophyll-binding  LHCB1 proteins, being confirmed in planta using bimolecular fluorescence  complementation (BIFC). Furthermore, ultrastructural analysis of sco2-1  chloroplasts revealed that formation and movement of transport vesicles from the  inner envelope to the thylakoids is perturbed. SCO2 does not interact with the  signal recognition particle proteins SRP54 and FtsY, which were shown to be  involved in targeting of LHCB1 to the thylakoids. We hypothesize that SCO2  provides an alternative targeting pathway for light-harvesting chlorophyll  binding (LHCB) proteins to the thylakoids via transport vesicles predominantly in  cotyledons, with the signal recognition particle (SRP) pathway predominant in  rosette leaves. Therefore, we propose that SCO2 is involved in the integration of  LHCB1 proteins into the thylakoids that feeds back on the regulation of the  tetrapyrrole biosynthetic pathway and nuclear gene expression.', '2012 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04833.x', 'Albrecht']

SCO2: !localizes to! chloroplast 
SCO2: !interacts with! LHCB1 
SCO2: !enhances! transport vesicles 
LHCB1: !synthesizes! protochlorophyllide 
SRP54/FtsY: !interacts with! LHCB1 
SRP54/FtsY: !represses! SCO2