['22044965', "Microgametogenesis is a complex process that involves numerous well-coordinated  cell activities, ending with the production of pollen grains. Pollen development  has been studied at the cytological level in Arabidopsis and other plant species,  where its temporal time course has been defined. However, the molecular mechanism  underlying this process is still unclear, since a relative small number of genes  and/or processes have been identified as essential for pollen development. We  have designed a methodology to select candidate genes for functional analysis,  based on transcriptomic data obtained from different stages of pollen  development. From our analyses, we selected At2g22950 as a candidate gene; this  gene encodes a protein belonging to the auto-regulated Ca(2+)-ATPase family,  ACA7. Microarray data indicate that ACA7 is expressed exclusively in developing  pollen grains, with the highest level of mRNA at the time of the second pollen  mitosis. Our RT-PCR experiments showed that ACA7 mRNA is detected exclusively in  developing flowers. Confocal microscopy experiments showed a plasma membrane  localization for the recombinant GFP:ACA7 protein. We identified two different  insertional mutant lines, aca7-1 and aca7-2; plants from both mutant lines  displayed a normal vegetative development but showed large amounts of dead pollen  grains in mature flowers assayed by Alexander's staining. Histological analysis  indicated that abnormalities are detected after the first pollen mitosis and we  found a strong correlation between ACA7 mRNA accumulation and the severity of the  phenotype. Our results indicate that ACA7 is a plasma membrane protein that has  an important role during pollen development, possibly through regulation of  Ca(2+) homeostasis.", '2012 Apr', 'Plant Cell Rep', '10.1007/s00299-011-1182-z', 'Leon']

Gene: ACA7 !affects! Pollen Development 
ACA7 !localizes to! Plasma Membrane 
ACA7 !synthesizes! Protein 
ACA7 !represses! Ca(2+) Homeostasis 
Insertional Mutant Lines !enhance! Severity of Phenotype