['22058024', 'Arabidopsis NSN1 encodes a nucleolar GTP-binding protein and is required for  flower development. Defective flowers were formed in heterozygous nsn1/+ plants.  Homozygous nsn1 plants were dwarf and exhibited severe defects in reproduction.  Arrests in embryo development in nsn1 could occur at any stage of embryogenesis.  Cotyledon initiation and development during embryogenesis were distorted in nsn1  plants. At the seedling stage, cotyledons and leaves of nsn1 formed upward curls.  The curled leaves developed meristem-like outgrowths or hyperplasia tissues in  the adaxial epidermis. Long and enlarged pavement cells, characteristic of the  abaxial epidermis of wild type plants, were found in the adaxial epidermis in  nsn1 leaves, suggesting a disoriented leaf polarity in the mutant. The important  role of NSN1 in embryo development and leaf differentiation was consistent with  the high level expression of the NSN1 gene in the developing embryos and the  primordia of cotyledons and leaves. The CLAVATA 3 (CLV3) gene, a stem cell marker  in the Arabidopsis shoot apical meristem (SAM), was expressed in expanded regions  surrounding the SAM of nsn1 plants, and induced ectopically in the meristem-like  outgrowths in cotyledons and leaves. The nsn1 mutation up-regulated the  expression levels of several genes implicated in the meristem identity and the  abaxial cell fate, and repressed the expression of other genes related to the  specification of cotyledon boundary and abaxial identity. These results  demonstrate that NSN1 represents a novel GTPase required for embryogenesis, leaf  development and leaf polarity establishment in Arabidopsis.', '2012 Jan', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-011-9840-7', 'Hong']

NSN1: !affects! flower development
NSN1: !arrests! embryo development
NSN1: !distorts! cotyledon initiation and development
NSN1: !causes! upward curls in leaves
NSN1: !induces! CLV3 expression
NSN1: !up-regulates! genes related to meristem identity
NSN1: !represses! genes related to cotyledon boundary and abaxial identity