Cucumber (Cucumis sativus) seedlings grown in a horizontal position develop a specialized protuberance (or peg) on the lower side of the transition zone between the hypocotyl and the root. This occurs by suppressing peg formation on the upper side via a decrease in auxin resulting from a gravitational response. However, the gravity-stimulated mechanism of inducing asymmetric auxin distribution in the transition zone is poorly understood. The gravity-sensing tissue responsible for regulating auxin distribution in the transition zone is thought to be the endodermal cell. To characterize the gravity-stimulated mechanism, the auxin efflux facilitator PIN-FORMED1 (CsPIN1) in the endodermis was identified and the localization of CsPIN1 proteins during the gravimorphogenesis of cucumber seedlings was examined. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the accumulation pattern of CsPIN1 protein in the endodermal cells of the transition zone of cucumber seedlings grown horizontally differed from that of plants grown vertically. Gravistimulation for 30 min prompted changes in the accumulation pattern of CsPIN1 protein in the endodermis as well as the asymmetric distribution of auxin in the transition zone. Furthermore, 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid inhibited the differential distribution of auxin as well as changes in the accumulation pattern of CsPIN1 in the endodermis of the transition zone during gravistimulation. These results suggest that the altered pattern of CsPIN1 accumulation in the endodermis in response to gravistimulation influences lateral auxin transport through the endodermis, resulting in asymmetric auxin distribution in the transition zone.

CsPIN1: !accumulates differently in! endodermis 
Gravistimulation: !prompts changes in! CsPIN1 accumulation 
CsPIN1: !influences lateral auxin transport through! endodermis 
Gravistimulation: !results in asymmetric auxin distribution in! transition zone 
2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid: !inhibits differential distribution of auxin and! CsPIN1 accumulation