['22065421', 'Transcription factors activate or repress target gene expression or switch  between activation and repression. In animals and yeast, Groucho/Tup1 corepressor  proteins are recruited by diverse transcription factors to induce  context-specific transcriptional repression. Two groups of Groucho/Tup1-like  corepressors have been described in plants. LEUNIG and LEUNIG_HOMOLOG constitute  one group and TOPLESS (TPL) and the four TPL-related (TPR) corepressors form the  other. To discover the processes in which TPL and the TPR corepressors operate,  high-throughput yeast two-hybrid approaches were used to identify interacting  proteins. We found that TPL/TPR corepressors predominantly interact directly with  specific transcription factors, many of which were previously implicated in  transcriptional repression. The interacting transcription factors reveal that the  TPL/TPR family has been coopted multiple times to modulate gene expression in  diverse processes, including hormone signaling, stress responses, and the control  of flowering time, for which we also show biological validation. The interaction  data suggest novel mechanisms for the involvement of TPL/TPR corepressors in  auxin and jasmonic acid signaling. A number of short repression domain (RD)  sequences have previously been identified in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  transcription factors. All known RD sequences were enriched among the TPL/TPR  interactors, and novel TPL-RD interactions were identified. We show that the  presence of RD sequences is essential for TPL/TPR recruitment. These data provide  a framework for TPL/TPR-dependent transcriptional repression. They allow for  predictions about new repressive transcription factors, corepressor interactions,  and repression mechanisms and identify a wide range of plant processes that  utilize TPL/TPR-mediated gene repression.', '2012 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.186999', 'Davies']

Transcription factors: !activate/repress! target gene expression
Groucho/Tup1 corepressor proteins: !recruited by! diverse transcription factors
LEUNIG and LEUNIG_HOMOLOG: !constitute one group of! Groucho/Tup1-like corepressors
TOPLESS (TPL) and TPL-related (TPR) corepressors: !form another group of! Groucho/Tup1-like corepressors
TPL/TPR corepressors: !interact with! specific transcription factors
Transcription factors: !reveal! TPL/TPR family has been coopted multiple times
TPL/TPR corepressors: !involved in! hormone signaling, stress responses, flowering time
Short repression domain (RD) sequences: !enriched among! TPL/TPR interactors
Presence of RD sequences: !essential for! TPL/TPR recruitment