['22096563', 'Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) constitute the regulatory network that  coordinates diverse cellular functions. There are growing needs in plant research  for creating protein interaction maps behind complex cellular processes and at a  systems biology level. However, only a few approaches have been successfully used  for large-scale surveys of PPIs in plants, each having advantages and  disadvantages. Here we present split firefly luciferase complementation (SFLC) as  a highly sensitive and noninvasive technique for in planta PPI investigation. In  this assay, the separate halves of a firefly luciferase can come into close  proximity and transiently restore its catalytic activity only when their fusion  partners, namely the two proteins of interest, interact with each other. This  assay was conferred with quantitativeness and high throughput potential when the  Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplast system and a microplate luminometer were  employed for protein expression and luciferase measurement, respectively. Using  the SFLC assay, we could monitor the dynamics of rapamycin-induced and  ascomycin-disrupted interaction between Arabidopsis FRB and human FKBP proteins  in a near real-time manner. As a proof of concept for large-scale PPI survey, we  further applied the SFLC assay to testing 132 binary PPIs among 8 auxin response  factors (ARFs) and 12 Aux/IAA proteins from Arabidopsis. Our results demonstrated  that the SFLC assay is ideal for in vivo quantitative PPI analysis in plant cells  and is particularly powerful for large-scale binary PPI screens.', '2011', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0027364', 'McCormack']

Protein-protein interactions (PPIs): !constitute! regulatory network 
Split firefly luciferase complementation (SFLC): !used for! in planta PPI investigation 
Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplast system: !employed for! protein expression 
Microplate luminometer: !employed for! luciferase measurement 
FRB and FKBP proteins: !interact with! each other 
SFLC assay: !applied to! 8 ARFs and 12 Aux/IAA proteins 
SFLC assay: !ideal for! in vivo quantitative PPI analysis