Investigations of the effects of elevated ozone (O(3)) on the virus-plant system were conducted to inform virus pathogen management strategies better. One susceptible cultivar of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L. cv. Yongding) and a resistant cultivar (Nicotiana tabacum L. cv. Vam) to Potato virus Y petiole necrosis strain (PVY(N)) infection were grown in open-top chambers under ambient and elevated O(3) concentrations. Above-ground biomass, foliage chlorophyll, nitrogen and total non-structural carbohydrate (TNCs), soluble protein, total amino acid (TAA) and nicotine content, and peroxidase (POD) activity were measured to estimate the effects of elevated O(3) on the impact of PVY(N) in the two cultivars. Results showed that under ambient O(3), the resistant cultivar possessed greater biomass and a lower C/N ratio after infection than the susceptible cultivar; however, under elevated O(3), the resistant cultivar lost its biomass advantage but maintained a lower C/N ratio. Variation of foliar POD activity could be explained as a resistance cost which was significantly correlated with biomass and C/N ratio of the tobacco cultivar. Chlorophyll content remained steady in the resistant cultivar but decreased significantly in the susceptible cultivar when stressors were applied. Foliar soluble protein and free amino acid content, which were related to resistance cost changes, are also discussed. This study indicated that a virus-resistant tobacco cultivar showed increased sensitivity to elevated O(3) compared to a virus-sensitive cultivar.

O3: !affects! PVY(N)
PVY(N): !affects! biomass
PVY(N): !affects! C/N ratio
PVY(N): !affects! chlorophyll content
PVY(N): !affects! soluble protein
PVY(N): !affects! free amino acid content
resistant cultivar: !possesses greater! biomass
resistant cultivar: !maintains lower! C/N ratio
resistant cultivar: !maintains steady! chlorophyll content
resistant cultivar: !related to resistance cost changes! soluble protein
resistant cultivar: !related to resistance cost changes! free amino acid content
resistant cultivar: !increased sensitivity to! elevated O3