['22106285', 'Recognition of microbial patterns by host pattern recognition receptors is a key  step in immune activation in multicellular eukaryotes. Peptidoglycans (PGNs) are  major components of bacterial cell walls that possess immunity-stimulating  activities in metazoans and plants. Here we show that PGN sensing and immunity to  bacterial infection in Arabidopsis thaliana requires three lysin-motif (LysM)  domain proteins. LYM1 and LYM3 are plasma membrane proteins that physically  interact with PGNs and mediate Arabidopsis sensitivity to structurally different  PGNs from gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. lym1 and lym3 mutants lack  PGN-induced changes in transcriptome activity patterns, but respond to  fungus-derived chitin, a pattern structurally related to PGNs, in a wild-type  manner. Notably, lym1, lym3, and lym3 lym1 mutant genotypes exhibit  supersusceptibility to infection with virulent Pseudomonas syringae pathovar  tomato DC3000. Defects in basal immunity in lym3 lym1 double mutants resemble  those observed in lym1 and lym3 single mutants, suggesting that both proteins are  part of the same recognition system. We further show that deletion of CERK1, a  LysM receptor kinase that had previously been implicated in chitin perception and  immunity to fungal infection in Arabidopsis, phenocopies defects observed in lym1  and lym3 mutants, such as peptidoglycan insensitivity and enhanced susceptibility  to bacterial infection. Altogether, our findings suggest that plants share with  metazoans the ability to recognize bacterial PGNs. However, as Arabidopsis LysM  domain proteins LYM1, LYM3, and CERK1 form a PGN recognition system that is  unrelated to metazoan PGN receptors, we propose that lineage-specific PGN  perception systems have arisen through convergent evolution.', '2011 Dec 6', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1112862108', 'Nurnberger']

LYM1: !interacts with! PGNs 
LYM3: !interacts with! PGNs 
LYM1: !enhances! Arabidopsis sensitivity to PGNs 
LYM3: !enhances! Arabidopsis sensitivity to PGNs 
LYM1: !represses! transcriptome activity patterns 
LYM3: !represses! transcriptome activity patterns 
LYM1: !synthesizes! immunity to bacterial infection 
LYM3: !synthesizes! immunity to bacterial infection 
CERK1: !interacts with! chitin 
CERK1: !enhances! immunity to fungal infection 
CERK1: !represses! immunity to bacterial infection