['22102827', 'RNA molecules such as small-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and antisense RNAs (asRNAs)  trigger chromatin silencing of target loci. In the model plant Arabidopsis,  RNA-triggered chromatin silencing involves repressive histone modifications such  as histone deacetylation, histone H3 lysine-9 methylation, and H3 lysine-27  monomethylation. Here, we report that two Arabidopsis homologs of the human  histone-binding proteins Retinoblastoma-Associated Protein 46/48 (RbAp46/48),  known as MSI4 (or FVE) and MSI5, function in partial redundancy in chromatin  silencing of various loci targeted by siRNAs or asRNAs. We show that MSI5 acts in  partial redundancy with FVE to silence FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), which is a  crucial floral repressor subject to asRNA-mediated silencing, FLC homologs, and  other loci including transposable and repetitive elements which are targets of  siRNA-directed DNA Methylation (RdDM). Both FVE and MSI5 associate with HISTONE  DEACETYLASE 6 (HDA6) to form complexes and directly interact with the target  loci, leading to histone deacetylation and transcriptional silencing. In  addition, these two genes function in de novo CHH (H = A, T, or C) methylation  and maintenance of symmetric cytosine methylation (mainly CHG methylation) at  endogenous RdDM target loci, and they are also required for establishment of  cytosine methylation in the previously unmethylated sequences directed by the  RdDM pathway. This reveals an important functional divergence of the plant  RbAp46/48 relatives from animal counterparts.', '2011 Nov', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1002366', 'He']

RNA molecules: !trigger! chromatin silencing 
MSI4/FVE and MSI5: !function in partial redundancy! in chromatin silencing 
MSI5 and FVE: !associate with! HDA6 
MSI5 and FVE: !interact with! target loci 
MSI5 and FVE: !lead to! histone deacetylation and transcriptional silencing 
MSI5 and FVE: !required for! de novo CHH methylation 
MSI5 and FVE: !required for! maintenance of symmetric cytosine methylation