Persian walnut (Juglans regia L.) is an economically important tree for its nut crop and timber. To gain insight into the structure and evolution of the walnut genome, we constructed two bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) libraries, containing a total of 129,024 clones, from in vitro-grown shoots of J. regia cv. Chandler using the HindIII and MboI cloning sites. A total of 48,218 high-quality BAC end sequences (BESs) were generated, with an accumulated sequence length of 31.2 Mb, representing approximately 5.1% of the walnut genome. Analysis of repeat DNA content in BESs revealed that approximately 15.42% of the genome consists of known repetitive DNA, while walnut-unique repetitive DNA identified in this study constitutes 13.5% of the genome. Among the walnut-unique repetitive DNA, Julia SINE and JrTRIM elements represent the first identified walnut short interspersed element (SINE) and terminal-repeat retrotransposon in miniature (TRIM) element, respectively; both types of elements are abundant in the genome. As in other species, these SINEs and TRIM elements could be exploited for developing repeat DNA-based molecular markers in walnut. Simple sequence repeats (SSR) from BESs were analyzed and found to be more abundant in BESs than in expressed sequence tags. The density of SSR in the walnut genome analyzed was also slightly higher than that in poplar and papaya. Sequence analysis of BESs indicated that approximately 11.5% of the walnut genome represents a coding sequence. This study is an initial characterization of the walnut genome and provides the largest genomic resource currently available; as such, it will be a valuable tool in studies aimed at genetically improving walnut.

Walnut genome: !consists of! known repetitive DNA 
Walnut genome: !contains! walnut-unique repetitive DNA 
Walnut-unique repetitive DNA: !includes! Julia SINE and JrTRIM elements 
Simple sequence repeats (SSR): !more abundant in! BESs 
Walnut genome: !has higher density of SSR than! poplar and papaya 
Walnut genome: !represents! 11.5% coding sequence