Reversible protein phosphorylation is of central importance to the proper cellular functioning of all living organisms. Catalyzed by the opposing reactions of protein kinases and phosphatases, dysfunction in reversible protein phosphorylation can result in a wide variety of cellular aberrations. In eukaryotic organisms there exists four classes of protein phosphatases, of which the PPP-family protein phosphatases have documented susceptibility to a range of protein and small molecule inhibitors. These inhibitors have been of great importance to the biochemical characterization of PPP-family protein phosphatases since their discovery, but also maintain in natura biological significance with their endogenous regulatory properties (protein inhibitors) and toxicity (small molecule inhibitors). Recently, two unique PPP-family protein phosphatases, named the Shewanella-like protein phosphatases (SLP phosphatases), from Arabidopsis thaliana were characterized and found to be phylogenetically similar to the PPP-family protein phosphatases protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), while completely lacking sensitivity to the classic PPP-family phosphatase small molecule inhibitors okadaic acid and microcystin-LR. SLP phosphatases were also found to be absent in metazoans, but present in a wide range of bacteria, fungi and protozoa responsible for human disease. The unique biochemical properties and evolutionary heritage of SLP phosphatases suggests they could not only be potential biotechnology targets for agriculture, but may also prove to be of interest for future therapeutic drug development.

Protein Kinases: !catalyze! Reversible Protein Phosphorylation 
PPP-family Protein Phosphatases: !susceptible to! Protein & Small Molecule Inhibitors 
SLP Phosphatases: !phylogenetically similar to! PP1 & PP2A 
SLP Phosphatases: !absent in! Metazoans 
SLP Phosphatases: !present in! Bacteria, Fungi & Protozoa 
SLP Phosphatases: !potential biotechnology targets for! Agriculture 
SLP Phosphatases: !potential therapeutic drug development for! Future