In this study, the proteome structures following the pathway in somatic embryogenesis of Cyclamen persicum were analysed via high-resolution 2D-SDS-PAGE with two objectives: (1) to identify the significant physiological processes during somatic embryogenesis in Cyclamen and (2) to improve the maturation of somatic embryos. Therefore, the effects of maturation-promoting plant growth regulator abscisic acid (ABA) and high sucrose levels on torpedo-shaped embryos were investigated. In total, 108 proteins of differential abundance were identified using a combination of tandem mass spectrometry and a digital proteome reference map. In callus, enzymes related to energy supply were especially distinct, most likely due to energy demand caused by fast growth and cell division. The switch from callus to globular embryo as well as from globular to torpedo-shaped embryo was associated with controlled proteolysis via the ubiquitin-26S proteasome pathway. Storage compound accumulation was first detected 21 days after transfer to plant growth regulator (PGR)-free medium in early torpedo-shaped embryos. Increase in abundance of auxin-amidohydrolase during embryogenesis suggests a possible increase in auxin release in the late embryo stages of Cyclamen. A development-specific isoelectric point switch of catalases has been reported for the first time for somatic embryogenesis. Several proteins were identified to represent markers for the different developmental stages analysed. High sucrose levels and ABA treatment promoted the accumulation of storage compounds in torpedo-shaped embryos. Additionally, proteins of the primary metabolic pathways were decreased in the proteomes of ABA-treated embryos. Thus, ABA and high sucrose concentration in the culture medium improved maturation and consequently the quality of somatic embryos in C. persicum.

ABA: !improves! maturation 
high sucrose levels: !promotes! storage compound accumulation 
ubiquitin-26S proteasome pathway: !controls! proteolysis 
auxin-amidohydrolase: !increases! abundance 
catalases: !exhibits! isoelectric point switch 
primary metabolic pathways: !decreased! by ABA treatment