Chloroplasts are equipped with a nuclear-encoded antioxidant defence system the components of which are usually expressed at high transcript and activity levels. To significantly challenge the chloroplast antioxidant system, Arabidopsis thaliana plants, acclimated to extremely low light slightly above the light compensation point or to normal growth chamber light, were moved to high light corresponding to a 100- and 10-fold light jump, for 6 h and 24 h in order to observe the responses of the water-water cycle at the transcript, protein, enzyme activity, and metabolite levels. The plants coped efficiently with the high light regime and the photoinhibition was fully reversible. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), glutathione and ascorbate levels as well as redox states, respectively, revealed no particular oxidative stress in low-light-acclimated plants transferred to 100-fold excess light. Strong regulation of the water-water cycle enzymes at the transcript level was only partly reflected at the protein and activity levels. In general, low light plants had higher stromal (sAPX) and thylakoid ascorbate peroxidase (tAPX), dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR), and CuZn superoxide dismutase (CuZnSOD) protein contents than normal light-grown plants. Mutants defective in components relevant for retrograde signalling, namely stn7, ex1, tpt1, and a mutant expressing E .coli catalase in the chloroplast showed unaltered transcriptional responses of water-water cycle enzymes. These findings, together with the response of marker transcripts, indicate that abscisic acid is not involved and that the plastoquinone redox state and reactive oxygen species do not play a major role in regulating the transcriptional response at t=6 h, while other marker transcripts suggest a major role for reductive power, metabolites, and lipids as signals for the response of the water-water cycle.

Chloroplasts: !equip! nuclear-encoded antioxidant defence system
ROS: !reveal! no particular oxidative stress
Low light plants: !have higher! stromal and thylakoid ascorbate peroxidase, dehydroascorbate reductase, and CuZn superoxide dismutase protein contents
Mutants: !show unaltered! transcriptional responses of water-water cycle enzymes
Abscisic acid: !not involved! in regulating transcriptional response
Plastoquinone redox state: !not play major role! in regulating transcriptional response
Reductive power, metabolites, lipids: !play major role! in response of water-water cycle