Chloroplast biogenesis requires constant adjustment of RNA homeostasis under conditions of on-going developmental and environmental change and its regulation is achieved mainly by post-transcriptional control mechanisms mediated by various nucleus-encoded ribonucleases. More than 180 ribonucleases are annotated in Arabidopsis, but only 17 are predicted to localize to the chloroplast. Although different ribonucleases act at different RNA target sites in vivo, most nucleases that attack RNA are thought to lack intrinsic cleavage specificity and show non-specific activity in vitro. In vivo, specificity is thought to be imposed by auxiliary RNA-binding proteins, including members of the huge pentatricopeptide repeat family, which protect RNAs from non-specific nucleolytic attack by masking otherwise vulnerable sites. RNA stability is also influenced by secondary structure, polyadenylation, and ribosome binding. Ribonucleases may cleave at internal sites (endonucleases) or digest successively from the 5' or 3' end of the polynucleotide chain (exonucleases). In bacteria, RNases act in the maturation of rRNA and tRNA precursors, as well as in initiating the degradation of mRNAs and small non-coding RNAs. Many ribonucleases in the chloroplasts of higher plants possess homologies to their bacterial counterparts, but their precise functions have rarely been described. However, many ribonucleases present in the chloroplast process polycistronic rRNAs, tRNAs, and mRNAs. The resulting production of monocistronic, translationally competent mRNAs may represent an adaptation to the eukaryotic cellular environment. This review provides a basic overview of the current knowledge of RNases in plastids and highlights gaps to stimulate future studies.

RNase: !localizes to! chloroplast 
RNase: !acts on! rRNA 
RNase: !acts on! tRNA 
RNase: !acts on! mRNA 
RNase: !acts on! small non-coding RNAs 
RNase: !processes! polycistronic RNAs 
RNase: !produces! monocistronic, translationally competent mRNAs