['22140429', 'BACKGROUND: Most secretory proteins contain signal peptides that direct their  sorting to the ER and secreted via the conventional ER/Golgi transport pathway,  while some signal-peptide-lacking proteins have been shown to export through  ER/Golgi independent secretory pathways. Hygromycin B is an aminoglycoside  antibiotic produced by Streptomyces hygroscopicus that is active against both  prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. The hygromycin phosphotransferase (HYG(R)) can  phosphorylate and inactivate the hygromycin B, and has been widely used as a  positive selective marker in the construction of transgenic plants. However, the  localization and trafficking of HYG(R) in plant cells remain unknown.  Synaptotagmins (SYTs) are involved in controlling vesicle endocytosis and  exocytosis as calcium sensors in animal cells, while their functions in plant  cells are largely unclear. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found Arabidopsis  synaptotagmin SYT2 was localized on the Golgi apparatus by immunofluorescence and  immunogold labeling. Surprisingly, co-expression of SYT2 and HYG(R) caused  hypersensitivity of the transgenic Arabidopsis plants to hygromycin B. HYG(R),  which lacks a signal sequence, was present in the cytoplasm as well as in the  extracellular space in HYG(R)-GFP transgenic Arabidopsis plants and its secretion  is not sensitive to brefeldin A treatment, suggesting it is not secreted via the  conventional secretory pathway. Furthermore, we found that HYG(R)-GFP was  truncated at carboxyl terminus of HYG(R) shortly after its synthesis, and the  cells deficient SYT2 failed to efficiently truncate HYG(R)-GFP,resulting in  HYG(R)-GFP accumulated in prevacuoles/vacuoles, indicating that SYT2 was involved  in HYG(R)-GFP trafficking and secretion. CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings  reveal for the first time that SYT2 is localized on the Golgi apparatus and  regulates HYG(R)-GFP secretion via the unconventional protein transport from the  cytosol to the extracelluar matrix in plant cells.', '2011', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0026477', 'Lin']

SYT2: !localizes to! Golgi apparatus 
SYT2: !regulates! HYG(R)-GFP secretion 
HYG(R): !synthesizes! HYG(R)-GFP 
HYG(R): !truncates at! carboxyl terminus 
HYG(R): !traffics via! unconventional protein transport 
HYG(R): !secrets to! extracellular matrix