For an efficient defense response against pathogens, plants must coordinate rapid genetic reprogramming to produce an incompatible interaction. Nitrate Trasnporter2 (NRT2) gene family members are sentinels of nitrate availability. In this study, we present an additional role for NRT2.1 linked to plant resistance against pathogens. This gene antagonizes the priming of plant defenses against the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000 (Pst). The nrt2 mutant (which is deficient in two genes, NRT2.1 and NRT2.2) displays reduced susceptibility to this bacterium. We demonstrate that modifying environmental conditions that stimulate the derepression of the NRT2.1 gene influences resistance to Pst independently of the total level of endogenous nitrogen. Additionally, hormonal homeostasis seemed to be affected in nrt2, which displays priming of salicylic acid signaling and concomitant irregular functioning of the jasmonic acid and abscisic acid pathways upon infection. Effector-triggered susceptibility and hormonal perturbation by the bacterium seem to be altered in nrt2, probably due to reduced sensitivity to the bacterial phytotoxin coronatine. The main genetic and metabolic targets of coronatine in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) remain largely unstimulated in nrt2 mutants. In addition, a P. syringae strain defective in coronatine synthesis showed the same virulence toward nrt2 as the coronatine-producing strain. Taken together, the reduced susceptibility of nrt2 mutants seems to be a combination of priming of salicylic acid-dependent defenses and reduced sensitivity to the bacterial effector coronatine. These results suggest additional functions for NRT2.1 that may influence plant disease resistance by down-regulating biotic stress defense mechanisms and favoring abiotic stress responses.

NRT2.1: !antagonizes! priming of plant defenses
NRT2.1: !influences! resistance to Pst
NRT2.1: !modifies! environmental conditions
NRT2.1: !affects! hormonal homeostasis
NRT2.1: !alters! effector-triggered susceptibility
NRT2.1: !down-regulates! biotic stress defense mechanisms
NRT2.1: !favors! abiotic stress responses