Sesuvium portulacastrum is a common halophyte growing well in adverse surroundings and is exploited mainly for the environmental protection including phytoremediation, desalination and stabilization of contaminated soil. In the present investigation, attempts have been made on the decolorization of a toxic textile dye Green HE4B (GHE4B) using in vitro grown Sesuvium plantlets. The plantlets exhibited significant (70%) decolorization of GHE4B (50 mg l(-1)) that sustain 200 mM sodium chloride (NaCl) within 5 days of incubation. The enzymatic analysis performed on the root and shoot tissues of the in vitro plantlets subjected to GHE4B decolorization in the presence of 200 mM NaCl showed a noteworthy induction of tyrosinase, lignin peroxidase and NADH-DCIP reductase activities, indicating the involvement of these enzymes in the metabolism of the dye GHE4B. The UV-visible spectrophotometer, HPLC and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) analyses of the samples before and after decolorization of the dye confirmed the efficient phytotransformation of GHE4B in the presence of 200 mM NaCl. Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectroscopy (GC-MS) analysis of the products revealed the formation of three metabolites such as p -amino benzene, p -amino toluene and 1, 2, 7-amino naphthalene after phytotransformation of GHE4B. Based on the FTIR and GC-MS results, the possible pathway for the biodegradation of GHE4B in the presence of 200 mM NaCl has been proposed. The phytotoxicity experiments confirmed the non-toxicity of the degraded products. The present study demonstrates for the first time the potential of Sesuvium for the efficient degradation of textile dyes and its efficacy on saline soils contaminated with toxic compounds.

Sesuvium portulacastrum: !decolorizes! GHE4B 
tyrosinase: !induces! GHE4B decolorization 
lignin peroxidase: !induces! GHE4B decolorization 
NADH-DCIP reductase: !induces! GHE4B decolorization 
GHE4B: !phytotransforms to! metabolites 
FTIR: !confirms! phytotransformation of GHE4B 
GC-MS: !confirms! formation of metabolites 
phytotoxicity experiments: !confirm! non-toxicity of degraded products