['22167189', 'The plant phenylpropanoid pathway produces an array of metabolites that impact  human health and the utility of feed and fiber crops. We previously characterized  several Arabidopsis thaliana mutants with dominant mutations in REDUCED EPIDERMAL  FLUORESCENCE 4 (REF4) that cause dwarfing and decreased accumulation of  phenylpropanoids. In contrast, ref4 null plants are of normal stature and have no  apparent defect in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. Here we show that disruption of  both REF4 and its paralog, REF4-RELATED 1 (RFR1), results in enhanced expression  of multiple phenylpropanoid biosynthetic genes, as well as increased accumulation  of numerous downstream products. We also show that the dominant ref4-3 mutant  protein interferes with the ability of the PAP1/MYB75 transcription factor to  induce the expression of PAL1 and drive anthocyanin accumulation. Consistent with  our experimental results, both REF4 and RFR1 have been shown to physically  associate with the conserved transcriptional coregulatory complex, Mediator,  which transduces information from cis-acting DNA elements to RNA polymerase II at  the core promoter. Taken together, our data provide critical genetic support for  a functional role of REF4 and RFR1 in the Mediator complex, and for Mediator in  the maintenance of phenylpropanoid homeostasis. Finally, we show that wild-type  RFR1 substantially mitigates the phenotype of the dominant ref4-3 mutant,  suggesting that REF4 and RFR1 may compete with one another for common binding  partners or for occupancy in Mediator. Determining the functions of diverse  Mediator subunits is essential to understand eukaryotic gene regulation, and to  facilitate rational manipulation of plant metabolic pathways to better suit human  needs.', '2012 Feb 17', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M111.312298', 'Chapple']

REF4: !interacts with! PAP1/MYB75
REF4: !associates with! Mediator
RFR1: !interacts with! PAP1/MYB75
RFR1: !associates with! Mediator
REF4: !competes with! RFR1