Lead is potentially toxic to all organisms including plants. Many physiological studies suggest that plants have developed various mechanisms to contend with heavy metals, however the molecular mechanisms remain unclear. We studied maize plants in which lead was introduced into detached leaves through the transpiration stream. The photochemical efficiency of PSII, measured as an Fv/Fm ratio, in the maize leaves treated with Pb was only 10% lower than in control leaves. The PSII activity was not affected by Pb ions in mesophyll thylakoids, whereas in bundle sheath it was reduced. Protein phosphorylation in mesophyll and bundle sheath thylakoids was analyzed using mass spectrometry and protein blotting before and after lead treatment. Both methods clearly demonstrated increase in phosphorylation of the PSII proteins upon treatment with Pb(2+), however, the extent of D1, D2 and CP43 phosphorylation in the mesophyll chloroplasts was clearly higher than in bundle sheath cells. We found that in the presence of Pb ions there was no detectable dephosphorylation of the strongly phosphorylated D1 and PsbH proteins of PSII complex in darkness or under far red light. These results suggest that Pb(2+) stimulates phosphorylation of PSII core proteins, which can affect stability of the PSII complexes and the rate of D1 protein degradation. Increased phosphorylation of the PSII core proteins induced by Pb ions may be a crucial protection mechanism stabilizing optimal composition of the PSII complexes under metal stress conditions. Our results show that acclimation to Pb ions was achieved in both types of maize chloroplasts in the same way. However, these processes are obviously more complex because of different metabolic status in mesophyll and bundle sheath chloroplasts.

Pb: !stimulates phosphorylation of! PSII core proteins
PSII core proteins: !stabilize! optimal composition of PSII complexes
Pb: !induces! increased phosphorylation of PSII core proteins
Mesophyll chloroplasts: !have higher! D1, D2 and CP43 phosphorylation
Bundle sheath cells: !have lower! D1, D2 and CP43 phosphorylation