['22170978', 'The genome of plants is organized into chromatin, affecting the rates of  transcription, DNA recombination, and repair. In this work, we have investigated  the consequences of reduced expression of some chromatin-remodeling factors and  histone acetylation in maize (Zea mays) and Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) in  their participation in DNA repair after ultraviolet (UV)-B irradiation. Plants  deficient in NFC102/NFC4 or SDG102/SDG26 showed more damaged DNA than wild-type  plants; however, the Arabidopsis chc1 mutant showed similar accumulation of  cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers as wild-type plants, in contrast to the increased  DNA damage measured in the maize chc101 RNA interference line. In Arabidopsis,  plants deficient in chromatin remodeling are also affected in the accumulation of  pigments by UV-B. Plants treated with an inhibitor of histone acetyltransferases,  curcumin, previous to the UV-B treatment show deficiencies in DNA repair; in  addition, the chromatin remodeling-deficient plants have altered levels of  acetylated histones after the UV-B treatment, demonstrating that histone  acetylation is important during DNA repair in these two plant species.  Arabidopsis mutants ham1 and ham2 also showed increased DNA damage after UV-B,  suggesting that the role of these proteins in DNA damage repair has been  conserved through evolution. However, cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer accumulation  was higher in ham1 than in ham2; suggesting that HAM1 has a major role in DNA  repair after UV-B. In summary, in this work, we have demonstrated that chromatin  remodeling, and histone acetylation in particular, is important during DNA repair  by UV-B, demonstrating that both genetic and epigenetic effects control DNA  repair in plants.', '2012 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.191452', 'Casati']

NFC102/NFC4: !affects! DNA repair 
SDG102/SDG26: !affects! DNA repair 
chc1: !shows similar accumulation of! cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers 
curcumin: !inhibits! histone acetyltransferases 
chromatin remodeling-deficient plants: !have altered levels of! acetylated histones 
ham1: !has a major role in! DNA repair 
ham2: !has a minor role in! DNA repair