['22199234', "Plant 9-lipoxygenases (9-LOX) and alpha-dioxygenases (alpha-DOX) initiate the synthesis  of oxylipins after bacterial infection. Here, the role of these enzymes in  plants' defense was investigated using individual Arabidopsis thaliana lox1 and  dox1 mutants and a double lox1 dox1 mutant. Studies with Pseudomonas syringae pv.  tomato (Pst) revealed the enhanced susceptibility of lox1 to the virulent strain  Pst DC3000 and the partial impairment of lox1 and dox1 mutants to activate  systemic acquired resistance. Notably, both defects were enhanced in the lox1  dox1 plants as compared with individual mutants. We found that pre-treatment with  9-LOX- and alpha-DOX-generated oxylipins protected plant tissues against bacterial  infection. The strongest effect in this respect was exerted by  9-ketooctadecatrienoic acid (9-KOT), which is produced from linolenic acid by  9-LOX. Quantification of 9-KOT revealed its accumulation after bacterial  infection. The levels were reduced in lox1 and lox1 dox1 plants but strongly  increased in the dox1 mutant due to metabolic interaction of the two pathways.  Transcriptional analyses indicated that 9-KOT pre-treatment modifies hormone  homeostasis during bacterial infection. The nature of the changes detected  suggested that 9-KOT interferes with the hormonal changes caused by bacterial  effectors. This notion was substantiated by the finding that 9-KOT failed to  reduce the growth of PstDC3000hrpA, a mutant compromised in effector secretion,  and of the avirulent strain Pst DC3000 avrRpm1. Further support for the action of  the 9-LOX- and alpha-DOX-oxylipin pathways as modulators of hormone homeostasis was  the observation that lox1 dox1 seedlings are hypersensitive to the  growth-inhibitory effect of ABA and showed enhanced activation of ABA-inducible  marker genes as compared with wild-type plants.", '2012 Jul', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/ssr105', 'Castresana']

9-LOX: !initiates synthesis of! oxylipins 
alpha-DOX: !initiates synthesis of! oxylipins 
lox1: !enhances susceptibility to! Pst DC3000 
lox1: !impairs activation of! systemic acquired resistance 
dox1: !impairs activation of! systemic acquired resistance 
lox1 dox1: !enhances impairment of! systemic acquired resistance 
oxylipins: !protects! plant tissues against bacterial infection 
9-KOT: !produced from! linolenic acid by 9-LOX 
9-KOT: !accumulates after! bacterial infection 
9-KOT: !modifies! hormone homeostasis during bacterial infection 
9-KOT: !interferes with! hormonal changes caused by bacterial effectors 
lox1 dox1: !hypersensitive to! growth-inhibitory effect of ABA 
lox1 dox1: !enhanced activation of! ABA-inducible marker genes