Heterosis is a common phenomenon in which the hybrids exhibit superior agronomic performance than either inbred parental lines. Although hybrid rice is one of the most successful apotheoses in crops utilizing heterosis, the molecular mechanisms underlying rice heterosis remain elusive. To gain a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of rice heterosis, comparative leaf proteomic analysis between a superhybrid rice LYP9 and its parental cultivars 9311 and PA64s at tillering, flowering and grain-filling stages were carried out. A total of 384 differentially expressed proteins (DP) were detected and 297 DP were identified, corresponding to 222 unique proteins. As DP were divided into those between the parents (DP(PP)) and between the hybrid and its parents (DP(HP)), the comparative results demonstrate that proteins in the categories of photosynthesis, glycolysis, and disease/defense were mainly enriched in DP. Moreover, the number of identified DP(HP) involved in photosynthesis, glycolysis, and disease/defense increased at flowering and grain-filling stages as compared to that at the tillering stage. Most of the up-regulated DP(HP) involved in the three categories showed greater expression in LYP9 at flowering and grain-filling stages than at the tillering stage. In addition, CO(2) assimilation rate and apparent quantum yield of photosynthesis also showed a greater increase in LYP9 at flowering and grain-filling stages than at the tillering stage. These results suggest that the proteins involved in photosynthesis, glycolysis, and disease/defense as well as their dynamic regulation at different developmental stages may be responsible for heterosis in rice.

Photosynthesis: !enhances! Heterosis 
Glycolysis: !enhances! Heterosis 
Disease/Defense: !enhances! Heterosis 
DP(PP): !differentiates from! DP(HP) 
DP(HP): !increases at! Flowering & Grain-Filling Stages 
CO2 Assimilation Rate: !increases in! LYP9 
Apparent Quantum Yield of Photosynthesis: !increases in! LYP9