ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGP) is a heterotetrameric enzyme comprising two small and two large subunits that catalyze the production of ADP-glucose linked to starch biosynthesis. The current paradigm on leaf starch metabolism assumes that post-translational redox modification of AGP in response to light is a major determinant of fine regulation of transitory starch accumulation. According to this view, under oxidizing conditions occurring during the night the two AGP small subunits (APS1) are covalently linked via an intermolecular disulfide bridge that inactivates the protein, whereas under reducing conditions occurring during the day NADP-thioredoxin reductase C (NTRC)-dependent reductive monomerization of APS1 activates the enzyme. In this work we have analyzed changes in the redox status of APS1 during dark-light transition in leaves of plants cultured under different light intensities. Furthermore, we have carried out time-course analyses of starch content in ntrc mutants, and in aps1 mutants expressing the Escherichia coli redox-insensitive AGP (GlgC) in the chloroplast. We also characterized aps1 plants expressing a redox-insensitive, mutated APS1 (APS1mut) form in which the highly conserved Cys81 residue involved in the formation of the intermolecular disulfide bridge has been replaced by serine. We found that a very moderate, NTRC-dependent APS1 monomerization process in response to light occurred only when plants were cultured under photo-oxidative conditions. We also found that starch accumulation rates during the light in leaves of both ntrc mutants and GlgC-expressing aps1 mutants were similar to those of wild-type leaves. Furthermore, the pattern of starch accumulation during illumination in leaves of APS1mut-expressing aps1 mutants was similar to that of APS1-expressing aps1 mutants at any light intensity. The overall data demonstrate that post-translational redox modification of AGP in response to light is not a major determinant of fine regulation of transitory starch accumulation in Arabidopsis.

NTRC: !activates! AGP
APS1: !inactivated by! intermolecular disulfide bridge
NTRC: !moderately monomerizes! APS1
GlgC: !expressing in! aps1 mutants
APS1mut: !expressing in! aps1 mutants
NTRC: !not major determinant of! starch accumulation