['22212122', 'Cyst nematodes establish and maintain feeding sites (syncytia) in the roots of  host plants by altering expression of host genes. Among these genes are members  of the large gene family of class III peroxidases, which have reported functions  in a variety of biological processes. In this study, we used  Arabidopsis-Heterodera schachtii as a model system to functionally characterize  peroxidase 53 (AtPRX53). Promoter assays showed that under non-infected  conditions AtPRX53 is expressed mainly in the root, the hypocotyl and the base of  the pistil. Under infected conditions, the AtPRX53 promoter showed upregulation  at the nematode penetration sites and in their migration paths. Interestingly,  strong GUS activity was observed in H. schachtii-induced syncytia during the  early stage of infection and remained strong in the syncytia of third-stage  juveniles. Also, AtPRX53 showed upregulation in response to wounding and jasmonic  acid treatments. Manipulation of AtPRX53 expression through overexpression and  knockout mutation affected both plant morphology and nematode susceptibility.  While AtPRX53 overexpression lines exhibited short hypocotyls, aberrant flower  development and reduced nematode susceptibility to H. schachtii, the atprx53  mutant showed long hypocotyls and a 3-carpel silique phenotype as well as a non  significant increase of nematode susceptibility. Taken together these data,  therefore, indicate diverse roles of AtPRX53 in the wound response, flower  development and syncytium formation.', '2011 Nov', 'Plant Signal Behav', '10.4161/psb.6.11.17684', 'Baum']

AtPRX53: !localizes to! root, hypocotyl and base of pistil 
AtPRX53: !upregulates! under infected conditions 
AtPRX53: !enhances! syncytium formation 
AtPRX53: !responds to! wounding and jasmonic acid treatments 
AtPRX53: !overexpression affects! plant morphology and nematode susceptibility 
AtPRX53: !knockout mutation affects! hypocotyl length, flower development and nematode susceptibility