['22214184', "TDP1 (tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1), a member of the PLD (phospholipase D)  superfamily, catalyses the hydrolysis of a phosphodiester bond between a tyrosine  residue and the 3'-phosphate of DNA. We have previously identified and  characterized the AtTDP gene in Arabidopsis thaliana, an orthologue of yeast and  human TDP1 genes. Sequence alignment of TDP1 orthologues revealed that AtTDP has  both a conserved C-terminal TDP domain and, uniquely, an N-terminal SMAD/FHA  (forkhead-associated) domain. To help understand the function of this novel  enzyme, we analysed the substrate saturation kinetics of full-length AtTDP  compared with a truncated AtTDP mutant lacking the N-terminal FHA domain. The  recombinant AtTDP protein hydrolysed a single-stranded DNA substrate with Km and  kcat/Km values of 703+/-137 nM and (1.5+/-0.04)x10(9) M(-1).min(-1) respectively. The  AtTDP-(Delta1-122) protein (TDP domain) showed kinetic parameters that were  equivalent to those of the full-length AtTDP protein. A basic amino acid sequence  (RKKVKP) within the AtTDP-(Delta123-605) protein (FHA domain) was necessary for  nuclear localization of AtTDP. Analysis of active-site mutations showed that a  histidine and a lysine residue in each of the HKD motifs were critical for enzyme  activity. Vanadates, inhibitors of phosphoryl transfer reactions, inhibited AtTDP  enzymatic activity and retarded the growth of an Arabidopsis tdp mutant. Finally,  we showed that expression of the AtTDP gene could complement a yeast tdp1Deltarad1Delta  mutant, rescuing the growth inhibitory effects of vanadate analogues and CPT  (camptothecin). Taken together, the results of the present study demonstrate the  structure-based function of AtTDP through which AtTDP can repair DNA strand  breaks in plants.", '2012 Apr 1', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BJ20111308', 'Kim']

TDP1: !catalyses! hydrolysis 
AtTDP: !has! TDP domain 
AtTDP: !has! SMAD/FHA domain 
AtTDP: !hydrolysed by! recombinant AtTDP protein 
RKKVKP: !localizes to! nucleus 
HKD motifs: !critical for! enzyme activity 
Vanadates: !inhibits! AtTDP enzymatic activity 
CPT: !inhibits! growth of Arabidopsis tdp mutant 
AtTDP: !complements! yeast tdp1Deltarad1Delta mutant