The occurrence of twin-arginine motifs (-R-R-) in the amino acid sequences of animal pro-proteins frequently defines the cleavage site(s) for their structural/functional maturation. No information is available on the presence and possible biological meaning of these motifs in the seed storage proteins. In this work, a novel endopeptidase activity with cleavage specificity to twin-arginine pairs has been detected in mature dry Lupinus albus seeds. The endopeptidase was tested with a number of endogenous and exogenous protein substrates, which were selected according to the presence of one or more twin-arginine residue motifs in their amino acid sequences. The observed hydrolysis patterns were limited and highly specific. Partial proteolysis led to stable polypeptide fragments that were characterized by 1- and 2-D electrophoresis. Selected polypeptides were submitted to N-terminal amino acid sequencing and mass spectrometry analyses. These approaches, supported by bioinformatic analysis of the available sequences, allowed the conclusion that the polypeptide cleavage events had occurred at the peptide bonds comprised between twin-arginine residue pairs with all tested protein substrates. The endopeptidase activity was inhibited by 4-(2-AminoEthyl)Benzene-Sulphonyl Fluoride hydrochloride (AEBSF), leupeptin, and serine proteinase protein inhibitors, while it was not affected by pepstatin, trans-Epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido(4-guanidino)butane (E64), and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), thus qualifying the Arg-Arg cleaving enzyme as a serine endopeptidase. The structural features of storage proteins from lupin and other legume seeds strongly support the hypothesis that the occurrence of an endopeptidase activity cleaving -R-R- bonds may be functional to facilitate their degradation at germination and possibly generate polypeptide fragments with specific biological activity.

Gene: !synthesizes! Pro-protein 
Pro-protein: !contains! Twin-arginine motifs 
Endopeptidase activity: !cleaves! Twin-arginine pairs 
Polypeptide fragments: !characterized by! 1- and 2-D electrophoresis 
Polypeptide fragments: !submitted to! N-terminal amino acid sequencing and mass spectrometry analyses 
Endopeptidase activity: !inhibited by! AEBSF, leupeptin, and serine proteinase inhibitors 
Endopeptidase activity: !not affected by! pepstatin, E64, and EDTA