Waterlogging is associated with poor soil drainage. As a consequence oxygen levels decrease in the root environment inducing root asphyxia and affecting plant growth. Some plants can survive under these conditions triggering complex anatomical and biochemical adaptations, mostly in the roots. Long- and short-term responses to waterlogging stress were compared in two trials using a set of two myrobalans (Prunus cerasifera Erhr), 'P.2175' and 'P.2980', as tolerant rootstocks and two almond × peach [Prunus amygdalus Batsch ×Prunus persica (L.) Batsch] interspecific hybrids, 'Garnem' and 'Felinem', as sensitive ones in two consecutive years. Stomatal conductance and chlorophyll content were measured in the long-term trials to assess survival performance, while the enzyme activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD, EC 1.15.1.1), guaiacol peroxidase (POD, EC 1.11.1.7), and catalase (CAT, EC 1.11.1.6) were measured in the short-term trials to study early antioxidant response. The incidence of the stress in the root environment was different as a result of the different plant development at the moment of the treatment, as a consequence of different environmental conditions both before and during the treatment between the 2 years. The activity of the different enzymes was higher in the sensitive genotype 'Felinem' than in the tolerant 'P.2175'. This result shows an activation of the antioxidant system and has been observed to depend of the different nature of the roots between the 2 years. As the antioxidant enzymes seem to work more efficiently when roots are more aerated, we cannot conclude that they are responsible for the higher tolerance observed in the myrobalan plums.

Waterlogging: !affects! Plant Growth 
Stomatal Conductance: !measures! Survival Performance 
Superoxide Dismutase: !enhances! Antioxidant Response 
Prunus cerasifera Erhr: !tolerant to! Waterlogging Stress 
Prunus amygdalus Batsch × Prunus persica (L.): !sensitive to! Waterlogging Stress 
Felinem: !activates! Antioxidant System 
Roots: !influence! Tolerance