In this report a full-length cDNA, SPCAM, was isolated from ethephon-treated mature leaves of sweet potato. SPCAM contained 450 nucleotides (149 amino acids) in its open reading frame, and exhibited high amino acid sequence identities (ca. 76-100%) with several plant calmodulins, including Arabidopsis, carrot, ghost needle weed, pea, potato, soybean, sweet chestnut, and tobacco. Sweet potato SPCAM also contained four putative conserved calmodulin EF-hand motifs, which responded for Ca(2+) binding and cellular signalling. Phylogenetic tree analysis showed that sweet potato SPCAM exhibited closely-related association with Arabidopsis AtCAM7, which functioned as a transcriptional regulator. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis showed that SPCAM gene expression was not significantly increased from L1 immature leaf to L3 mature leaf, however, was remarkably enhanced in L4 early senescent leaf, and then decreased in L5 late senescent leaf. In dark- and ethephon-treated mature leaves, SPCAM expression was significantly increased from 6 to 48h, then decreased gradually until 72h after treatment. Ethephon-mediated leaf senescence, H(2)O(2) elevation, and senescence-associated gene expression, however, was remarkably inhibited by chlorpromazine, a calmodulin inhibitor. Exogenous application of purified calmodulin SPCAM fusion protein reversed the chlorpromazine repression of ethephon-mediated leaf senescence, H(2)O(2) elevation and senescence-associated gene expression. Based on these data we conclude that sweet potato SPCAM is an ethephon-inducible calmodulin and its expression is enhanced in natural and induced senescent leaves. Calmodulin SPCAM may play a physiological role in ethephon-mediated leaf senescence, H(2)O(2) elevation and senescence-associated gene expression in sweet potato leaves.

SPCAM: !enhances! Ethephon-mediated leaf senescence
SPCAM: !elevates! H2O2 levels
SPCAM: !regulates! Senescence-associated gene expression
SPCAM: !binds to! Ca2+
SPCAM: !inhibited by! Chlorpromazine
SPCAM: !reversed by! Calmodulin SPCAM fusion protein