The ethylene response is negatively regulated by a family of five ethylene receptor genes in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). The five members of the ethylene receptor family can physically interact and form complexes, which implies that cooperativity for signaling may exist among the receptors. The ethylene receptor gene mutations etr1-1((C65Y))(for ethylene response1-1), ers1-1((I62P)) (for ethylene response sensor1-1), and ers1(C65Y) are dominant, and each confers ethylene insensitivity. In this study, the repression of the ethylene response by these dominant mutant receptor genes was examined in receptor-defective mutants to investigate the functional significance of receptor cooperativity in ethylene signaling. We showed that etr1-1((C65Y)), but not ers1-1((I62P)), substantially repressed various ethylene responses independent of other receptor genes. In contrast, wild-type receptor genes differentially supported the repression of ethylene responses by ers1-1((I62P)); ETR1 and ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE4 (EIN4) supported ers1-1((I62P)) functions to a greater extent than did ERS2, ETR2, and ERS1. The lack of both ETR1 and EIN4 almost abolished the repression of ethylene responses by ers1(C65Y), which implied that ETR1 and EIN4 have synergistic effects on ers1(C65Y) functions. Our data indicated that a dominant ethylene-insensitive receptor differentially repressed ethylene responses when coupled with a wild-type ethylene receptor, which supported the hypothesis that the formation of a variety of receptor complexes may facilitate differential receptor signal output, by which ethylene responses can be repressed to different extents. We hypothesize that plants can respond to a broad ethylene concentration range and exhibit tissue-specific ethylene responsiveness with differential cooperation of the multiple ethylene receptors.

ethylene receptor family: !interacts with! each other 
etr1-1((C65Y)): !represses! ethylene responses 
ers1-1((I62P)): !represses! ethylene responses 
ers1(C65Y): !represses! ethylene responses 
ETR1: !supports! ers1-1((I62P)) functions 
EIN4: !supports! ers1-1((I62P)) functions 
ETR1: !synergizes with! EIN4 
ers1(C65Y): !repressed by! lack of both ETR1 and EIN4