['22232549', 'Heterotrimeric G proteins, consisting of Galpha, Gbeta, and Ggamma subunits, play important  roles in plant development and cell signaling. In Arabidopsis, in addition to one  prototypical G protein alpha subunit, GPA1, there are three extra-large G proteins,  XLG1, XLG2, and XLG3, of largely unknown function. Each extra-large G (XLG)  protein has a C-terminal Galpha-like region and a  approximately 400 amino acid N-terminal  extension. Here we show that the three XLG proteins specifically bind and  hydrolyze GTP, despite the fact that these plant-specific proteins lack key  conserved amino acid residues important for GTP binding and hydrolysis of GTP in  mammalian Galpha proteins. Moreover, unlike other known Galpha proteins, these activities  require Ca(2+) instead of Mg(2+) as a cofactor. Yeast two-hybrid library  screening and in vitro protein pull-down assays revealed that XLG2 interacts with  the nuclear protein RTV1 (related to vernalization 1). Electrophoretic mobility  shift assays show that RTV1 binds to DNA in vitro in a non-sequence-specific  manner and that GTP-bound XLG2 promotes the DNA binding activity of RTV1.  Overexpression of RTV1 results in early flowering. Combined overexpression of  XLG2 and RTV1 enhances this early flowering phenotype and elevates expression of  the floral pathway integrator genes, FT and SOC1, but does not repress expression  of the floral repressor, FLC. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that XLG2  increases RTV1 binding to FT and SOC1 promoters. Thus, a Ca(2+)-dependent G  protein, XLG2, promotes RTV1 DNA binding activity for a subset of floral  integrator genes and contributes to floral transition.', '2012 Mar 9', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M111.317412', 'Assmann']

Gprotein: !consists of! Galpha, Gbeta, Ggamma
XLG2: !interacts with! RTV1
XLG2: !promotes! DNA binding activity of RTV1
RTV1: !binds to! DNA
XLG2: !enhances! early flowering phenotype
XLG2: !elevates! FT and SOC1 expression
XLG2: !increases! RTV1 binding to FT and SOC1 promoters