Trehalose 6-phosphate (T6P) is an important regulator of plant metabolism and development. T6P content increases when carbon availability is high, and in young growing tissue, T6P inhibits the activity of Snf1-related protein kinase (SnRK1). Here, strong accumulation of T6P was found in senescing leaves of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), in parallel with a rise in sugar contents. To determine the role of T6P in senescence, T6P content was altered by expressing the bacterial T6P synthase gene, otsA (to increase T6P), or the T6P phosphatase gene, otsB (to decrease T6P). In otsB-expressing plants, T6P accumulated less strongly during senescence than in wild-type plants, while otsA-expressing plants contained more T6P throughout. Mature otsB-expressing plants showed a similar phenotype as described for plants overexpressing the SnRK1 gene, KIN10, including reduced anthocyanin accumulation and delayed senescence. This was confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of senescence-associated genes and genes involved in anthocyanin synthesis. To analyze if the senescence phenotype was due to decreased sugar sensitivity, the response to sugars was determined. In combination with low nitrogen supply, metabolizable sugars (glucose, fructose, or sucrose) induced senescence in wild-type and otsA-expressing plants but to a smaller extent in otsB-expressing plants. The sugar analog 3-O-methyl glucose, on the other hand, did not induce senescence in any of the lines. Transfer of plants to and from glucose-containing medium suggested that glucose determines senescence during late development but that the effects of T6P on senescence are established by the sugar response of young plants.

T6P: !regulates! Plant Metabolism
T6P: !inhibits! SnRK1
T6P: !increases! Sugar Content
otsA: !synthesizes! T6P
otsB: !decreases! T6P
KIN10: !overexpresses! otsB
Senescence-Associated Genes: !expresses! otsB
Anthocyanin Synthesis Genes: !expresses! otsB
Glucose: !induces! Senescence
3-O-Methyl Glucose: !does not induce! Senescence