['22242006', 'RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) is an epigenetic control mechanism driven by  small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that influence gene function. In plants, little  is known of the involvement of the RdDM pathway in regulating traits related to  immune responses. In a genetic screen designed to reveal factors regulating  immunity in Arabidopsis thaliana, we identified NRPD2 as the OVEREXPRESSOR OF  CATIONIC PEROXIDASE 1 (OCP1). NRPD2 encodes the second largest subunit of the  plant-specific RNA Polymerases IV and V (Pol IV and Pol V), which are crucial for  the RdDM pathway. The ocp1 and nrpd2 mutants showed increases in disease  susceptibility when confronted with the necrotrophic fungal pathogens Botrytis  cinerea and Plectosphaerella cucumerina. Studies were extended to other mutants  affected in different steps of the RdDM pathway, such as nrpd1, nrpe1, ago4,  drd1, rdr2, and drm1drm2 mutants. Our results indicate that all the mutants  studied, with the exception of nrpd1, phenocopy the nrpd2 mutants; and they  suggest that, while Pol V complex is required for plant immunity, Pol IV appears  dispensable. Moreover, Pol V defective mutants, but not Pol IV mutants, show  enhanced disease resistance towards the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae  DC3000. Interestingly, salicylic acid (SA)-mediated defenses effective against  PsDC3000 are enhanced in Pol V defective mutants, whereas jasmonic acid  (JA)-mediated defenses that protect against fungi are reduced. Chromatin  immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that, through differential histone  modifications, SA-related defense genes are poised for enhanced activation in Pol  V defective mutants and provide clues for understanding the regulation of gene  priming during defense. Our results highlight the importance of epigenetic  control as an additional layer of complexity in the regulation of plant immunity  and point towards multiple components of the RdDM pathway being involved in plant  immunity based on genetic evidence, but whether this is a direct or indirect  effect on disease-related genes is unclear.', '2011 Dec', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1002434', 'Vera']

NRPD2: !encodes! subunit of Pol IV and V 
Pol IV and V: !drive! RdDM pathway 
nrpd2 mutants: !increase! disease susceptibility 
nrpd1, nrpe1, ago4, drd1, rdr2, drm1drm2 mutants: !phenocopy! nrpd2 mutants 
Pol V: !required for! plant immunity 
Pol IV: !dispensable for! plant immunity 
Pol V defective mutants: !enhance! disease resistance 
SA-mediated defenses: !enhanced in! Pol V defective mutants 
JA-mediated defenses: !reduced in! Pol V defective mutants 
SA-related defense genes: !poised for! enhanced activation in Pol V defective mutants