Potato can suffer from several abiotic stresses such as cold temperature, high soil salinity, lack of water or heavy metal exposure, to name a few. They are known to affect plant growth as well as productivity, with differential regulations at several levels. Potato response to cold and salt exposure was investigated at both transcriptomic and proteomic levels in a growth chamber experiment. Cold exposure in potato resulted in a higher number of significantly differentially regulated genes compared to salt exposure, whereas there were nearly three times more differentially regulated proteins after salt exposure when compared to cold exposure. The allocation of up and down-regulated genes at the functional category level also differed between salt and cold exposure although common trends, previously described in various abiotic stresses, were observed. In both stresses, the majority of photosynthesis-related genes were down-regulated whereas cell rescue and transcription factor-related genes were mostly up-regulated. In the other functional categories no common trend was observed; salt exposure results displayed a strong down-regulation of genes implicated in primary metabolism, detoxication apparatus and signal transduction, whereas upon cold exposure, up and down-regulated genes were similar in number. At the proteomic level, the abundance of the majority of identified proteins was increased except for the photosynthesis-related proteins, which were mostly less abundant after both salt and cold exposure. Common responses between salt and cold stress and specific responses inherent to these abiotic stresses are described.

Cold exposure: !affects! Plant growth 
Cold exposure: !regulates! Genes 
Salt exposure: !affects! Plant productivity 
Salt exposure: !regulates! Proteins 
Photosynthesis-related genes: !down-regulated by! Both stresses 
Cell rescue and transcription factor-related genes: !up-regulated by! Both stresses 
Primary metabolism, detoxication apparatus and signal transduction-related genes: !down-regulated by! Salt exposure 
Photosynthesis-related proteins: !less abundant after! Both stresses