['22278767', 'During skotomorphogenesis in angiosperms, NADPH:protochlorophyllide  oxidoreductase (POR) forms an aggregate of photolabile  NADPH-POR-protochlorophyllide (Pchlide) ternary complexes localized to the  prolamellar bodies within etioplasts. During photomorphogenesis, POR catalyzes  the light-dependent reduction of Pchlide a to chlorophyllide (Chlide) a, which is  subsequently converted to chlorophyll (Chl). In Arabidopsis there are three  structurally related POR genes, denoted PORA, PORB and PORC. The PORA and PORB  proteins accumulate during skotomorphogenesis. During illumination, PORA is only  transiently expressed, whereas PORB and PORC persist and are responsible for bulk  Chl synthesis throughout plant development. Here we have tested whether PORA is  important for skotomorphogenesis by assisting in etioplast development, and  normal photomorphogenic development. Using reverse genetic approaches, we have  identified the porA-1 null mutant, which contains an insertion of the maize  Dissociation transposable element in the PORA gene. Additionally, we have  characterized PORA RNAi lines. The porA-1 and PORA RNAi lines display severe  photoautotrophic growth defects, which can be partially rescued on  sucrose-supplemented growth media. Elimination of PORA during skotomorphogenesis  results in reductions in the volume and frequency of prolamellar bodies, and in  photoactive Pchlide conversion. The porA-1 mutant characterization thus  establishes a quantitative requirement for PORA in etioplast development by  demonstrating significant membrane ultrastructural and biochemical defects, in  addition to suggesting PORA-specific functions in photomorphogenesis and plant  development.', '2012 Mar', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-012-9873-6', 'Armstrong']

NADPH:protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (POR): !forms! aggregate of photolabile NADPH-POR-protochlorophyllide ternary complexes 
POR: !catalyzes! light-dependent reduction of Pchlide a to Chlide a 
Arabidopsis: !contains! three structurally related POR genes 
porA-1 null mutant: !contains! insertion of maize Dissociation transposable element in the PORA gene 
porA-1 and PORA RNAi lines: !display! severe photoautotrophic growth defects 
porA-1 mutant: !establishes! quantitative requirement for PORA in etioplast development 
porA-1 mutant: !demonstrates! membrane ultrastructural and biochemical defects