['22302148', "Plant specific SGS3-like proteins are composed of various combinations of an  RNA-binding XS domain, a zinc-finger zf-XS domain, a coil-coil domain and a  domain of unknown function called XH. In addition to being involved in de novo 2  (IDN2) and SGS3, the Arabidopsis genome encodes 12 uncharacterized SGS3-like  proteins. Here, we show that a group of SGS3-like proteins act redundantly in  RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway in Arabidopsis. Transcriptome  co-expression analyses reveal significantly correlated expression of two  SGS3-like proteins, factor of DNA methylation 1 (FDM1) and FDM2 with known genes  required for RdDM. The fdm1 and fdm2 double mutations but not the fdm1 or fdm2  single mutations significantly impair DNA methylation at RdDM loci, release  transcriptional gene silencing and dramatically reduce the abundance of siRNAs  originated from high copy number repeats or transposons. Like IDN2 and SGS3, FDM1  binds dsRNAs with 5' overhangs. Double mutant analyses also reveal that IDN2 and  three uncharacterized SGS3-like proteins FDM3, FDM4 and FDM5 have overlapping  function with FDM1 in RdDM. Five FDM proteins and IDN2 define a group of  SGS3-like proteins that possess all four-signature motifs in Arabidopsis. Thus,  our results demonstrate that this group of SGS3-like proteins is an important  component of RdDM. This study further enhances our understanding of the SGS3 gene  family and the RdDM pathway.", '2012 May', 'Nucleic Acids Res', '10.1093/nar/gks034', 'Yu']

SGS3-like proteins: !compose of! various combinations of domains 
SGS3-like proteins: !act redundantly in! RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway 
FDM1 and FDM2: !significantly correlated expression with! known genes required for RdDM 
fdm1 and fdm2 double mutations: !impaired DNA methylation at! RdDM loci 
IDN2 and three uncharacterized SGS3-like proteins FDM3, FDM4 and FDM5: !overlapping function with! FDM1 in RdDM 
Five FDM proteins and IDN2: !define a group of! SGS3-like proteins