Gene-to-gene coexpression analysis provides fundamental information and is a promising approach for predicting unknown gene functions in plants. We investigated various associations in the gene expression of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) to predict unknown gene functions in an unbiased manner. We obtained more than 300 microarrays from publicly available databases and our own hybridizations, and here, we present tomato coexpression networks and coexpression modules. The topological characteristics of the networks were highly heterogenous. We extracted 465 total coexpression modules from the data set by graph clustering, which allows users to divide a graph effectively into a set of clusters. Of these, 88% were assigned systematically by Gene Ontology terms. Our approaches revealed functional modules in the tomato transcriptome data; the predominant functions of coexpression modules were biologically relevant. We also investigated differential coexpression among data sets consisting of leaf, fruit, and root samples to gain further insights into the tomato transcriptome. We now demonstrate that (1) duplicated genes, as well as metabolic genes, exhibit a small but significant number of differential coexpressions, and (2) a reversal of gene coexpression occurred in two metabolic pathways involved in lycopene and flavonoid biosynthesis. Independent experimental verification of the findings for six selected genes was done using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Our findings suggest that differential coexpression may assist in the investigation of key regulatory steps in metabolic pathways. The approaches and results reported here will be useful to prioritize candidate genes for further functional genomics studies of tomato metabolism.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !coexpresses with! Other genes
Gene: !localizes to! Tomato
Gene: !synthesizes! Lycopene and flavonoid
Gene: !differentially coexpresses with! Duplicated genes
Gene: !reverses coexpression in! Metabolic pathways