Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2 (CRY2) is a blue-light receptor mediating blue-light inhibition of hypocotyl elongation and photoperiodic promotion of floral initiation. CRY2 is a constitutive nuclear protein that undergoes blue-light-dependent phosphorylation, ubiquitination, photobody formation, and degradation in the nucleus, but the relationship between these blue-light-dependent events remains unclear. It has been proposed that CRY2 phosphorylation triggers a conformational change responsible for the subsequent ubiquitination and photobody formation, leading to CRY2 function and/or degradation. We tested this hypothesis by a structure-function study, using mutant CRY2-GFP fusion proteins expressed in transgenic Arabidopsis. We show that changes of lysine residues of the NLS (Nuclear Localization Signal) sequence of CRY2 to arginine residues partially impair the nuclear importation of the CRY2K541R and CRY2K554/5R mutant proteins, resulting in reduced phosphorylation, physiological activities, and degradation in response to blue light. In contrast to the wild-type CRY2 protein that forms photobodies exclusively in the nucleus, the CRY2K541R and CRY2K554/5R mutant proteins form protein bodies in both the nucleus and cytosol in response to blue light. These results suggest that photoexcited CRY2 molecules can aggregate to form photobody-like structure without the nucleus-dependent protein modifications or the association with the nuclear CRY2-interacting proteins. Taken together, the observation that CRY2 forms photobodies markedly faster than CRY2 phosphorylation in response to blue light, we hypothesize that the photoexcited cryptochromes form oligomers, preceding other biochemical changes of CRY2, to facilitate photobody formation, signal amplification, and propagation, as well as desensitization by degradation.

CRY2: !mediates! blue-light inhibition of hypocotyl elongation 
CRY2: !undergoes! blue-light-dependent phosphorylation 
CRY2: !undergoes! ubiquitination 
CRY2: !forms! photobodies 
CRY2: !degrades! in nucleus 
CRY2K541R/CRY2K554/5R: !impede! nuclear importation 
CRY2K541R/CRY2K554/5R: !reduce! phosphorylation 
CRY2K541R/CRY2K554/5R: !form! protein bodies in nucleus and cytosol 
photoexcited CRY2: !forms! oligomers 
photoexcited CRY2: !facilitates! photobody formation 
photoexcited CRY2: !amplifies! signal 
photoexcited CRY2: !propagates! signal 
photoexcited CRY2: !desensitizes! by degradation