['22312006', 'Sugar is essential for all cellular activities, but at high levels it inhibits  growth and development. How plants balance the tradeoffs between the need for  sugars and their growth inhibitory effects is poorly understood. SHORT-ROOT (SHR)  and SCARECROW (SCR) are key regulators of stem cell renewal and radial patterning  in the root of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Recently, we identified direct  targets of SHR at the genome scale. Intriguingly, among the top-ranked list, we  found a number of genes that are involved in stress responses. By chromatin  immunoprecipitation-polymerase chain reaction (PCR), we showed that SHR and SCR  regulate a similar but not identical set of stress response genes. Consistent  with this, scr and shr were found to be hypersensitive to abscisic acid (ABA). We  further showed that both mutants were hypersensitive to high levels of glucose  (Glc) but responded normally to high salinity and osmoticum. The endogenous  levels of sucrose, Glc, and fructose were also elevated in shr and scr.  Intriguingly, although shr had sugar content and developmental defects similar to  those of scr, it was much less sensitive to Glc. Chromatin  immunoprecipitation-PCR and reverse transcription-PCR assays as well as  transgenic studies with an ABA-INSENSITIVE2 (ABI4)-beta-glucuronidase reporter  construct revealed that in root, SCR, but not SHR, repressed ABI4 and ABI5  directly and specifically in the apical meristem. When combined with abi4, scr  became much more tolerant of high Glc. Finally, transgenic plants expressing ABI4  under the control of the SCR promoter manifested a short-root phenotype. These  results together suggest that SCR has a SHR-independent role in mitigating the  sugar response and that this role of SCR is important for root growth.', '2012 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.191502', 'Kong']

SHR: !regulates! stem cell renewal 
SCR: !regulates! stem cell renewal 
SHR: !regulates! stress response genes 
SCR: !regulates! stress response genes 
SHR: !hypersensitive to! ABA 
SCR: !hypersensitive to! ABA 
SHR: !hypersensitive to! Glc 
SCR: !hypersensitive to! Glc 
SCR: !represses! ABI4 
SCR: !represses! ABI5 
SCR: !mitigates! sugar response 
SCR: !important for! root growth