['22315425', 'The first described feedback loop of the Arabidopsis circadian clock is based on  reciprocal regulation between Timing of CAB Expression 1 (TOC1) and Circadian  Clock-associated 1 (CCA1)/late elongated hypocotyl (LHY). CCA1 and LHY are Myb  transcription factors that bind directly to the TOC1 promoter to negatively  regulate its expression. Conversely, the activity of TOC1 has remained less well  characterized. Genetic data support that TOC1 is necessary for the reactivation  of CCA1/LHY, but there is little description of its biochemical function. Here we  show that TOC1 occupies specific genomic regions in the CCA1 and LHY promoters.  Purified TOC1 binds directly to DNA through its CCT domain, which is similar to  known DNA-binding domains. Chemical induction and transient overexpression of  TOC1 in Arabidopsis seedlings cause repression of CCA1/LHY expression,  demonstrating that TOC1 can repress direct targets, and mutation or deletion of  the CCT domain prevents this repression showing that DNA-binding is necessary for  TOC1 action. Furthermore, we use the Gal4/UAS system in Arabidopsis to show that  TOC1 acts as a general transcriptional repressor, and that repression activity is  in the pseudoreceiver domain of the protein. To identify the genes regulated by  TOC1 on a genomic scale, we couple TOC1 chemical induction with microarray  analysis and identify previously unexplored potential TOC1 targets and output  pathways. Taken together, these results define a biochemical action for the core  clock protein TOC1 and refine our perspective on how plant clocks function.', '2012 Feb 21', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1200355109', 'Kay']

CCA1/LHY: !binds to! TOC1 promoter 
TOC1: !necessary for! reactivation of CCA1/LHY 
TOC1: !occupies! specific genomic regions in CCA1/LHY promoters 
TOC1: !binds directly to! DNA 
TOC1: !represses! CCA1/LHY expression 
TOC1: !acts as! general transcriptional repressor 
TOC1: !identifies! potential targets and output pathways