['22328157', 'The chloroplast ATP synthase catalyzes the light-driven synthesis of ATP and acts  as a key feedback regulatory component of photosynthesis. Arabidopsis possesses  two homologues of the regulatory gamma subunit of the ATP synthase, encoded by the  ATPC1 and ATPC2 genes. Using a series of mutants, we show that both these  subunits can support photosynthetic ATP synthesis in vivo with similar specific  activities, but that in wild-type plants, only gamma(1) is involved in ATP synthesis  in photosynthesis. The gamma(1)-containing ATP synthase shows classical light-induced  redox regulation, whereas the mutant expressing only gamma(2)-ATP synthase (gamma  exchange-revised ATP synthase, gamera) shows equally high ATP synthase activity  in the light and dark. In situ redox titrations demonstrate that the regulatory  thiol groups on gamma(2)-ATP synthase remain reduced under physiological conditions  but can be oxidized by the strong oxidant diamide, implying that the redox  potential for the thiol/disulphide transition in gamma(2) is substantially higher  than that for gamma(1). This regulatory difference may be attributed to alterations  in the residues near the redox-active thiols. We propose that gamma(2)-ATP synthase  functions to catalyze ATP hydrolysis-driven proton translocation in  nonphotosynthetic plastids, maintaining a sufficient transthylakoid proton  gradient to drive protein translocation or other processes. Consistent with this  interpretation, ATPC2 is predominantly expressed in the root, whereas modifying  its expression results in alteration of root hair development. Phylogenetic  analysis suggests that gamma(2) originated from ancient gene duplication, resulting  in divergent evolution of functionally distinct ATP synthase complexes in dicots  and mosses.', '2012 Feb 28', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1115728109', 'Kramer']

ATPC1: !synthesizes! ATP
ATPC2: !synthesizes! ATP
gamma(1): !localizes to! photosynthesis
gamma(2): !localizes to! nonphotosynthetic plastids
ATPC2: !enhances! root hair development
gamma(1): !represses! ATP synthesis in dark
gamma(2): !represses! ATP synthesis in dark