['22332816', 'Acetoacetyl CoA thiolase (AACT, EC 2.3.1.9) catalyzes the condensation of two  acetyl CoA molecules to form acetoacetyl CoA. Two AACT-encoding genes, At5g47720  (AACT1) and At5g48230 (AACT2), were functionally identified in the Arabidopsis  genome by direct enzymological assays and functional expression in yeast.  Promoter::GUS fusion experiments indicated that AACT1 is primarily expressed in  the vascular system and AACT2 is highly expressed in root tips, young leaves, top  stems and anthers. Characterization of T-DNA insertion mutant alleles at each  AACT locus established that AACT2 function is required for embryogenesis and for  normal male gamete transmission. In contrast, plants lacking AACT1 function are  completely viable and show no apparent growth phenotypes, indicating that AACT1  is functionally redundant with respect to AACT2 function. RNAi lines that express  reduced levels of AACT2 show pleiotropic phenotypes, including reduced apical  dominance, elongated life span and flowering duration, sterility, dwarfing,  reduced seed yield and shorter root length. Microscopic analysis reveals that the  reduced stature is caused by a reduction in cell size and fewer cells, and male  sterility is caused by loss of the pollen coat and premature degeneration of the  tapetal cells. Biochemical analyses established that the roots of AACT2 RNAi  plants show quantitative and qualitative alterations in phytosterol profiles.  These phenotypes and biochemical alterations are reversed when AACT2 RNAi plants  are grown in the presence of mevalonate, which is consistent with the role of  AACT2 in generating the bulk of the acetoacetyl CoA precursor required for the  cytosol-localized, mevalonate-derived isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway.', '2012 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.04942.x', 'Nikolau']

AACT1: !localizes to! vascular system 
AACT2: !localizes to! root tips, young leaves, top stems and anthers 
AACT2: !required for! embryogenesis and male gamete transmission 
AACT1: !functionally redundant with! AACT2 
AACT2: !reduction of! apical dominance, elongated life span and flowering duration, sterility, dwarfing, reduced seed yield and shorter root length 
AACT2: !alterations in! phytosterol profiles 
AACT2: !reversed by! mevalonate