['22337887', 'Phosphoserine phosphatase (PSP) catalyzes the dephosphorylation of phosphoserine  to serine and inorganic phosphate. PSPs, which have been found in all three  domains of life, belong to the haloacid dehalogenase-like hydrolase superfamily.  However, certain organisms, particularly bacteria, lack a classical PSP gene,  although they appear to possess a functional phosphoserine synthetic pathway. The  apparent lack of a PSP ortholog in Hydrogenobacter thermophilus, an obligately  chemolithoautotrophic and thermophilic bacterium, represented a missing link in  serine anabolism because our previous study suggested that serine should be  synthesized from phosphoserine. Here, we detected PSP activity in cell-free  extracts of H. thermophilus and purified two proteins with PSP activity.  Surprisingly, these proteins belonged to the histidine phosphatase superfamily  and had been annotated as cofactor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutase (dPGM).  However, because they possessed neither mutase activity nor the residues  important for the activity, we defined these proteins as novel-type PSPs.  Considering the strict substrate specificity toward l-phosphoserine, kinetic  parameters, and PSP activity levels in cell-free extracts, these proteins were  strongly suggested to function as PSPs in vivo. We also detected PSP activity  from "dPGM-like" proteins of Thermus thermophilus and Arabidopsis thaliana,  suggesting that PSP activity catalyzed by dPGM-like proteins may be distributed  among a broad range of organisms. In fact, a number of bacterial genera,  including Firmicutes and Cyanobacteria, were proposed to be strong candidates for  possessing this novel type of PSP. These findings will help to identify the  missing link in serine anabolism.', '2012 Apr 6', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M111.330621', 'Igarashi']

PSP: !catalyzes! dephosphorylation 
dPGM-like proteins: !possess! PSP activity 
H. thermophilus: !contains! PSP activity 
T. thermophilus: !contains! PSP activity 
A. thaliana: !contains! PSP activity 
Firmicutes: !possess! novel type of PSP 
Cyanobacteria: !possess! novel type of PSP