['22345435', 'Thermospermine, a structural isomer of spermine, is produced through the action  of ACAULIS5 (ACL5) and suppresses xylem differentiation in Arabidopsis thaliana.  To elucidate the molecular basis of the function of thermospermine, we screened  chemical libraries for compounds that can modulate xylem differentiation in the  acl5 mutant, which is deficient in thermospermine and shows a severe dwarf  phenotype associated with excessive proliferation of xylem vessels. We found that  the isooctyl ester of a synthetic auxin, 2,4-D, remarkably enhanced xylem vessel  differentiation in acl5 seedlings. 2,4-D, 2,4-D analogs and IAA analogs,  including 4-chloro IAA (4-Cl-IAA) and IAA ethyl ester, also enhanced xylem vessel  formation, while IAA alone had little or no obvious effect on xylem  differentiation. These effects of auxin analogs were observed only in the acl5  mutant but not in the wild type, and were suppressed by the anti-auxin,  p-chlorophenoxyisobutyric acid (PCIB) and alpha-(phenyl ethyl-2-one)-IAA (PEO-IAA),  and also by thermospermine. Furthermore, the suppressor of acaulis51-d (sac51-d)  mutation, which causes SAC51 overexpression in the absence of thermospermine and  suppresses the dwarf phenotype of acl5, also suppressed the effect of auxin  analogs in acl5. These results suggest that the auxin signaling that promotes  xylem differentiation is normally limited by SAC51-mediated thermospermine  signaling but can be continually stimulated by exogenous auxin analogs in the  absence of thermospermine. The opposite action between thermospermine and auxin  may fine-tune the timing and spatial pattern of xylem differentiation.', '2012 Apr', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcs017', 'Motose']

ACL5: !produces! Thermospermine 
Thermospermine: !suppresses! Xylem differentiation 
2,4-D: !enhances! Xylem vessel differentiation 
IAA: !has little effect on! Xylem differentiation 
PCIB/PEO-IAA: !suppress! Effect of auxin analogs 
SAC51: !mediates! Thermospermine signaling 
SAC51: !overexpression suppresses! Dwarf phenotype of acl5