Protein interactions are fundamental to the molecular processes occurring within an organism and can be utilized in network biology to help organize, simplify, and understand biological complexity. Currently, there are more than 10 publicly available Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) protein interaction databases. However, there are limitations with these databases, including different types of interaction evidence, a lack of defined standards for protein identifiers, differing levels of information, and, critically, a lack of integration between them. In this paper, we present an interactive bioinformatics Web tool, ANAP (Arabidopsis Network Analysis Pipeline), which serves to effectively integrate the different data sets and maximize access to available data. ANAP has been developed for Arabidopsis protein interaction integration and network-based study to facilitate functional protein network analysis. ANAP integrates 11 Arabidopsis protein interaction databases, comprising 201,699 unique protein interaction pairs, 15,208 identifiers (including 11,931 The Arabidopsis Information Resource Arabidopsis Genome Initiative codes), 89 interaction detection methods, 73 species that interact with Arabidopsis, and 6,161 references. ANAP can be used as a knowledge base for constructing protein interaction networks based on user input and supports both direct and indirect interaction analysis. It has an intuitive graphical interface allowing easy network visualization and provides extensive detailed evidence for each interaction. In addition, ANAP displays the gene and protein annotation in the generated interactive network with links to The Arabidopsis Information Resource, the AtGenExpress Visualization Tool, the Arabidopsis 1,001 Genomes GBrowse, the Protein Knowledgebase, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, and the Ensembl Genome Browser to significantly aid functional network analysis. The tool is available open access at http://gmdd.shgmo.org/Computational-Biology/ANAP.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Protein: !interacts with! Arabidopsis 
ANAP: !integrates! Databases 
ANAP: !visualizes! Networks 
ANAP: !links to! Resources 
Gene: !annotates! Network