['22345493', 'Aluminum (Al) toxicity is a global issue that severely limits root growth in  acidic soils. Isolation of suppressors of the Arabidopsis thaliana  Al-hypersensitive mutant, als3-1, resulted in identification of a cell cycle  checkpoint factor, ALUMINUM TOLERANT2 (ALT2), which monitors and responds to DNA  damage. ALT2 is required for active stoppage of root growth after Al exposure,  because alt2 loss-of-function mutants fail to halt root growth after Al exposure,  do not accumulate CyclinB1;1 in the root tip, and fail to force differentiation  of the quiescent center. Thus, alt2-1 mutants are highly tolerant of Al levels  that are severely inhibitory to the wild type. The alt2-1 allele is a  loss-of-function mutation in a protein containing a putative DDB1-binding WD40  motif, previously identified as TANMEI, which is required for assessment of DNA  integrity, including monitoring of DNA crosslinks. alt2-1 and atr  loss-of-function mutants, the latter of which affects the cell cycle checkpoint  ATAXIA TELANGIECTASIA-MUTATED AND RAD3-RELATED, are severely sensitive to DNA  crosslinking agents and have increased Al tolerance. These results suggest that  Al likely acts as a DNA-damaging agent in vivo and that Al-dependent root growth  inhibition, in part, arises from detection of and response to this damage by  TANMEI/ALT2 and ATR, both of which actively halt cell cycle progression and force  differentiation of the quiescent center.', '2012 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.112.095596', 'Larsen']

ALT2: !monitors and responds to! DNA damage 
alt2-1: !fails to halt! root growth after Al exposure 
CyclinB1;1: !accumulated in! root tip 
alt2-1: !forces differentiation of! quiescent center 
TANMEI/ALT2: !required for assessment of! DNA integrity 
ATR: !affects! cell cycle checkpoint 
alt2-1 and atr: !severely sensitive to! DNA crosslinking agents 
Al: !acts as! DNA-damaging agent in vivo 
Al-dependent root growth inhibition: !arises from detection of and response to! this damage by TANMEI/ALT2 and ATR