Brassinosteroids are a newly reported class of plant growth phytohormones found in plants throughout the plant kingdom. Functioning at very low concentrations, they play an essential role in improving biomass yield and stress tolerance. There are no reports in the literature of the genetic variability of responsiveness of brassinosteroids in wheat; most studies on brassinosteroids have focused on the physiological effects of exogenous addition of brassinosteroids. Our aim was to study the genetic variation in the responsiveness of a doubled haploid durum wheat population to three brassinosteroid concentrations using the leaf unrolling test, which is a simple bioassay to test brassinosteroid activity. An F(1)-derived doubled haploid population of 77 individuals from the cross Strongfield/Blackbird was used to construct a genetic map of 427 molecular marker loci. The leaf unrolling test was performed on the parents and doubled haploid genotypes of the population using 0.2, 2 and 20 nM brassinosteroid concentrations. The results indicated significant differences in leaf unrolling between the two parents, doubled haploid genotypes, treatments and genotype-by-treatment combinations. Transgressive segregation beyond Strongfield of leaf unrolling was observed for all concentrations, with the strongest response at 20 nM. Putative quantitative trait loci were revealed in the intervals Xgwm2-Xbarc45 on chromosome 3A and Xwmc643a-Xwmc625a on chromosome 3B. Additional quantitative trait loci were associated with markers Xwmc48a, Xwmc511, Xwmc89a and Xgwmc692 on chromosome 4B, and Xwmc17 on chromosome 7A. This work should enhance the understanding of the relationship between stress tolerance and productivity, and responsiveness to brassinosteroids.

Brassinosteroids: !affect! Plant growth 
Strongfield/Blackbird: !derived from! Doubled haploid population 
Leaf unrolling test: !performed on! Parents and doubled haploid genotypes 
0.2, 2 and 20 nM brassinosteroid concentrations: !used for! Leaf unrolling test 
Transgressive segregation: !observed beyond! Strongfield 
Putative quantitative trait loci: !revealed in! Intervals Xgwm2-Xbarc45 and Xwmc643a-Xwmc625a 
Markers Xwmc48a, Xwmc511, Xwmc89a and Xgwmc692: !associated with! Quantitative trait loci 
Marker Xwmc17: !associated with! Quantitative trait loci