['22372525', 'It is not known how plants cleave the thioester bond of  1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoyl-CoA (DHNA-CoA), a necessary step to form the  naphthoquinone ring of phylloquinone (vitamin K(1) ). In fact, only recently has  the hydrolysis of DHNA-CoA been demonstrated to be enzyme driven in vivo, and the  cognate thioesterase characterized in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis. With a  few exceptions in certain prokaryotic (Sorangium and Opitutus) and eukaryotic  (Cyanidium, Cyanidioschyzon and Paulinella) organisms, orthologs of DHNA-CoA  thioesterase are missing outside of the cyanobacterial lineage. In this study,  genomic approaches and functional complementation experiments identified two  Arabidopsis genes encoding functional DHNA-CoA thioesterases. The deduced plant  proteins display low percentages of identity with cyanobacterial DHNA-CoA  thioesterases, and do not even share the same catalytic motif. GFP-fusion  experiments demonstrated that the Arabidopsis proteins are targeted to  peroxisomes, and subcellular fractionations of Arabidopsis leaves confirmed that  DHNA-CoA thioesterase activity occurs in this organelle. In vitro assays with  various aromatic and aliphatic acyl-CoA thioester substrates showed that the  recombinant Arabidopsis enzymes preferentially hydrolyze DHNA-CoA. Cognate T-DNA  knock-down lines display reduced DHNA-CoA thioesterase activity and phylloquinone  content, establishing in vivo evidence that the Arabidopsis enzymes are involved  in phylloquinone biosynthesis. Extraordinarily, structure-based phylogenies  coupled to comparative genomics demonstrate that plant DHNA-CoA thioesterases  originate from a horizontal gene transfer with a bacterial species of the  Lactobacillales order.', '2012 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.04972.x', 'Basset']

Gene: !encodes! DHNA-CoA thioesterase 
Gene: !localizes to! peroxisomes 
Gene: !synthesizes! phylloquinone 
Gene: !represses! knock-down lines 
Gene: !originates from! horizontal gene transfer