We observed the biphasic production of ethylene and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in susceptible tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum 'Wisconsin 38') plants after shoot inoculation with Phytophthora parasitica var nicotianae. The initial transient increase in ROS and ethylene at 1 and 3 h (phase I), respectively, was followed by a second massive increase at 48 and 72 h (phase II), respectively, after pathogen inoculation. This biphasic pattern of ROS production significantly differed from the hypersensitive response exhibited by cryptogein-treated wild-type tobacco plants. The biphasic increase in ROS production was mediated by both NADPH oxidase isoforms, respiratory burst oxidase homolog (Rboh) D and RbohF. Conversely, different 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid synthase members were involved in specific phases of ethylene production: NtACS4 in the first phase and NtACS1 in the second phase. Biphasic production of ROS was inhibited in transgenic antisense plant lines expressing 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid synthase/oxidase or ethylene-insensitive3 as well as in transgenic plants impaired in ROS production. All tested transgenic plants were more tolerant against P. parasitica var nicotianae infection as determined based on trypan blue staining and pathogen proliferation. Further, silencing of NtACS4 blocked the second massive increase in ROS production as well as pathogen progression. Pathogen tolerance was due to the inhibition of ROS and ethylene production, which further resulted in lower activation of ROS-detoxifying enzymes. Accordingly, the synergistic inhibition of the second phase of ROS and ethylene production had protective effects against pathogen-induced cell damage. We conclude that the levels of ethylene and ROS correlate with compatible P. parasitica proliferation in susceptible plants.

RbohD: !mediates! ROS production 
RbohF: !mediates! ROS production 
NtACS4: !synthesizes! ethylene 
NtACS1: !synthesizes! ethylene 
transgenic plants: !inhibit! ROS production 
transgenic plants: !inhibit! ethylene production 
ROS: !activates! ROS-detoxifying enzymes 
ethylene: !correlates with! P. parasitica proliferation