['22383539', 'We previously provided evidence that plastid signaling regulates the downstream  components of a light signaling network and that this signal integration  coordinates chloroplast biogenesis with both the light environment and  development by regulating gene expression. We tested these ideas by analyzing  light- and plastid-regulated transcriptomes in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana). We found that the enrichment of Gene Ontology terms in these  transcriptomes is consistent with the integration of light and plastid signaling  (1) down-regulating photosynthesis and inducing both repair and stress tolerance  in dysfunctional chloroplasts and (2) helping coordinate processes such as  growth, the circadian rhythm, and stress responses with the degree of chloroplast  function. We then tested whether factors that contribute to this signal  integration are also regulated by light and plastid signals by characterizing  T-DNA insertion alleles of genes that are regulated by light and plastid  signaling and that encode proteins that are annotated as contributing to  signaling, transcription, or no known function. We found that a high proportion  of these mutant alleles induce chloroplast biogenesis during deetiolation. We  quantified the expression of four photosynthesis-related genes in seven of these  enhanced deetiolation (end) mutants and found that photosynthesis-related gene  expression is attenuated. This attenuation is particularly striking for  Photosystem II subunit S expression. We conclude that the integration of light  and plastid signaling regulates a number of END genes that help optimize  chloroplast function and that at least some END genes affect  photosynthesis-related gene expression.', '2012 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.193599', 'Larkin']

Light: !integrates with! Plastid Signaling 
Plastid Signaling: !regulates! Gene Expression 
Gene Expression: !coordinates! Chloroplast Biogenesis 
Chloroplast Biogenesis: !helps optimize! Chloroplast Function 
T-DNA Insertion Alleles: !induce! Chloroplast Biogenesis 
Photosynthesis-Related Genes: !attenuated by! END Genes