['22404201', 'Microtubules in eukaryotic cells are nucleated from ring-shaped complexes that  contain gamma-tubulin and a family of homologous gamma-tubulin complex proteins (GCPs),  but the subunit composition of the complexes can vary among fungi, animals and  plants. Arabidopsis GCP3-interacting protein 1 (GIP1), a small protein with no  homology to the GCP family, interacts with GCP3 in vitro, and is a plant homolog  of vertebrate mitotic-spindle organizing protein associated with a ring of  gamma-tubulin 1 (MOZART1), a recently identified component of the gamma-tubulin complex  in human cell lines. In this study, we characterized two closely related  Arabidopsis GIP1s: GIP1a and GIP1b. Single mutants of gip1a and gip1b were  indistinguishable from wild-type plants, but their double mutant was embryonic  lethal, and showed impaired development of male gametophytes. Functional fusions  of GIP1a with green fluorescent protein (GFP) were used to purify  GIP1a-containing complexes from Arabidopsis plants, which contained all the  subunits (except NEDD1) previously identified in the Arabidopsis gamma-tubulin  complexes. GIP1a and GIP1b interacted specifically with Arabidopsis GCP3 in  yeast. GFP-GIP1a labeled mitotic microtubule arrays in a pattern largely  consistent with, but partly distinct from, the localization of the gamma-tubulin  complex containing GCP2 or GCP3 in planta. In interphase cortical arrays, the  labeled complexes were preferentially recruited to existing microtubules, from  which new microtubules were efficiently nucleated. However, in contrast to  complexes labeled with tagged GCP2 or GCP3, their recruitment to cortical areas  with no microtubules was rarely observed. These results indicate that  GIP1/MOZART1 is an integral component of a subset of the Arabidopsis gamma-tubulin  complexes.', '2012 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.04988.x', 'Hashimoto']

GIP1a: !interacts with! GCP3 
GIP1b: !interacts with! GCP3 
GIP1a/GIP1b: !form! gamma-tubulin complex 
GFP-GIP1a: !labels! mitotic microtubules 
GFP-GIP1a: !recruits to! existing microtubules