Phosphite (Phi), a phloem-mobile oxyanion of phosphorous acid (H(3)PO(3)), protects plants against diseases caused by oomycetes. Its mode of action is unclear, as evidence indicates both direct antibiotic effects on pathogens as well as inhibition through enhanced plant defense responses, and its target(s) in the plants is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that the biotrophic oomycete Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (Hpa) exhibits an unusual biphasic dose-dependent response to Phi after inoculation of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), with characteristics of indirect activity at low doses (10 mm or less) and direct inhibition at high doses (50 mm or greater). The effect of low doses of Phi on Hpa infection was nullified in salicylic acid (SA)-defective plants (sid2-1, NahG) and in a mutant impaired in SA signaling (npr1-1). Compromised jasmonate (jar1-1) and ethylene (ein2-1) signaling or abscisic acid (aba1-5) biosynthesis, reactive oxygen generation (atrbohD), or accumulation of the phytoalexins camalexin (pad3-1) and scopoletin (f6'h1-1) did not affect Phi activity. Low doses of Phi primed the accumulation of SA and Pathogenesis-Related protein1 transcripts and mobilized two essential components of basal resistance, Enhanced Disease Susceptibility1 and Phytoalexin Deficient4, following pathogen challenge. Compared with inoculated, Phi-untreated plants, the gene expression, accumulation, and phosphorylation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase MPK4, a negative regulator of SA-dependent defenses, were reduced in plants treated with low doses of Phi. We propose that Phi negatively regulates MPK4, thus priming SA-dependent defense responses following Hpa infection.

Phosphite: !protects! plants
Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis: !exhibits! biphasic dose-dependent response
salicylic acid: !nullifies! Phi effect
jasmonate: !compromises! Phi activity
ethylene: !compromises! Phi activity
abscisic acid: !compromises! Phi activity
reactive oxygen: !compromises! Phi activity
camalexin: !compromises! Phi activity
scopoletin: !compromises! Phi activity
Phi: !primes! SA and Pathogenesis-Related protein1 transcripts
MPK4: !negatively regulates! SA-dependent defenses