['22411811', 'In plants, plasmodesmata (PD) serve as channels for micromolecular and  macromolecular cell-to-cell transport. Based on structure, PD in immature tissues  are classified into two types, simple and branched (X- and Y-shaped) or twinned.  The maximum size of molecules capable of PD transport defines PD aperture, known  as the PD size exclusion limit. Here we report an Arabidopsis mutation, decreased  size exclusion limit1 (dse1), that exhibits reduced cell-to-cell transport of the  small (524 Da) fluorescent tracer 8-hydroxypyrene-1,3,6-trisulfonic acid at the  midtorpedo stage of embryogenesis. Correspondingly, the fraction of X- and  Y-shaped and twinned PD was reduced in dse1 embryos compared with WT embryos at  this stage, suggesting that the frequency of PD is related to transport  capability. dse1 is caused by a point mutation in At4g29860 (previously termed  TANMEI) at the last donor splice site of its transcript, resulting in alternative  splicing in both the first intron and the last intron. AtDSE1 is a conserved  eukaryotic 386-aa WD-repeat protein critical for Arabidopsis morphogenesis and  reproduction. Similar to its homologs in mouse, null mutants are embryo-lethal.  The weak loss-of-function mutant dse1 exhibits pleiotropic phenotypes, including  retarded vegetative growth, delayed flowering time, dysfunctional male and female  organs, and delayed senescence. Finally, silencing of DSE1 in Nicotiana  benthamiana leaves leads to reduced movement of GFP fused to tobacco mosaic virus  movement protein. Thus, DSE1 is important for regulating PD transport between  plant cells.', '2012 Mar 27', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1202919109', 'Zambryski']

plasmodesmata: !classifies into! simple and branched 
plasmodesmata: !defines! size exclusion limit 
At4g29860: !causes! decreased size exclusion limit1 
AtDSE1: !critical for! Arabidopsis morphogenesis 
AtDSE1: !regulates! PD transport 
GFP: !fused to! tobacco mosaic virus movement protein