Cellulose is the most abundant biopolymer in the world, the main load-bearing element in plant cell walls, and represents a major sink for carbon fixed during photosynthesis. Previous work has shown that photosynthetic activity is partially regulated by carbohydrate sinks. However, the coordination of cellulose biosynthesis with carbohydrate metabolism and photosynthesis is not well understood. Here, we demonstrate that cellulose biosynthesis inhibition (CBI) leads to reductions in transcript levels of genes involved in photosynthesis, the Calvin cycle, and starch degradation in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings. In parallel, we show that CBI induces changes in carbohydrate distribution and influences Rubisco activase levels. We find that the effects of CBI on gene expression and carbohydrate metabolism can be neutralized by osmotic support in a concentration-dependent manner. However, osmotic support does not suppress CBI-induced metabolic changes in seedlings impaired in mechanoperception (mid1 complementing activity1 [mca1]) and osmoperception (cytokinin receptor1 [cre1]) or reactive oxygen species production (respiratory burst oxidase homolog DF [rbohDF]). These results show that carbohydrate metabolism is responsive to changes in cellulose biosynthesis activity and turgor pressure. The data suggest that MCA1, CRE1, and RBOHDF-derived reactive oxygen species are involved in the regulation of osmosensitive metabolic changes. The evidence presented here supports the notion that cellulose and carbohydrate metabolism may be coordinated via an osmosensitive mechanism.

Cellulose: !regulates! Photosynthesis
Cellulose: !influences! Rubisco activase levels
CBI: !induces changes in! Carbohydrate distribution
Osmotic support: !neutralizes! CBI-induced metabolic changes
MCA1: !involved in! Regulation of osmosensitive metabolic changes
CRE1: !involved in! Regulation of osmosensitive metabolic changes
RBOHDF: !involved in! Regulation of osmosensitive metabolic changes