In the present study, three closely related Linderniaceae species which differ in their sensitivity to desiccation are compared in response to light and oxidative stress defence. Lindernia brevidens, a desiccation-tolerant plant, displayed intense purple pigmentation in leaves under long-day conditions in contrast to Craterostigma plantagineum (desiccation tolerant) and Lindernia subracemosa (desiccation sensitive). The intense pigmentation in leaves does not affect the desiccation tolerance behaviour but seems to be related to oxidative stress protection. Green leaves of short-day and purple leaves of long-day plants provided suitable material for comparing basic photosynthetic parameters. An increase in non-photochemical quenching in purple leaves appears to prevent photoinhibition. Treatment with methyl viologen decreased the photochemical activities in both long-day and short-day plants but long-day plants which accumulate anthocyanins maintained a higher non-photochemical quenching than short-day plants. No differences were seen in the expression of desiccation-induced proteins and proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism in short-day and long-day grown plants, whereas differences were observed in the expression of transcripts encoding chloroplast-localised stress proteins and transcripts encoding antioxidant enzymes. While the expression of genes encoding antioxidant enzymes were either constitutive or up-regulated during desiccation in C. plantagineum, the expression was down-regulated in L. subracemosa. RNA expression analysis indicated degradation of mRNA during desiccation in L. subracemosa but not in desiccation tolerant species. These results indicate that a better oxidative stress management and mRNA stability are correlated with desiccation tolerance.

Gene: !affects! Desiccation tolerance
Gene: !localizes to! Chloroplast
Gene: !interacts with! Oxidative stress
Gene: !enhances! Non-photochemical quenching
Gene: !represses! Photoinhibition
Gene: !synthesizes! Antioxidant enzymes