['22430844', 'The plant Golgi plays a pivotal role in the biosynthesis of cell wall matrix  polysaccharides, protein glycosylation, and vesicle trafficking. Golgi-localized  proteins have become prospective targets for reengineering cell wall biosynthetic  pathways for the efficient production of biofuels from plant cell walls. However,  proteomic characterization of the Golgi has so far been limited, owing to the  technical challenges inherent in Golgi purification. In this study, a combination  of density centrifugation and surface charge separation techniques have allowed  the reproducible isolation of Golgi membranes from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) at sufficiently high purity levels for in-depth proteomic analysis.  Quantitative proteomic analysis, immunoblotting, enzyme activity assays, and  electron microscopy all confirm high purity levels. A composition analysis  indicated that approximately 19% of proteins were likely derived from  contaminating compartments and ribosomes. The localization of 13 newly assigned  proteins to the Golgi using transient fluorescent markers further validated the  proteome. A collection of 371 proteins consistently identified in all replicates  has been proposed to represent the Golgi proteome, marking an appreciable  advancement in numbers of Golgi-localized proteins. A significant proportion of  proteins likely involved in matrix polysaccharide biosynthesis were identified.  The potential within this proteome for advances in understanding Golgi processes  has been demonstrated by the identification and functional characterization of  the first plant Golgi-resident nucleoside diphosphatase, using a yeast  complementation assay. Overall, these data show key proteins involved in primary  cell wall synthesis and include a mixture of well-characterized and unknown  proteins whose biological roles and importance as targets for future research can  now be realized.', '2012 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.193151', 'Heazlewood']

Golgi: !plays pivotal role in! cell wall biosynthesis 
density centrifugation: !allows isolation of! Golgi membranes 
proteomic analysis: !confirms! high purity levels 
13 proteins: !localized to! Golgi 
371 proteins: !represent! Golgi proteome 
nucleoside diphosphatase: !identified as! first plant Golgi-resident