Light is emerging as a central regulator of plant immune responses against herbivores and pathogens. Solar UV-B radiation plays an important role as a positive modulator of plant defense. However, since UV-B photons can interact with a wide spectrum of molecular targets in plant tissues, the mechanisms that mediate their effects on plant defense have remained elusive. Here, we show that ecologically meaningful doses of UV-B radiation increase Arabidopsis resistance to the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis cinerea and that this effect is mediated by the photoreceptor UVR8. The UV-B effect on plant resistance was conserved in mutants impaired in jasmonate (JA) signaling (jar1-1 and P35S:JAZ10.4) or metabolism of tryptophan-derived defense compounds (pen2-1, pad3-1, pen2 pad3), suggesting that neither regulation of the JA pathway nor changes in levels of indolic glucosinolates (iGS) or camalexin are involved in this response. UV-B radiation, acting through UVR8, increased the levels of flavonoids and sinapates in leaf tissue. The UV-B effect on pathogen resistance was still detectable in tt4-1, a mutant deficient in chalcone synthase and therefore impaired in the synthesis of flavonoids, but was absent in fah1-7, a mutant deficient in ferulic acid 5-hydroxylase, which is essential for sinapate biosynthesis. Collectively, these results indicate that UVR8 plays an important role in mediating the effects of UV-B radiation on pathogen resistance by controlling the expression of the sinapate biosynthetic pathway.

Light: !regulates! Plant immune responses
Solar UV-B radiation: !positively modulates! Plant defense
UV-B radiation: !increases! Arabidopsis resistance to Botrytis cinerea
UVR8: !mediates! UV-B effect on plant resistance
JA signaling: !not involved in! UV-B response
iGS/camalexin: !not involved in! UV-B response
UV-B radiation: !increases! Flavonoid/sinapate levels
tt4-1: !deficient in! Chalcone synthase synthesis
fah1-7: !deficient in! Ferulic acid 5-hydroxylase synthesis
UVR8: !controls! Sinapate biosynthetic pathway expression