Analysis of photosystem I (PSI) complexes from Cyclotella meneghiniana cultured under different growth conditions led to the identification of three groups of antenna proteins, having molecular weights of around 19, 18, and 17 kDa. The 19-kDa proteins have earlier been demonstrated to be more peripherally bound to PSI, and their amount in the PSI complexes was significantly reduced when the iron supply in the growth medium was lowered. This polypeptide was almost missing, and thus the total amount of fucoxanthin-chlorophyll proteins (Fcps) bound to PSI was reduced as well. When treating cells with high light in addition, no further changes in antenna polypeptide composition were detected. Xanthophyll cycle pigments were found to be bound to all Fcps of PSI. However, PSI of high light cultures had a significantly higher diatoxanthin to diadinoxanthin ratio, which is assumed to protect against a surplus of excitation energy. PSI complexes from the double-stressed cultures (high light plus reduced iron supply) were slightly more sensitive against destruction by the detergent treatment. This could be seen as a higher 674-nm emission at 77 K in comparison to the PSI complexes isolated from other growth conditions. Two major emission bands of the Fcps bound to PSI at 77 K could be identified, whereby chlorophyll a fluorescing at 697 nm was more strongly coupled to the PSI core than those fluorescing at 685 nm. Thus, the build up of the PSI antenna of several Fcp components enables variable reactions to several stress factors commonly experienced by the diatoms in vivo, in particular diatoxanthin enrichment under high light and reduction of antenna size under reduced iron conditions.

19-kDa proteins: !reduced when! iron supply lowered 
Fcps: !bound to! PSI 
Xanthophyll cycle pigments: !bound to! Fcps 
high light cultures: !have higher! diatoxanthin to diadinoxanthin ratio 
double-stressed cultures: !more sensitive to! detergent treatment 
Chlorophyll a: !strongly coupled to! PSI core