The establishment of an arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiotic interaction is a successful strategy for the promotion of substantial plant growth, development, and fitness. Numerous studies have supported the hypothesis that plant hormones play an important role in the establishment of functional AM symbiosis. Particular attention has been devoted to jasmonic acid (JA) and its derivates, which are believed to play a major role in AM symbiosis. Jasmonates belong to a diverse class of lipid metabolites known as oxylipins that include other biologically active molecules. Recent transcriptional analyses revealed up-regulation of the oxylipin pathway during AM symbiosis in mycorrhizal tomato roots and indicate a key regulatory role for oxylipins during AM symbiosis in tomato, particularly those derived from the action of 9-lipoxygenases (9-LOXs). Continuing with the tomato as a model, the spatial and temporal expression pattern of genes involved in the 9-LOX pathway during the different stages of AM formation in tomato was analysed. The effects of JA signalling pathway changes on AM fungal colonization were assessed and correlated with the modifications in the transcriptional profiles of 9-LOX genes. The up-regulation of the 9-LOX oxylipin pathway in mycorrhizal wild-type roots seems to depend on a particular degree of AM fungal colonization and is restricted to the colonized part of the roots, suggesting that these genes could play a role in controlling fungal spread in roots. In addition, the results suggest that this strategy of the plant to control AM fungi development within the roots is at least partly dependent on JA pathway activation.

jasmonic acid: !plays a major role in! AM symbiosis 
oxylipins: !belong to! diverse class of lipid metabolites 
9-lipoxygenases: !up-regulate! oxylipin pathway 
AM fungal colonization: !correlates with! transcriptional profiles of 9-LOX genes 
JA signalling pathway: !controls! AM fungal colonization 
plant: !controls! AM fungi development