Entry into mitosis is regulated by cyclin dependent kinases that in turn are phosphoregulated. In most eukaryotes, phosphoregulation is through WEE1 kinase and CDC25 phosphatase. In higher plants a homologous CDC25 gene is unconfirmed and hence the mitotic inducer Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Sp) cdc25 has been used as a tool in transgenic plants to probe cell cycle function. Expression of Spcdc25 in tobacco BY-2 cells accelerates entry into mitosis and depletes cytokinins; in whole plants it stimulates lateral root production. Here we show, for the first time, that alterations to cytokinin and ethylene signaling explain the rooting phenotype elicited by Spcdc25 expression in Arabidopsis. Expressing Spcdc25 in Arabidopsis results in increased formation of lateral and adventitious roots, a reduction of primary root width and more isodiametric cells in the root apical meristem (RAM) compared with wild type. Furthermore it stimulates root morphogenesis from hypocotyls when cultured on two way grids of increasing auxin and cytokinin concentrations. Microarray analysis of seedling roots expressing Spcdc25 reveals that expression of 167 genes is changed by > 2-fold. As well as genes related to stress responses and defence, these include 19 genes related to transcriptional regulation and signaling. Amongst these was the up-regulation of genes associated with ethylene synthesis and signaling. Seedlings expressing Spcdc25 produced 2-fold more ethylene than WT and exhibited a significant reduction in hypocotyl length both in darkness or when exposed to 10 ppm ethylene. Furthermore in Spcdc25 expressing plants, the cytokinin receptor AHK3 was down-regulated, and endogenous levels of iPA were reduced whereas endogeous IAA concentrations in the roots increased. We suggest that the reduction in root width and change to a more isodiametric cell phenotype in the RAM in Spcdc25 expressing plants is a response to ethylene over-production. The increased rooting phenotype in Spcdc25 expressing plants is due to an increase in the ratio of endogenous auxin to cytokinin that is known to stimulate an increased rate of lateral root production. Overall, our data reveal important cross talk between cell division and plant growth regulators leading to developmental changes.

WEE1 kinase: !phosphoregulates! cyclin dependent kinases 
Spcdc25: !accelerates entry into mitosis! tobacco BY-2 cells 
Spcdc25: !stimulates lateral root production! whole plants 
Spcdc25: !increases formation of lateral and adventitious roots! Arabidopsis 
Spcdc25: !reduces primary root width! Arabidopsis 
Spcdc25: !stimulates root morphogenesis! hypocotyls 
Spcdc25: !upregulates genes associated with ethylene synthesis and signaling! seedling roots 
Spcdc25: !produces 2-fold more ethylene! seedlings 
Spcdc25: !reduces hypocotyl length! seedlings 
Spcdc25: !downregulates AHK3! seedlings 
Spcdc25: !reduces iPA! seedlings 
Spcdc25: !increases IAA! seedlings 
Ethylene: !overproduction! reduction in root width 
Auxin: !increased ratio to cytokinin! increased rate of lateral root production