['22457425', 'The differentiation of stomata provides a convenient model for studying pattern  formation in plant tissues. Stomata formation is induced by a set of basic  helix-loop-helix transcription factors and inhibited by a signal transduction  pathway initiated by TOO MANY MOUTHS (TMM) and ERECTA family (ERf) receptors. The  formation of a proper stomata pattern is also dependent upon the restriction of  symplastic movement of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors into  neighboring cells, especially in the backgrounds where the function of the  TMM/ERf signaling pathway is compromised. Here, we describe a novel mutant of  KOBITO1 in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). The kob1-3 mutation leads to the  formation of stomata clusters in the erl1 erl2 background but not in the wild  type. Cell-to-cell mobility assays demonstrated an increase in intercellular  protein trafficking in kob1-3, including increased diffusion of SPEECHLESS,  suggesting that the formation of stomata clusters is due to an escape of cell  fate-specifying factors from stomatal lineage cells. While plasmodesmatal  permeability is increased in kob1-3, we did not detect drastic changes in callose  accumulation at the neck regions of the plasmodesmata. Previously, KOBITO1 has  been proposed to function in cellulose biosynthesis. Our data demonstrate that  disruption of cellulose biosynthesis in the erl1 erl2 background does not lead to  the formation of stomata clusters, indicating that cellulose biosynthesis is not  a major determining factor for regulating plasmodesmatal permeability. Analysis  of KOBITO1 structure suggests that it is a glycosyltransferase-like protein.  KOBITO1 might be involved in a carbohydrate metabolic pathway that is essential  for both cellulose biosynthesis and the regulation of plasmodesmatal  permeability.', '2012 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.194563', 'Shpak']

TMM/ERf: !inhibits! Stomata formation 
KOBITO1: !increases! Intercellular protein trafficking 
KOBITO1: !restricts! Symplastic movement of transcription factors 
KOBITO1: !disrupts! Cellulose biosynthesis 
KOBITO1: !regulates! Plasmodesmatal permeability