Stresses resulting from high transpiration demand induce adjustments in plants that lead to reductions of water loss. These adjustments, including changes in water absorption, transport and/or loss by transpiration, are crucial to normal plant development. Tomato wild type (WT) and phytochrome A (phyA)-mutant plants, fri1-1, were exposed to conditions of either low or high transpiration demand and several morphological and physiological changes were measured during stress conditions. Mutant plants rapidly wilted compared to WT plants after exposure to high evaporative demand. Root size and hydraulic conductivity did not show significant differences between genotypes, suggesting that water absorption and transport through this organ could not explain the observed phenotype. Moreover, stomatal density was similar between genotypes, whereas transpiration and stomatal conductance were both lower in mutant than in WT plants. This was accompanied by a lower stem-specific hydraulic conductivity in mutant plants, which was associated to lower xylem vessel number and transversal area in fri1-1 plants, producing a reduction in water supply to the leaves, which rapidly wilted under high evaporative demand. PhyA signaling might facilitate the adjustment to environments differing widely in water evaporative demand in part through the modulation of xylem dimensions.

Stresses: !induce! Adjustments
Adjustments: !include! Changes in water absorption, transport and/or loss by transpiration
WT plants: !compared to! Mutant plants
Mutant plants: !wilted more rapidly! Under high evaporative demand
Root size: !did not show! Significant differences between genotypes
Stomatal density: !similar between! Genotypes
Transpiration: !lower in! Mutant than in WT plants
Stem-specific hydraulic conductivity: !lower in! Mutant plants
Xylem vessel number: !lower in! Mutant plants
Transversal area: !lower in! Mutant plants
PhyA signaling: !facilitate adjustment to! Environments differing widely in water evaporative demand