Growth chamber and field experiments were carried out to determine the effects of extended photoperiod under low and freezing temperatures on bermudagrass turf dormancy at Bajgah, in the southern part of Iran. The experiment in the growth chamber was conducted with four temperature regimes (15, 7.5, 0 and -7.5°C) and three light durations (8, 12 and 16h) in a completely randomized design with four replications. The field study was conducted in two consecutive years (2008-2009) with three light durations (8, 12 and 16h) in months with natural short day length and arranged in a randomized complete blocks design with three replications. Results in both experiments showed that decreasing temperature and photoperiod decreased verdure fresh and dry weight, shoot height, tiller density, leaf area and chlorophyll and relative water contents (RWC). However, rooting depth and fresh weight of roots increased in the growth chamber. Decreasing the temperature and light duration increased electrolyte leakage and proline content. Reducing sugars increased with decreasing temperature and declined with lowering light duration in both shoots and roots. Starch content of both shoots and roots showed an adverse trend compared to reducing sugars; starch content increased in both shoots and roots in all treatments by shortening the photoperiod. Practically, the problem of bermudagrass turf's dormancy could be solved via increasing the photoperiod in months with short day lengths. This treatment would be efficient and useful for turfgrass managers to apply in landscapes and stadiums.

Temperature: !affects! Verdure fresh and dry weight 
Temperature: !affects! Shoot height 
Temperature: !affects! Tiller density 
Temperature: !affects! Leaf area 
Temperature: !affects! Chlorophyll 
Temperature: !affects! Relative water content 
Temperature: !affects! Rooting depth 
Temperature: !affects! Fresh weight of roots 
Temperature: !affects! Electrolyte leakage 
Temperature: !affects! Proline content 
Temperature: !affects! Reducing sugars 
Temperature: !affects! Starch content 
Photoperiod: !affects! Verdure fresh and dry weight 
Photoperiod: !affects! Shoot height 
Photoperiod: !affects! Tiller density 
Photoperiod: !affects! Leaf area 
Photoperiod: !affects! Chlorophyll 
Photoperiod: !affects! Relative water content 
Photoperiod: !affects! Reducing sugars 
Photoperiod: !affects