['22474184', 'Nucleotide de novo synthesis is highly conserved among organisms and represents  an essential biochemical pathway. In plants, the two initial enzymatic reactions  of de novo pyrimidine synthesis occur in the plastids. By use of green  fluorescent protein fusions, clear support is provided for a localization of the  remaining reactions in the cytosol and mitochondria. This implies that carbamoyl  aspartate, an intermediate of this pathway, must be exported and precursors of  pyrimidine salvage (i.e., nucleobases or nucleosides) are imported into plastids.  A corresponding uracil transport activity could be measured in intact plastids  isolated from cauliflower (Brassica oleracea) buds. PLUTO (for plastidic  nucleobase transporter) was identified as a member of the  Nucleobase:Cation-Symporter1 protein family from Arabidopsis thaliana, capable of  transporting purine and pyrimidine nucleobases. A PLUTO green fluorescent protein  fusion was shown to reside in the plastid envelope after expression in  Arabidopsis protoplasts. Heterologous expression of PLUTO in an Escherichia coli  mutant lacking the bacterial uracil permease uraA allowed a detailed biochemical  characterization. PLUTO transports uracil, adenine, and guanine with apparent  affinities of 16.4, 0.4, and 6.3 muM, respectively. Transport was markedly  inhibited by low concentrations of a proton uncoupler, indicating that PLUTO  functions as a proton-substrate symporter. Thus, a protein for the absolutely  required import of pyrimidine nucleobases into plastids was identified.', '2012 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.112.096743', 'Mohlmann']

Nucleotide de novo synthesis: !highly conserved! among organisms 
Plastids: !localize! two initial enzymatic reactions 
Cytosol/Mitochondria: !localize! remaining reactions 
Carbamoyl aspartate: !exported! from plastids 
Nucleobases/Nucleosides: !imported! into plastids 
Uracil transport activity: !measured! in intact plastids 
PLUTO: !identified! as Nucleobase:Cation-Symporter1 protein 
PLUTO: !resides! in plastid envelope 
PLUTO: !transports! uracil, adenine, guanine 
PLUTO: !functions! as proton-substrate symporter