A dwarf mutant (dwf1) was obtained among 15 transgenic lines, when TaLEA (Tamarix androssowii late embryogenesis abundant gene) was introduced into Populus simonii × Populus nigra by Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation. Under the same growth conditions, dwf1 height was significantly reduced compared with the wild type and the other transgenic lines. Because only one transgenic line (dwf1) displayed the dwarf phenotype, we considered that T-DNA insertion sites may play a role in the mutant formation. The mechanisms underlying this effect were investigated using TAIL-PCR (thermal asymmetric interlaced PCR) and microarrays methods. According to the TAIL-PCR results, two flanking sequences located on chromosome IV and VIII respectively, were cloned. The results indicated the integration of two independent T-DNA copies. We searched for the potential genes near to the T-DNA insertions. The nearest gene was a putative poplar AP2 transcription factor (GI: 224073210). Expression analysis showed that AP2 was up-regulated in dwf1 compared with the wild type and the other transgenic lines. According to the microarrays results, a total of 537 genes involved in hydrolase, kinase and transcription factor activities, as well as protein and nucleotide binding, showed significant alterations in gene expression. These genes were expressed in more than 60 metabolic pathways, including starch, sucrose, galactose and glycerolipid metabolism and phenylpropanoids and flavonoid biosyntheses. Our transcriptome and T-DNA insertion sites analyses might provide some useful insights into the dwarf mutant formation.

dwf1: !obtained from! TaLEA 
TaLEA: !introduced into! Populus simonii × Populus nigra 
dwf1: !significantly reduced! height 
T-DNA: !may play a role in! mutant formation 
TAIL-PCR: !cloned! flanking sequences 
flanking sequences: !located on! chromosome IV and VIII 
AP2: !nearest gene to! T-DNA insertions 
AP2: !up-regulated in! dwf1 
microarrays: !showed significant alterations in! gene expression 
gene expression: !involved in! metabolic pathways