To understand the impact of water stress on the greening process, water stress was applied to 6-day-old etiolated seedlings of a drought-sensitive cultivar of rice (Oryza sativa), Pusa Basmati-1 by immersing their roots in 40 mm polyethylene glycol (PEG) 6000 (-0.69 MPa) or 50 mm PEG 6000 (-1.03 MPa) dissolved in half-strength Murashige and Skoog (MS)-nutrient-solution, 16 h prior to transfer to cool-white-fluorescent + incandescent light. Chlorophyll (Chl) accumulation substantially declined in developing water-stressed seedlings. Reduced Chl synthesis was due to decreased accumulation of chlorophyll biosynthetic intermediates, that is, glutamate-1-semialdehyde (GSA), 5-aminolevulinic acid, Mg-protoporphyrin IX monomethylester and protochlorophyllide. Although 5-aminolevulinic acid synthesis decreased, the gene expression and protein abundance of the enzyme responsible for its synthesis, GSA aminotransferase, increased, suggesting its crucial role in the greening process in stressful environment. The biochemical activities of Chl biosynthetic enzymes, that is, 5-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase, porphobilinogen deaminase, coproporphyrinogen III oxidase, porphyrinogen IX oxidase, Mg-chelatase and protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase, were down-regulated due to their reduced protein abundance/gene expression in water-stressed seedlings. Down-regulation of protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase resulted in impaired Shibata shift. Our results demonstrate that reduced synthesis of early intermediates, that is, GSA and 5-aminolevulinic acid, could modulate the gene expression of later enzymes of Chl biosynthesis pathway.

Gene: !affects! Chlorophyll synthesis 
Gene: !enhances! GSA aminotransferase expression 
Gene: !represses! 5-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase activity 
Gene: !represses! porphobilinogen deaminase activity 
Gene: !represses! coproporphyrinogen III oxidase activity 
Gene: !represses! porphyrinogen IX oxidase activity 
Gene: !represses! Mg-chelatase activity 
Gene: !represses! protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase activity