['22511887', "Eukaryotic mRNA transcription and turnover is controlled by an enzymatic  machinery that includes RNA polymerase II and the 3' to 5' exosome. The activity  of these protein complexes is modulated by additional factors, such as the  nuclear RNA polymerase II-associated factor 1 (Paf1c) and the cytoplasmic  Superkiller (SKI) complex, respectively. Their components are conserved across  uni- as well as multi-cellular organisms, including yeast, Arabidopsis, and  humans. Among them, SKI8 displays multiple facets on top of its cytoplasmic role  in the SKI complex. For instance, nuclear yeast ScSKI8 has an additional function  in meiotic recombination, whereas nuclear human hSKI8 (unlike ScSKI8) associates  with Paf1c. The Arabidopsis SKI8 homolog VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENT 3 (VIP3) has  been found in Paf1c as well; however, whether it also has a role in the SKI  complex remains obscure so far. We found that transgenic VIP3-GFP, which  complements a novel vip3 mutant allele, localizes to both nucleus and cytoplasm.  Consistently, biochemical analyses suggest that VIP3-GFP associates with the SKI  complex. A role of VIP3 in the turnover of nuclear encoded mRNAs is supported by  random-primed RNA sequencing of wild-type and vip3 seedlings, which indicates  mRNA stabilization in vip3. Another SKI subunit homolog mutant, ski2, displays a  dwarf phenotype similar to vip3. However, unlike vip3, it displays neither early  flowering nor flower development phenotypes, suggesting that the latter reflect  VIP3's role in Paf1c. Surprisingly then, transgenic ScSKI8 rescued all aspects of  the vip3 phenotype, suggesting that the dual role of SKI8 depends on  species-specific cellular context.", '2012', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1002652', 'Hardtke']

RNA polymerase II: !modulated by! Paf1c 
Paf1c: !contains! SKI8 
SKI8: !localizes to! nucleus and cytoplasm 
VIP3: !interacts with! SKI complex 
VIP3: !stabilizes! mRNA 
ski2: !displays! dwarf phenotype 
ScSKI8: !rescues! vip3 phenotype