['22511869', 'A small open reading frame (ORF), pipo, overlaps with the P3 coding region of the  potyviral polyprotein ORF. Previous evidence suggested a requirement for pipo for  efficient viral cell-to-cell movement. Here, we provide immunoblotting evidence  that the protein PIPO is expressed as a trans-frame protein consisting of the  amino-terminal half of P3 fused to PIPO (P3N-PIPO). P3N-PIPO of Turnip mosaic  virus (TuMV) fused to GFP facilitates its own cell-to-cell movement. Using a  yeast two-hybrid screen, co-immunoprecipitation assays, and bimolecular  fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assays, we found that P3N-PIPO interacts with  host protein PCaP1, a cation-binding protein that attaches to the plasma membrane  via myristoylation. BiFC revealed that it is the PIPO domain of P3N-PIPO that  binds PCaP1 and that myristoylation of PCaP1 is unnecessary for interaction with  P3N-PIPO. In PCaP1 knockout mutants (pcap1) of Arabidopsis, accumulation of TuMV  harboring a GFP gene (TuMV-GFP) was drastically reduced relative to the virus  level in wild-type plants, only small localized spots of GFP were visible, and  the plants showed few symptoms. In contrast, TuMV-GFP infection in wild-type  Arabidopsis yielded large green fluorescent patches, and caused severe stunting.  However, viral RNA accumulated to high level in protoplasts from pcap1 plants  indicating that PCaP1 is not required for TuMV RNA synthesis. In contrast to  TuMV, the tobamovirus Oilseed rape mosaic virus did not require PCaP1 to infect  Arabidopsis plants. We conclude that potyviral P3N-PIPO interacts specifically  with the host plasma membrane protein PCaP1 to participate in cell-to-cell  movement. We speculate that PCaP1 links a complex of viral proteins and genomic  RNA to the plasma membrane by binding P3N-PIPO, enabling localization to the  plasmodesmata and cell-to-cell movement. The PCaP1 knockout may contribute to a  new strategy for recessive resistance to potyviruses.', '2012', 'PLoS Pathog', '10.1371/journal.ppat.1002639', 'Miller']

PIPO: !overlaps with! P3 coding region 
P3N-PIPO: !facilitates! cell-to-cell movement 
P3N-PIPO: !interacts with! PCaP1 
PCaP1: !binds! P3N-PIPO 
PCaP1: !links! viral proteins and genomic RNA 
TuMV-GFP: !accumulates! in wild-type plants 
TuMV-GFP: !accumulates less! in PCaP1 knockout mutants 
Oilseed rape mosaic virus: !does not require! PCaP1