['22530652', 'BACKGROUND: Arabidopsis DMP1 was discovered in a genome-wide screen for  senescence-associated membrane proteins. DMP1 is a member of a novel  plant-specific membrane protein family of unknown function. In rosette leaves  DMP1 expression increases from very low background level several 100fold during  senescence progression. RESULTS: Expression of AtDMP1 fused to eGFP in Nicotiana  benthamiana triggers a complex process of succeeding membrane remodeling events  affecting the structure of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the vacuole.  Induction of spherical structures ("bulbs"), changes in the architecture of the  ER from tubular to cisternal elements, expansion of smooth ER, formation of  crystalloid ER, and emergence of vacuolar membrane sheets and foamy membrane  structures inside the vacuole are proceeding in this order. In some cells it can  be observed that the process culminates in cell death after breakdown of the  entire ER network and the vacuole. The integrity of the plasma membrane, nucleus  and Golgi vesicles are retained until this stage. In Arabidopsis thaliana plants  expressing AtDMP1-eGFP by the 35S promoter massive ER and vacuole vesiculation is  observed during the latest steps of leaf senescence, whereas earlier in  development ER and vacuole morphology are not perturbed. Expression by the native  DMP1 promoter visualizes formation of aggregates termed "boluses" in the ER  membranes and vesiculation of the entire ER network, which precedes  disintegration of the central vacuole during the latest stage of senescence in  siliques, rosette and cauline leaves and in darkened rosette leaves. In roots  tips, DMP1 is strongly expressed in the cortex undergoing vacuole biogenesis.  CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that DMP1 is directly or indirectly involved in  membrane fission during breakdown of the ER and the tonoplast during leaf  senescence and in membrane fusion during vacuole biogenesis in roots. We propose  that these properties of DMP1, exacerbated by transient overexpression, may cause  or contribute to the dramatic membrane remodeling events which lead to cell death  in infiltrated tobacco leaves.', '2012 Apr 24', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-12-54', 'Kunze']

AtDMP1: !triggers! membrane remodeling 
membrane remodeling: !leads to! cell death 
AtDMP1: !strongly expressed in! cortex 
cortex: !undergoes! vacuole biogenesis 
AtDMP1: !involved in! membrane fission 
membrane fission: !during breakdown of! ER and tonoplast 
AtDMP1: !contributes to! dramatic membrane remodeling