['22545134', 'In this work, we conducted functional analysis of Arabidopsis HRS1 gene in order  to provide new insights into the mechanisms governing seed germination. Compared  with wild type (WT) control, HRS1 knockout mutant (hrs1-1) exhibited significant  germination delays on either normal medium or those supplemented with abscisic  acid (ABA) or sodium chloride (NaCl), with the magnitude of the delay being  substantially larger on the latter media. The hypersensitivity of hrs1-1  germination to ABA and NaCl required ABI3, ABI4 and ABI5, and was aggravated in  the double mutant hrs1-1abi1-2 and triple mutant hrs1-1hab1-1abi1-2, indicating  that HRS1 acts as a negative regulator of ABA signaling during seed germination.  Consistent with this notion, HRS1 expression was found in the embryo axis, and  was regulated both temporally and spatially, during seed germination. Further  analysis showed that the delay of hrs1-1 germination under normal conditions was  associated with reduction in the elongation of the cells located in the lower  hypocotyl (LH) and transition zone (TZ) of embryo axis. Interestingly, the  germination rate of hrs1-1 was more severely reduced by the inhibitor of cell  elongation, and more significantly decreased by the suppressors of plasmalemma  H(+)-ATPase activity, than that of WT control. The plasmalemma H(+)-ATPase  activity in the germinating seeds of hrs1-1 was substantially lower than that  exhibited by WT control, and fusicoccin, an activator of this pump, corrected the  transient germination delay of hrs1-1. Together, our data suggest that HRS1 may  be needed for suppressing ABA signaling in germinating embryo axis, which  promotes the timely germination of Arabidopsis seeds probably by facilitating the  proper function of plasmalemma H(+)-ATPase and the efficient elongation of LH and  TZ cells.', '2012', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0035764', 'Wang']

HRS1: !regulates! ABA signaling 
HRS1: !localizes to! embryo axis 
hrs1-1: !exhibits! germination delays 
ABI3/4/5: !required for! hypersensitivity of hrs1-1 germination 
hrs1-1: !associated with! reduction in cell elongation 
plasmalemma H(+)-ATPase: !reduced in! hrs1-1 germinating seeds 
fusicoccin: !corrects! transient germination delay of hrs1-1