['22547783', 'The human hereditary disease Fanconi anemia leads to severe symptoms, including  developmental defects and breakdown of the hematopoietic system. It is caused by  single mutations in the FANC genes, one of which encodes the DNA translocase  FANCM (for Fanconi anemia complementation group M), which is required for the  repair of DNA interstrand cross-links to ensure replication progression. We  identified a homolog of FANCM in Arabidopsis thaliana that is not directly  involved in the repair of DNA lesions but suppresses spontaneous somatic  homologous recombination via a RecQ helicase (At-RECQ4A)-independent pathway. In  addition, it is required for double-strand break-induced homologous  recombination. The fertility of At-fancm mutant plants is compromised. Evidence  suggests that during meiosis At-FANCM acts as antirecombinase to suppress ectopic  recombination-dependent chromosome interactions, but this activity is antagonized  by the ZMM pathway to enable the formation of interference-sensitive crossovers  and chromosome synapsis. Surprisingly, mutation of At-FANCM overcomes the  sterility phenotype of an At-MutS homolog4 mutant by apparently rescuing a  proportion of crossover-designated recombination intermediates via a route that  is likely At-MMS and UV sensitive81 dependent. However, this is insufficient to  ensure the formation of an obligate crossover. Thus, At-FANCM is not only a  safeguard for genome stability in somatic cells but is an important factor in the  control of meiotic crossover formation.', '2012 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.112.096644', 'Puchta']

FANCM: !encodes! DNA translocase 
FANCM: !suppresses! spontaneous somatic homologous recombination 
At-FANCM: !required for! double-strand break-induced homologous recombination 
At-FANCM: !acts as antirecombinase to suppress! ectopic recombination-dependent chromosome interactions 
At-FANCM: !antagonized by! ZMM pathway 
At-FANCM: !overcomes! sterility phenotype of At-MutS homolog4 mutant 
At-FANCM: !rescues! proportion of crossover-designated recombination intermediates