['22558264', 'NMD3 is required for nuclear export of the 60S ribosomal subunit in yeast and  vertebrate cells, but no corresponding function of NMD3 has been reported in  plants. Here we report that Arabidopsis thaliana NMD3 (AtNMD3) showed a similar  function in the nuclear export of the 60S ribosomal subunit. Interference with  AtNMD3 function by overexpressing a truncated dominant negative form of the  protein lacking the nuclear export signal sequence caused retainment of the 60S  ribosomal subunits in the nuclei. More interestingly, the transgenic Arabidopsis  with dominant negative interference of AtNMD3 function showed a striking failure  of secondary cell wall thickening, consistent with the altered expression of  related genes and composition of cell wall components. Observation of a  significant decrease of rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) in the differentiating  interfascicular fiber cells of the transgenic plant stems suggested a link  between the defective nuclear export of 60S ribosomal subunits and the abnormal  formation of the secondary cell wall. These findings not only clarified the  evolutionary conservation of NMD3 functions in the nuclear export of 60S  ribosomal subunits in yeast, animals and plants, but also revealed a new facet of  the regulatory mechanism underlying secondary cell wall thickening in  Arabidopsis. This new facet is that the nuclear export of 60S ribosomal subunits  and the formation of RER may play regulatory roles in coordinating protein  synthesis in cytoplasm and transcription in nuclei.', '2012', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0035904', 'Bai']

NMD3: !required for! nuclear export of 60S ribosomal subunit 
AtNMD3: !localizes to! Arabidopsis thaliana 
AtNMD3: !interacts with! nuclear export signal sequence 
Dominant negative form of AtNMD3: !causes! retainment of 60S ribosomal subunits in nuclei 
Transgenic Arabidopsis: !shows! failure of secondary cell wall thickening 
RER: !decreases! in differentiating interfascicular fiber cells 
Nuclear export of 60S ribosomal subunits: !regulates! protein synthesis and transcription