A key innovation in leaf evolution is the acquisition of a flat lamina with adaxial-abaxial polarity, which optimizes the primary function of photosynthesis. The developmental mechanism behind leaf adaxial-abaxial polarity specification and flat lamina formation has long been of interest to biologists. Surgical and genetic studies proposed a conceptual model wherein a signal derived from the shoot apical meristem is necessary for adaxial-abaxial polarity specification, and subsequent lamina outgrowth is promoted at the juxtaposition of adaxial and abaxial identities. Several distinct regulators involved in leaf adaxial-abaxial polarity specification and lamina outgrowth have been identified. Analyses of these genes demonstrated that the mutual antagonistic interactions between adaxial and abaxial determinants establish polarity and define the boundary between two domains, along which lamina outgrowth regulators function. Evolutionary developmental studies on diverse leaf forms of angiosperms proposed that alteration to the adaxial-abaxial patterning system can be a major driving force in the generation of diverse leaf forms, as represented by 'unifacial leaves', in which leaf blades have only the abaxial identity. Interestingly, unifacial leaf blades become flattened, in spite of the lack of adaxial-abaxial juxtaposition. Modification of the adaxial-abaxial patterning system is also utilized to generate complex organ morphologies, such as stamens. In this review, we summarize recent advances in the genetic mechanisms underlying leaf adaxial-abaxial polarity specification and lamina outgrowth, with emphasis on the genetic basis of the evolution and diversification of leaves.

Signal: !derives from! Shoot apical meristem
Regulators: !involved in! Leaf adaxial-abaxial polarity specification and lamina outgrowth
Adaxial/Abaxial determinants: !mutually antagonize! Establish polarity
Lamina outgrowth regulators: !function at! Adaxial-abaxial boundary
Unifacial leaves: !lack! Adaxial identity
Stamens: !generated by! Modification of adaxial-abaxial patterning system