['22623518', 'Plant epidermal cells have evolved specialist functions associated with  adaptation to stress. These include the synthesis and deposition of specialized  metabolites such as waxes and cutin together with flavonoids and anthocyanins,  which have important roles in providing a barrier to water loss and protection  against UV radiation, respectively. Characterization of the sticky peel (pe)  mutant of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) revealed several phenotypes indicative of  a defect in epidermal cell function, including reduced anthocyanin accumulation,  a lower density of glandular trichomes, and an associated reduction in  trichome-derived terpenes. In addition, pe mutant fruit are glossy and peels have  increased elasticity due to a severe reduction in cutin biosynthesis and altered  wax deposition. Leaves of the pe mutant are also cutin deficient and the  epicuticular waxes contain a lower proportion of long-chain alkanes. Direct  measurements of transpiration, together with chlorophyll-leaching assays,  indicate increased cuticular permeability of pe leaves. Genetic mapping revealed  that the pe locus represents a new allele of CUTIN DEFICIENT2 (CD2), a member of  the class IV homeodomain-leucine zipper gene family, previously only associated  with cutin deficiency in tomato fruit. CD2 is preferentially expressed in  epidermal cells of tomato stems and is a homolog of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) ANTHOCYANINLESS2 (ANL2). Analysis of cuticle composition in leaves of  anl2 revealed that cutin accumulates to approximately 60% of the levels observed  in wild-type Arabidopsis. Together, these data provide new insight into the role  of CD2 and ANL2 in regulating diverse metabolic pathways and in particular, those  associated with epidermal cells.', '2012 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.198374', 'Barry']

CD2: !regulates! metabolic pathways 
CD2: !preferentially expressed in! epidermal cells 
ANL2: !homolog of! CD2 
ANL2: !regulates! cutin accumulation 
cutin: !provides! barrier to water loss 
flavonoids: !protect against! UV radiation 
glandular trichomes: !produce! terpenes 
pe mutant: !deficient in! cutin biosynthesis 
pe mutant: !altered! wax deposition