['22635115', 'Mutation of the ECERIFERUM9 (CER9) gene in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  causes elevated amounts of 18-carbon-length cutin monomers and a dramatic shift  in the cuticular wax profile (especially on leaves) toward the very-long-chain  free fatty acids tetracosanoic acid (C(2)(4)) and hexacosanoic acid (C(2)(6)). Relative  to the wild type, cer9 mutants exhibit elevated cuticle membrane thickness over  epidermal cells and cuticular ledges with increased occlusion of the stomatal  pore. The cuticular phenotypes of cer9 are associated with delayed onset of  wilting in plants experiencing water deficit, lower transpiration rates, and  improved water use efficiency measured as carbon isotope discrimination. The CER9  protein thus encodes a novel determinant of plant drought tolerance-associated  traits, one whose deficiency elevates cutin synthesis, redistributes wax  composition, and suppresses transpiration. Map-based cloning identified CER9, and  sequence analysis predicted that it encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase homologous to  yeast Doa10 (previously shown to target endoplasmic reticulum proteins for  proteasomal degradation). To further elucidate CER9 function, the impact of CER9  deficiency on interactions with other genes was examined using double mutant and  transcriptome analyses. For both wax and cutin, cer9 showed mostly additive  effects with cer6, long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase1 (lacs1), and lacs2 and  revealed its role in early steps of both wax and cutin synthetic pathways.  Transcriptome analysis revealed that the cer9 mutation affected diverse cellular  processes, with primary impact on genes associated with diverse stress responses.  The discovery of CER9 lays new groundwork for developing novel cuticle-based  strategies for improving the drought tolerance and water use efficiency of crop  plants.', '2012 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.198697', 'Jenks']

Mutation of CER9: !causes! elevated cutin monomers 
CER9: !encodes! novel determinant of drought tolerance-associated traits 
CER9: !affects! interactions with other genes 
CER9: !redistributes! wax composition 
CER9: !suppresses! transpiration 
CER9: !impacts! diverse cellular processes