Waterlogging usually results from overuse or poor management of irrigation water and is a serious constraint due to its damaging effects. RAP2.6L (At5g13330) overexpression enhances plant resistance to jasmonic acid, salicylic acid, abscisic acid (ABA) and ethylene in Arabidopsis thaliana. However, it is not known whether RAP2.6L overexpression in vivo improves plant tolerance to waterlogging stress. In this study, the RAP2.6L transcript was induced by waterlogging or an ABA treatment, which was reduced after pretreatment with an ABA biosynthesis inhibitor tungstate. Water loss and membrane leakage were reduced in RAP2.6L overexpression plants under waterlogging stress. Time course analyses of ABA content and production of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) showed that increased ABA precedes the increase of H(2)O(2). It is also followed by a marked increase in the antioxidant enzyme activities. Increased ABA promoted stomatal closure and made leaves exhibit a delayed waterlogging induced premature senescence. Furthermore, RAP2.6L overexpression caused significant increases in the transcripts of antioxidant enzyme genes APX1 (ascorbate peroxidase 1) and FSD1 (Fe-superoxide dismutase 1), the ABA biosynthesis gene ABA1 (ABA deficient 1) and signaling gene ABH1 (ABA-hypersensitive 1) and the waterlogging responsive gene ADH1 (alcohol dehydrogenase 1), while the transcript of ABI1 (ABA insensitive 1) was decreased. ABA inhibits seed germination and seedling growth and phenotype analysis showed that the integration of abi1-1 mutation into the RAP2.6L overexpression lines reduces ABA sensitivity. These suggest that RAP2.6L overexpression delays waterlogging induced premature senescence and might function through ABI1-mediated ABA signaling pathway.

RAP2.6L: !enhances! Plant resistance 
RAP2.6L: !induces! ABA treatment 
ABA: !promotes! Stomatal closure 
ABA: !increases! Antioxidant enzyme activities 
RAP2.6L: !increases! Transcripts of antioxidant enzyme genes 
RAP2.6L: !decreases! Transcript of ABI1 
ABI1: !reduces! ABA sensitivity 
RAP2.6L: !functions through! ABI1-mediated ABA signaling pathway