['22673766', 'Sterols play crucial roles as membrane components and precursors of steroid  hormones (e.g., brassinosteroids, BR). Within membranes, sterols regulate  membrane permeability and fluidity by interacting with other lipids and proteins.  Sterols are frequently enriched in detergent-insoluble membranes (DIMs), which  organize molecules involved in specialized signaling processes, including auxin  transporters. To be fully functional, the two methyl groups at the C-4 position  of cycloartenol, a precursor of plant sterols, must be removed by bifunctional  3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases/C-4 decarboxylases (3betaHSD/D). To understand the  role of 3betaHSD/D in Arabidopsis development, we analyzed the phenotypes of  knock-out mutants and overexpression lines of two 3betaHSD/D genes (At1g47290 and  At2g26260). Neither single nor double knock-out mutants displayed a noticeable  phenotype; however, overexpression consistently resulted in plants with wrinkled  leaves and short inflorescence internodes. Interestingly, the internode growth  defects were opportunistic; even within a plant, some stems were more severely  affected than others. Endogenous levels of BRs were not altered in the  overexpression lines, suggesting that the growth defect is not primarily due to a  flaw in BR biosynthesis. To determine if overexpression of the sterol  biosynthetic genes affects the functions of membrane-localized auxin  transporters, we subjected plants to the auxin efflux carrier inhibitor,  1-N-naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA). Where-as the gravity vectors of wild-type  roots became randomly scattered in response to NPA treatment, those of the  overexpression lines continued to grow in the direction of gravity.  Overexpression of the two Arabidopsis 3betaHSD/D genes thus appears to affect auxin  transporter activity, possibly by altering sterol composition in the membranes.', '2012 Jul', 'Mol Cells', '10.1007/s10059-012-0102-6', 'Choe']

Sterols: !regulate! Membrane permeability 
Sterols: !enrich! Detergent-insoluble membranes 
3betaHSD/D: !remove! Methyl groups 
3betaHSD/D: !affect! Arabidopsis development 
Overexpression: !causes! Wrinkled leaves and short internodes 
Overexpression: !does not affect! BR biosynthesis 
Overexpression: !alters! Auxin transporter activity 
Sterols: !possibly alter! Sterol composition in membranes