['22676313', 'BACKGROUND: RanBPM (Ran-binding protein in the microtubule-organizing centre) was  originally reported as a centrosome-associated protein in human cells. However,  RanBPM protein containing highly conserved SPRY, LisH, CTLH and CRA domains is  currently considered as a scaffolding protein with multiple cellular functions. A  plant homologue of RanBPM has not yet been characterized. RESULTS: Based on  sequence similarity, we identified a homologue of the human RanBPM in Arabidopsis  thaliana. AtRanBPM protein has highly conserved SPRY, LisH, CTLH and CRA domains.  Cell fractionation showed that endogenous AtRanBPM or expressed GFP-AtRanBPM are  mainly cytoplasmic proteins with only a minor portion detectable in microsomal  fractions. AtRanBPM was identified predominantly in the form of soluble  cytoplasmic complexes ~230-500 kDa in size. Immunopurification of AtRanBPM  followed by mass spectrometric analysis identified proteins containing LisH and  CRA domains; LisH, CRA, RING-U-box domains and a transducin/WD40 repeats in a  complex with AtRanBPM. Homologues of identified proteins are known to be  components of the C-terminal to the LisH motif (CTLH) complexes in humans and  budding yeast. Microscopic analysis of GFP-AtRanBPM in vivo and  immunofluorescence localization of endogenous AtRanBPM protein in cultured cells  and seedlings of Arabidopsis showed mainly cytoplasmic and nuclear localization.  Absence of colocalization with gamma-tubulin was consistent with the biochemical data  and suggests another than a centrosomal role of the AtRanBPM protein. CONCLUSION:  We showed that as yet uncharacterized Arabidopsis RanBPM protein physically  interacts with LisH-CTLH domain-containing proteins. The newly identified high  molecular weight cytoplasmic protein complexes of AtRanBPM showed homology with  CTLH types of complexes described in mammals and budding yeast. Although the  exact functions of the CTLH complexes in scaffolding of protein degradation, in  protein interactions and in signalling from the periphery to the cell centre are  not yet fully understood, structural conservation of the complexes across  eukaryotes suggests their important biological role.', '2012 Jun 7', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-12-83', 'Binarova']

AtRanBPM: !interacts with! proteins containing LisH and CRA domains 
AtRanBPM: !localizes to! cytoplasm and nucleus 
AtRanBPM: !synthesizes! high molecular weight cytoplasmic protein complexes 
CTLH complexes: !conserved across! eukaryotes 
CTLH complexes: !function in! scaffolding of protein degradation, protein interactions and signalling