Phosphoglucomutase (PGM, EC 2.7.5.1) is one of the enzymes constituting the carbohydrate synthesis pathway in higher plants. It catalyzes the reversible conversion of glucose 6-phosphate (Glc6P) to glucose 1-phosphate (Glc1P). Previously, metabolic turnover analysis using (13)CO(2) in tobacco leaves demonstrated that conversion of Glc6P to Glc1P may limit carbon flow into carbohydrate synthesis. In order to assess the effects of PGM, Arabidopsis thaliana cytosolic or plastidial PGM was expressed under the control of cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter in tobacco plants (Nicotiana tabacum cv. Xanthi) and phenotypic analysis was performed. The transgenic plants expressing Arabidopsis plastidial PGM showed 3.5-8.2-fold higher PGM activity than that of wild-type, and leaf starch and sucrose contents increased 2.3-3.2-fold and 1.3-1.4-fold, respectively over wild-type levels. In vivo(13)C-labeling experiments indicated that photosynthetically fixed carbon in the transgenic plants could be converted faster to Glc1P and adenosine 5'-diphosphate glucose than in wild-type, suggesting that elevation of plastidial PGM activity should accelerate conversion of Glc6P to Glc1P in chloroplasts and increase carbon flow into starch. On the other hand, transgenic plants expressing Arabidopsis cytosolic PGM showed a 2.1-3.4-fold increase in PGM activity over wild-type and a decrease of leaf starch content, but no change in sucrose content. These results suggest that plastidial PGM limits photosynthetic carbon flow into starch.

PGM: !catalyzes! conversion of Glc6P to Glc1P 
Arabidopsis plastidial PGM: !expressed in! tobacco plants 
Arabidopsis plastidial PGM: !increases! PGM activity 
Arabidopsis plastidial PGM: !increases! leaf starch and sucrose contents 
Arabidopsis plastidial PGM: !accelerates! conversion of Glc6P to Glc1P 
Arabidopsis cytosolic PGM: !expressed in! tobacco plants 
Arabidopsis cytosolic PGM: !increases! PGM activity 
Arabidopsis cytosolic PGM: !decreases! leaf starch content