The inflated calyx syndrome (ICS) is a post-floral novelty within Solanaceae. Previous work has shown that MPF2-like MADS-box genes have been recruited for the development and evolution of ICS through heterotopic expression from vegetative to floral organs. ICS seems to be a plesiomorphic trait in Physaleae, but it has been secondarily lost in some lineages during evolution. We hypothesized that molecular and functional divergences of MPF2-like proteins might play a role in the loss of ICS. In this study we analyzed the phylogeny, selection and various functions of MPF2-like proteins with respect to the evolution of ICS. Directional selection of MPF2-like orthologs toward evolution of ICS was detected. While auto-activation capacity between proteins varies in yeast, MPF2-like interaction with floral MADS-domain proteins is robustly detected, hence substantiating their integration into the floral developmental programs. Dimerization with A- (MPF3) and E-function (PFSEP1/3) proteins seems to be essential for ICS development within Solanaceae. Moreover, the occurrence of the enlarged sepals, reminiscent of ICS, and MPF2-like interactions with these specific partners were observed in transgenic Arabidopsis. The interaction spectrum relevant to ICS seems to be plesiomorphic, reinforcing the plesiomorphy of this trait. The inability of some MPF2-like to interact with either the A-function or any of the E-function partners characterized is correlated with the loss of ICS in the lineages that showed a MPF2-like expression in the calyx. Our findings suggest that, after recruitment of MPF2-like genes for floral development, diversification in their coding region due to directional selection leads to a modification of the MADS-domain protein interacting spectrum, which might serve as a constraint for the evolution of ICS within Solanaceae.

MPF2-like: !interacts with! floral MADS-domain proteins
MPF2-like: !dimerizes with! A-function (MPF3) and E-function (PFSEP1/3) proteins
MPF2-like: !inability to interact with! A-function or E-function partners 
MPF2-like: !correlated with! loss of ICS