Bois noir (BN) is one of the main phytoplasma diseases of grapevine (Vitis vinifera). It is widespread, and can cause severe losses in European vineyards. The infective agent colonizes phloem elements and induces visible symptoms of leaf yellowing or reddening after a relatively long incubation period. As the most sensitive cultivars to BN, Chardonnay plants were grouped as healthy or symptomatic in spring, based on the records from the previous year. Leaf gas exchange and chlorophyll a fluorescence were measured weekly from July to September in healthy plants, and in symptomatic and asymptomatic leaves from symptomatic plants. The midday relative water content (mRWC) was measured once per month. The detection of phytoplasma DNA by nested-polymerase chain reaction revealed BN infection in symptomatic leaf samples at the end of September. A significant decrease in pigment content and maximum quantum efficiency of photosystem II (Fv/Fm) of these symptomatic leaves was detected from July to September, although in the asymptomatic leaves of the symptomatic plants the net photosynthesis (Pn) decrease was not significant. In the leaves from the healthy plants, Pn and transpiration were relatively stable. Of note, in July, an initially healthy plant showed a strong Pn reduction that was followed by visible leaf yellowing symptoms only in August. The phytoplasma infection also stimulated significant reductions in mRWC of the symptomatic leaves, with a final large decrease in yield.

Bois noir: !causes! Symptoms 
Chardonnay plants: !grouped as! Healthy/Symptomatic 
Leaf gas exchange: !measured! Weekly 
Chlorophyll a fluorescence: !measured! Weekly 
Midday relative water content: !measured! Monthly 
Nested-polymerase chain reaction: !detects! Phytoplasma DNA 
Symptomatic leaves: !show! Decrease in pigment content 
Symptomatic leaves: !show! Decrease in maximum quantum efficiency of photosystem II 
Healthy plants: !show! Relatively stable Pn and transpiration 
Phytoplasma infection: !stimulates! Reduction in mRWC 
Phytoplasma infection: !leads to! Decrease in yield