Chloroplasts play critical roles in land plant cells. Despite their importance and the availability of at least 200 sequenced chloroplast genomes, the number of known DNA regulatory sequences in chloroplast genomes are limited. In this paper, we designed computational methods to systematically study putative DNA regulatory sequences in intergenic regions near chloroplast genes in seven plant species and in promoter sequences of nuclear genes in Arabidopsis and rice. We found that -35/-10 elements alone cannot explain the transcriptional regulation of chloroplast genes. We also concluded that there are unlikely motifs shared by intergenic sequences of most of chloroplast genes, indicating that these genes are regulated differently. Finally and surprisingly, we found five conserved motifs, each of which occurs in no more than six chloroplast intergenic sequences, are significantly shared by promoters of nuclear-genes encoding chloroplast proteins. By integrating information from gene function annotation, protein subcellular localization analyses, protein-protein interaction data, and gene expression data, we further showed support of the functionality of these conserved motifs. Our study implies the existence of unknown nuclear-encoded transcription factors that regulate both chloroplast genes and nuclear genes encoding chloroplast protein, which sheds light on the understanding of the transcriptional regulation of chloroplast genes.

Chloroplasts: !play critical roles in! land plant cells 
DNA regulatory sequences: !limited in! chloroplast genomes 
intergenic regions: !study putative DNA regulatory sequences in! seven plant species 
promoter sequences: !study putative DNA regulatory sequences in! Arabidopsis and rice 
-35/-10 elements: !cannot explain! transcriptional regulation of chloroplast genes 
motifs: !unlikely shared by! intergenic sequences of most of chloroplast genes 
five conserved motifs: !significantly shared by! promoters of nuclear-genes encoding chloroplast proteins 
gene function annotation: !support functionality of! conserved motifs 
protein subcellular localization analyses: !support functionality of! conserved motifs 
protein-protein interaction data: !support functionality of! conserved motifs 
gene expression data: !support functionality of! conserved motifs 
unknown nuclear-encoded transcription factors: !regulate both! chloroplast genes and nuclear genes encoding chloroplast protein