['22751378', 'Tubby and Tubby-like proteins (TLPs) were first discovered in mammals, where they  are involved in the development and function of neuronal cells. Due to their  importance as plasma membrane (PM)-tethered transcription factors or mediators of  vesicle trafficking, their lack causes obesity and other disease syndromes.  Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate binding of the carboxyl-terminal Tubby  domain attaches these proteins to the PM and vesicles and is essential for  function. TLPs are conserved across eukaryotic kingdoms including plants,  suggesting fundamental biological functions of TLPs. Plant TLPs possess an  amino-terminal F-box domain that distinguishes them from other eukaryotic TLPs.  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) encodes 11 AtTLPs that fall into six  phylogenetic clades. We identified the significance of AtTLPs for root  colonization of Arabidopsis by the mutualistic fungus Piriformospora indica. Our  results further indicate conserved phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate-binding  sites in the Tubby domains that are required for PM anchoring of AtTLPs. More  detailed studies revealed phospholipase C-triggered release of AtTLP3 from the  PM, indicating a conserved mechanism as reported for mammalian Tubby and TLP3. We  further show that hydrogen peroxide stimulates the release of AtTLP3 from the PM,  presumably for activating downstream events. Different from mammalian homologs,  the amino-terminal part of almost all AtTLPs has nucleocytosolic and plastidial  localization patterns. Thus, it is tempting to assume that TLPs translate  reactive oxygen species currents into signaling not only for transcriptional  regulation in the nucleus but also affect plastid-associated functions after  release from the PM.', '2012 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.201319', 'Schafer']

Tubby and TLP: !bind to! Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 
AtTLP3: !released from! PM by Phospholipase C 
AtTLP3: !released from! PM by Hydrogen Peroxide 
AtTLPs: !localize to! Nucleocytosolic and Plastidial 
TLPs: !translate! Reactive Oxygen Species Currents