['22762281', 'The plant mitochondrial DNA-binding protein ODB1 was identified from a  mitochondrial extract after DNA-affinity purification. ODB1 (organellar  DNA-binding protein 1) co-purified with WHY2, a mitochondrial member of the  WHIRLY family of plant-specific proteins involved in the repair of organellar  DNA. The Arabidopsis thaliana ODB1 gene is identical to RAD52-1, which encodes a  protein functioning in homologous recombination in the nucleus but additionally  localizing to mitochondria. We confirmed the mitochondrial localization of ODB1  by in vitro and in vivo import assays, as well as by immunodetection on  Arabidopsis subcellular fractions. In mitochondria, WHY2 and ODB1 were found in  large nucleo-protein complexes. Both proteins co-immunoprecipitated in a  DNA-dependent manner. In vitro assays confirmed DNA binding by ODB1 and showed  that the protein has higher affinity for single-stranded than for double-stranded  DNA. ODB1 showed no sequence specificity in vitro. In vivo, DNA  co-immunoprecipitation indicated that ODB1 binds sequences throughout the  mitochondrial genome. ODB1 promoted annealing of complementary DNA sequences,  suggesting a RAD52-like function as a recombination mediator. Arabidopsis odb1  mutants were morphologically indistinguishable from the wild-type, but following  DNA damage by genotoxic stress, they showed reduced mitochondrial homologous  recombination activity. Under the same conditions, the odb1 mutants showed an  increase in illegitimate repair bypasses generated by microhomology-mediated  recombination. These observations identify ODB1 as a further component of  homologous recombination-dependent DNA repair in plant mitochondria.', '2012 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.05097.x', 'Gualberto']

ODB1: !co-purifies with! WHY2 
ODB1: !localizes to! mitochondria 
ODB1: !interacts with! DNA 
ODB1: !binds! sequences throughout mitochondrial genome 
ODB1: !promotes! annealing of complementary DNA sequences 
ODB1: !enhances! homologous recombination activity 
ODB1: !increases! illegitimate repair bypasses