['22760209', 'Triacylglycerol (TAG) levels and oil bodies persist in sucrose (Suc)-rescued  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings disrupted in seed oil catabolism.  This study set out to establish if TAG levels persist as a metabolically inert  pool when downstream catabolism is disrupted, or if other mechanisms, such as  fatty acid (FA) recycling into TAG are operating. We show that TAG composition  changes significantly in Suc-rescued seedlings compared with that found in dry  seeds, with 18:2 and 18:3 accumulating. However, 20:1 FA is not efficiently  recycled back into TAG in young seedlings, instead partitioning into the membrane  lipid fraction and diacylglycerol. In the lipolysis mutant sugar dependent1and  the beta-oxidation double mutant acx1acx2 (for acyl-Coenzyme A oxidase), levels of  TAG actually increased in seedlings growing on Suc. We performed a transcriptomic  study and identified up-regulation of an acyltransferase gene, DIACYLGLYCEROL  ACYLTRANSFERASE3 (DGAT3), with homology to a peanut (Arachis hypogaea) cytosolic  acyltransferase. The acyl-Coenzyme A substrate for this acyltransferase  accumulates in mutants that are blocked in oil breakdown postlipolysis. Transient  expression in Nicotiana benthamiana confirmed involvement in TAG synthesis and  specificity toward 18:3 and 18:2 FAs. Double-mutant analysis with the peroxisomal  ATP-binding cassette transporter mutant peroxisomal ABC transporter1 indicated  involvement of DGAT3 in the partitioning of 18:3 into TAG in mutant seedlings  growing on Suc. Fusion of the DGAT3 protein with green fluorescent protein  confirmed localization to the cytosol of N. benthamiana. This work has  demonstrated active recycling of 18:2 and 18:3 FAs into TAG when seed oil  breakdown is blocked in a process involving a soluble cytosolic acyltransferase.', '2012 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.201541', 'Graham']

Triacylglycerol: !persists in! Suc-rescued seedlings 
Fatty acid: !partitions into! membrane lipid fraction 
Sugar dependent1: !increases! TAG levels 
beta-oxidation double mutant acx1acx2: !increases! TAG levels 
DIACYLGLYCEROL ACYLTRANSFERASE3: !up-regulated! in transcriptomic study 
DIACYLGLYCEROL ACYLTRANSFERASE3: !synthesizes! TAG 
DIACYLGLYCEROL ACYLTRANSFERASE3: !specific to! 18:3 and 18:2 FAs 
peroxisomal ABC transporter1: !involves! DGAT3 in partitioning of 18:3 into TAG 
DGAT3 protein: !localizes to! cytosol of N. benthamiana