['22773682', 'A family of eight genes with homology to mammalian glutathione peroxidase (GPX)  isoenzymes, designated AtGPX1-AtGPX8, has been identified in Arabidopsis  thaliana. In this study we demonstrated the functional analysis of Arabidopsis  AtGPX8 with peroxidase activity toward H(2)O(2) and lipid hydroperoxides using  thioredoxin as an electron donor. The transcript and protein levels of AtGPX8 in  Arabidopsis were up-regulated coordinately in response to oxidative damage caused  by high-light (HL) stress or treatment with paraquat (PQ). Furthermore, the  knockout Arabidopsis mutants of AtGPX8 (KO-gpx8) exhibited increased sensitivity  to oxidative damage caused by PQ treatment in root elongation compared with the  wild-type plants. In contrast, transgenic lines overexpressing AtGPX8 (Ox-AtGPX8)  were less sensitive to oxidative damage than the wild-type plants. The levels of  oxidized proteins in the KO-gpx8 and Ox-AtGPX8 lines were enhanced and  suppressed, respectively, compared with the wild-type plants under HL stress or  PQ treatment. The fusion protein of AtGPX8 tagged with green  fl uorescent protein  was localized in the cytosol and nucleus of onion epidermal cells. In addition,  the AtGPX8 protein was detected in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions prepared  from leaves of Arabidopsis plants using the AtGPX8 antibody. Oxidative DNA damage  under treatment with PQ increased in the wild-type and KO-gpx8 plants, while it  decreased in the OX-AtGPX8 plants. These results suggest that AtGPX8 plays an  important role in the protection of cellular components including nuclear DNA  against oxidative stress.', '2012 Sep', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcs100', 'Shigeoka']

AtGPX8: !up-regulates in response to! oxidative damage 
AtGPX8: !increases sensitivity of! knockout mutants 
AtGPX8: !decreases sensitivity of! transgenic lines 
AtGPX8: !enhances oxidized proteins in! KO-gpx8 
AtGPX8: !suppresses oxidized proteins in! Ox-AtGPX8 
AtGPX8: !localizes to! cytosol and nucleus 
AtGPX8: !protects! cellular components 
AtGPX8: !reduces! oxidative DNA damage