['22811435', 'Chloroplasts develop from proplastids in a process that requires the interplay of  nuclear and chloroplast genomes, but key steps in this developmental process have  yet to be elucidated. Here, we show that the nucleus-localized transcription  factors GATA NITRATE-INDUCIBLE CARBON-METABOLISM-INVOLVED (GNC) and  CYTOKININ-RESPONSIVE GATA1 (CGA1) regulate chloroplast development, growth, and  division in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). GNC and CGA1 are highly expressed  in green tissues, and the phytohormone cytokinin regulates their expression. A  gnc cga1 mutant exhibits a reduction in overall chlorophyll levels as well as in  chloroplast size in the hypocotyl. Ectopic overexpression of either GNC or CGA1  promotes chloroplast biogenesis in hypocotyl cortex and root pericycle cells,  based on increases in the number and size of the chloroplasts, and also results  in expanded zones of chloroplast production into the epidermis of hypocotyls and  cotyledons and into the cortex of roots. Ectopic overexpression also promotes the  development of etioplasts from proplastids in dark-grown seedlings, subsequently  enhancing the deetiolation process. Inducible expression of GNC demonstrates that  GNC-mediated chloroplast biogenesis can be regulated postembryonically, notably  so for chloroplast production in cotyledon epidermal cells. Analysis of the gnc  cga1 loss-of-function and overexpression lines supports a role for these  transcription factors in regulating the effects of cytokinin on chloroplast  division. These data support a model in which GNC and CGA1 serve as two of the  master transcriptional regulators of chloroplast biogenesis, acting downstream of  cytokinin and mediating the development of chloroplasts from proplastids and  enhancing chloroplast growth and division in specific tissues.', '2012 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.198705', 'Schaller']

GNC: !regulates! chloroplast development 
CGA1: !regulates! chloroplast development 
cytokinin: !regulates! GNC and CGA1 expression 
gnc cga1 mutant: !exhibits reduction in! chlorophyll levels 
GNC/CGA1: !promote! chloroplast biogenesis 
GNC/CGA1: !enhance! deetiolation process 
GNC: !can be regulated postembryonically! 
GNC/CGA1: !serve as master transcriptional regulators of! chloroplast biogenesis 
GNC/CGA1: !act downstream of! cytokinin