Lipid peroxidation (LPO) is induced by a variety of abiotic and biotic stresses. Although LPO is involved in diverse signaling processes, little is known about the oxidation mechanisms and major lipid targets. A systematic lipidomics analysis of LPO in the interaction of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) with Pseudomonas syringae revealed that LPO is predominantly confined to plastid lipids comprising galactolipid and triacylglyceride species and precedes programmed cell death. Singlet oxygen was identified as the major cause of lipid oxidation under basal conditions, while a 13-lipoxygenase (LOX2) and free radical-catalyzed lipid oxidation substantially contribute to the increase upon pathogen infection. Analysis of lox2 mutants revealed that LOX2 is essential for enzymatic membrane peroxidation but not for the pathogen-induced free jasmonate production. Despite massive oxidative modification of plastid lipids, levels of nonoxidized lipids dramatically increased after infection. Pathogen infection also induced an accumulation of fragmented lipids. Analysis of mutants defective in 9-lipoxygenases and LOX2 showed that galactolipid fragmentation is independent of LOXs. We provide strong in vivo evidence for a free radical-catalyzed galactolipid fragmentation mechanism responsible for the formation of the essential biotin precursor pimelic acid as well as of azelaic acid, which was previously postulated to prime the immune response of Arabidopsis. Our results suggest that azelaic acid is a general marker for LPO rather than a general immune signal. The proposed fragmentation mechanism rationalizes the pathogen-induced radical amplification and formation of electrophile signals such as phytoprostanes, malondialdehyde, and hexenal in plastids.

LPO: !induced by! abiotic/biotic stresses 
Singlet oxygen: !major cause of! lipid oxidation 
LOX2: !essential for! enzymatic membrane peroxidation 
LOX2: !contributes to! increase upon pathogen infection 
galactolipid fragmentation: !independent of! LOXs 
pimelic acid: !formed from! galactolipid fragmentation 
azelaic acid: !general marker for! LPO