In angiosperms, growth of the root apex is determined by the quiescent centre. All tissues of the root proper and the root cap are derived from initial cells that surround this zone. The diversity of cell lineages originated from these initials suggests an interesting variation of the displacement velocity within the root apex. However, little is known about this variation, especially in the most apical region including the root cap. This paper shows a method of determination of velocity field for this region taking the Arabidopsis root apex as example. Assuming the symplastic growth without a rotation around the root axis, the method combines mathematical modelling and two types of empirical data: the published velocity profile along the root axis above the quiescent centre, and dimensions of cell packet originated from the initials of epidermis and lateral root cap. The velocities, calculated for points of the axial section, vary in length and direction. Their length increases with distance from the quiescent centre, in the root cap at least twice slower than in the root proper, if points at similar distance from the quiescent centre are compared. The vector orientation depends on the position of a calculation point, the widest range of angular changes, reaching almost 90°, in the lateral root cap. It is demonstrated how the velocity field is related to both distribution of growth rates and growth-resulted deformation of the cell wall system. Also changes in the field due to cell pattern asymmetry and differences in slope of the velocity profile are modelled.

quiescent centre: !determines! growth of root apex 
initial cells: !surround! quiescent centre 
velocity profile: !published along! root axis 
dimensions of cell packet: !empirically determined from! epidermis and lateral root cap 
length of velocity: !increases with! distance from quiescent centre 
vector orientation: !depends on! position of calculation point 
growth rates: !related to! velocity field 
deformation of cell wall system: !resulted from! growth 
cell pattern asymmetry: !changes! velocity field 
differences in slope of velocity profile: !affects! velocity field