['22829320', 'Six Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) clade A protein phosphatase 2Cs (PP2Cs)  have established abscisic acid (ABA) signaling roles; however, phenotypic roles  of the remaining three "HAI" PP2Cs, Highly ABA-Induced1 (HAI1), AKT1-Interacting  PP2C1/HAI2, and HAI3, have remained unclear. HAI PP2C mutants had enhanced  proline and osmoregulatory solute accumulation at low water potential, while  mutants of other clade A PP2Cs had no or lesser effect on these drought  resistance traits. hai1-2 also had increased expression of abiotic  stress-associated genes, including dehydrins and late embryogenesis abundant  proteins, but decreased expression of several defense-related genes. Conversely,  the HAI PP2Cs had relatively less impact on several ABA sensitivity phenotypes.  HAI PP2C single mutants were unaffected in ABA sensitivity, while double and  triple mutants were moderately hypersensitive in postgermination ABA response but  ABA insensitive in germination. The HAI PP2Cs interacted most strongly with PYL5  and PYL7 to -10 of the PYL/RCAR ABA receptor family, with PYL7 to -10  interactions being relatively little affected by ABA in yeast two-hybrid assays.  HAI1 had especially limited PYL interaction. Reduced expression of the main  HAI1-interacting PYLs at low water potential when HAI1 expression was strongly  induced also suggests limited PYL regulation and a role of HAI1 activity in  negatively regulating specific drought resistance phenotypes. Overall, the HAI  PP2Cs had greatest effect on ABA-independent low water potential phenotypes and  lesser effect on classical ABA sensitivity phenotypes. Both this and their  distinct PYL interaction demonstrate a new level of functional differentiation  among the clade A PP2Cs and a point of cross talk between ABA-dependent and  ABA-independent drought-associated signaling.', '2012 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.202408', 'Verslues']

Six Arabidopsis PP2Cs: !affects! ABA signaling
HAI PP2C mutants: !enhances! proline and osmoregulatory solute accumulation
HAI PP2C mutants: !increases! abiotic stress-associated gene expression
HAI PP2C mutants: !decreases! defense-related gene expression
HAI PP2C single mutants: !unaffected! in ABA sensitivity
HAI PP2Cs: !interacts with! PYL5 and PYL7 to -10
HAI1: !limited interaction! with PYLs
HAI1: !negatively regulates! specific drought resistance phenotypes