Drought stress affects cereals especially during the reproductive stage. The maize (Zea mays) drought transcriptome was studied using RNA-Seq analysis to compare drought-treated and well-watered fertilized ovary and basal leaf meristem tissue. More drought-responsive genes responded in the ovary compared with the leaf meristem. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis revealed a massive decrease in transcript abundance of cell division and cell cycle genes in the drought-stressed ovary only. Among Gene Ontology categories related to carbohydrate metabolism, changes in starch and Suc metabolism-related genes occurred in the ovary, consistent with a decrease in starch levels, and in Suc transporter function, with no comparable changes occurring in the leaf meristem. Abscisic acid (ABA)-related processes responded positively, but only in the ovaries. Related responses suggested the operation of low glucose sensing in drought-stressed ovaries. The data are discussed in the context of the susceptibility of maize kernel to drought stress leading to embryo abortion and the relative robustness of dividing vegetative tissue taken at the same time from the same plant subjected to the same conditions. Our working hypothesis involves signaling events associated with increased ABA levels, decreased glucose levels, disruption of ABA/sugar signaling, activation of programmed cell death/senescence through repression of a phospholipase C-mediated signaling pathway, and arrest of the cell cycle in the stressed ovary at 1 d after pollination. Increased invertase levels in the stressed leaf meristem, on the other hand, resulted in that tissue maintaining hexose levels at an "unstressed" level, and at lower ABA levels, which was correlated with successful resistance to drought stress.

Drought stress: !affects! cereals 
ovary: !responds more to! drought stress 
cell division/cycle genes: !decrease in abundance with! drought stress 
starch/Suc metabolism-related genes: !change in abundance with! drought stress 
ABA-related processes: !positively respond to! drought stress 
low glucose sensing: !operates in! drought-stressed ovaries 
ABA levels: !increase with! drought stress 
glucose levels: !decrease with! drought stress 
ABA/sugar signaling: !disrupted by! drought stress 
programmed cell death/senescence: !activated by! drought stress 
phospholipase C-mediated signaling pathway: !repressed by! drought stress 
cell cycle: !arrested in! stressed ovary 
invertase levels: !increased in! stressed leaf meristem 
hexose levels: !maintained at unstressed level by! invertase levels 
ABA levels: !correlated with successful resistance to! drought stress