Signaling pathways, and specifically the signaling pathway of calcium, have been widely implicated in the regulation of a variety of signals in plants. Calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) are essential sensor-transducers of calcium signaling pathways, the functional characterization of which is of great interest because they play important roles during growth and in response to a wide range of environmental and developmental stimuli. Here, we report the first evidence of transient and specific elevation of PnCDPK1 transcript level and enzyme activity following conversion of a leaf bud to a flower bud, as well as participation of PnCDPK1 in evocation and flower morphogenesis in Pharbitis nil. Fluorescence microscopy immunolocalization and biochemical analysis confirmed the presence of CDPK in shoot apexes. The protein level was low in leaves, vegetative apexes and increased significantly in apexes after a flowering long-induction night. In the vegetative apex, a very weak PnCDPK1 protein signal was accumulated prominently in the zone of the ground meristem and in external layers of tissues of the cortex. After the dark treatment, the signal in cells of the ground meristem was still present, but a significantly stronger signal appeared in epidermal cells, cortex tissue, and leaf primordium. At the onset of flower meristem development, the PnCDPK1 level diverged significantly. PnCDPK1 mRNA, protein level and enzyme activity were very low at the beginning of flower bud development and gradually increased in later stages, reaching the highest level in a fully open flower. Analysis of flower organs revealed that PnCDPK1 was accumulated mainly in petals and sepals rather than in pistils and stamens. Our results clearly indicate that PnCDPK1 is developmentally regulated and may be an important component in the signal transduction pathways for flower morphogenesis. Findings from this research are important for further dissecting mechanisms of flowering and functions of CDPKs in flowering plants.

PnCDPK1: !elevates! Transcript Level 
PnCDPK1: !participates in! Flower Morphogenesis 
PnCDPK1: !localizes to! Shoot Apexes 
PnCDPK1: !increases in! Apexes After Dark Treatment 
PnCDPK1: !diverges significantly! At Onset of Flower Meristem Development 
PnCDPK1: !accumulates mainly in! Petals and Sepals