['22854967', 'How stereoselective monolignol-derived phenoxy radical-radical coupling reactions  are differentially biochemically orchestrated in planta, whereby for example they  afford (+)- and (-)-pinoresinols, respectively, is both a fascinating mechanistic  and evolutionary question. In earlier work, biochemical control of  (+)-pinoresinol formation had been established to be engendered by a  (+)-pinoresinol-forming dirigent protein in Forsythia intermedia, whereas the  presence of a (-)-pinoresinol-forming dirigent protein was indirectly deduced  based on the enantiospecificity of downstream pinoresinol reductases (AtPrRs) in  Arabidopsis thaliana root tissue. In this study of 16 putative dirigent protein  homologs in Arabidopsis, AtDIR6, AtDIR10, and AtDIR13 were established to be  root-specific using a beta-glucuronidase reporter gene strategy. Of these three, in  vitro analyses established that only recombinant AtDIR6 was a  (-)-pinoresinol-forming dirigent protein, whose physiological role was further  confirmed using overexpression and RNAi strategies in vivo. Interestingly, its  closest homolog, AtDIR5, was also established to be a (-)-pinoresinol-forming  dirigent protein based on in vitro biochemical analyses. Both of these were  compared in terms of properties with a (+)-pinoresinol-forming dirigent protein  from Schizandra chinensis. In this context, sequence analyses, site-directed  mutagenesis, and region swapping resulted in identification of putative substrate  binding sites/regions and candidate residues controlling distinct  stereoselectivities of coupling modes.', '2012 Oct 5', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M112.387423', 'Lewis']

AtDIR6: !forms! (-)-pinoresinol 
AtDIR5: !forms! (-)-pinoresinol 
AtDIR6: !compared with! Schizandra chinensis 
AtDIR5: !compared with! Schizandra chinensis 
AtDIR6: !localizes to! Arabidopsis root tissue 
AtDIR10: !localizes to! Arabidopsis root tissue 
AtDIR13: !localizes to! Arabidopsis root tissue 
AtDIR6: !enhances! (+)-pinoresinol formation 
AtPrRs: !affects! enantiospecificity 
AtDIR6: !interacts with! AtDIR5 
AtDIR6: !represses! AtDIR10 
AtDIR6: !synthesizes! beta-glucuronidase reporter gene