Despite substantial evidence on the essential roles of cell wall invertase (CWIN) in seed filling, it remains largely unknown how CWIN exerts its regulation early in seed development, a critical stage that sets yield potential. To fill this knowledge gap, we systematically examined the spatial and temporal expression patterns of a major CWIN gene, GhCWIN1, in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) seeds from prefertilization to prestorage phase. GhCWIN1 messenger RNA was abundant at the innermost seed coat cell layer at 5 d after anthesis but became undetectable at 10 d after anthesis, at the onset of its differentiation into transfer cells characterized by wall ingrowths, suggesting that CWIN may negatively regulate transfer cell differentiation. Within the filial tissues, GhCWIN1 transcript was detected in endosperm cells undergoing nuclear division but not in those cells at the cellularization stage, with similar results observed in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) endosperm for CWIN, AtCWIN4. These findings indicate a function of CWIN in nuclear division but not cell wall biosynthesis in endosperm, contrasting to the role proposed for sucrose synthase (Sus). Further analyses revealed a preferential expression pattern of GhCWIN1 and AtCWIN4 in the provascular region of the torpedo embryos in cotton and Arabidopsis seed, respectively, indicating a role of CWIN in vascular initiation. Together, these novel findings provide insights into the roles of CWIN in regulating early seed development spatially and temporally. By comparing with previous studies on Sus expression and in conjunction with the expression of other related genes, we propose models of CWIN- and Sus-mediated regulation of early seed development.

GhCWIN1: !localizes to! innermost seed coat cell layer
GhCWIN1: !represses! transfer cell differentiation
GhCWIN1: !synthesizes! nuclear division in endosperm cells
AtCWIN4: !localizes to! provascular region of torpedo embryos
GhCWIN1: !interacts with! AtCWIN4
CWIN: !enhances! vascular initiation