The proteomic profiles of primary needles from Cr2-resistant and cr2-susceptible Pinus monticola seedlings were analysed post Cronartium ribicola inoculation by 2-DE. One hundred-and-five protein spots exhibiting significant differential expression were identified using LC-MS/MS. Functional classification showed that the most numerous proteins are involved in defence signalling, oxidative burst, metabolic pathways, and other physiological processes. Our results revealed that differential expression of proteins in response to C. ribicola inoculation was genotype- and infection-stage dependent. Responsive proteins in resistant seedlings with incompatible white pine blister rust (WPBR) interaction included such well-characterized proteins as heat shock proteins (HSPs), reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging enzymes, and intermediate factors functioning in the signal transduction pathways triggered by well-known plant R genes, as well as new candidates in plant defence like sugar epimerase, GTP-binding proteins, and chloroplastic ribonucleoproteins. Fewer proteins were regulated in susceptible seedlings; most of them were in common with resistant seedlings and related to photosynthesis among others. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis confirmed HSP- and ROS-related genes played an important role in host defence in response to C. ribicola infection. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comparative proteomics study on WPBR interactions at the early stages of host defence, which provides a reference proteomic profile for other five-needle pines as well as resistance candidates for further understanding of host resistance in the WPBR pathosystem.

HSPs: !enhance! defence signalling 
ROS scavenging enzymes: !enhance! defence signalling 
Intermediate factors: !function in! signal transduction pathways 
Sugar epimerase: !plays role in! plant defence 
GTP-binding proteins: !play role in! plant defence 
Chloroplastic ribonucleoproteins: !play role in! plant defence 
Photosynthesis: !related to! susceptible seedlings 
HSPs: !confirmed by! quantitative RT-PCR analysis 
ROS-related genes: !confirmed by! quantitative RT-PCR analysis