The SE7 somaclonal line of finger millet (Eleusine coracana) achieved increased grain yield in field trials that apparently resulted from a higher number of inflorescences and seeds per plant, compared with the wild type. Levels of endogenous cytokinins, especially those of highly physiologically active iso-pentenyl adenine, were increased during early inflorescence development in SE7 plants. Transcript levels of cytokinin-degrading enzymes but not of a cytokinin-synthesizing enzyme were also decreased in young leaves, seedlings, and initiating inflorescences of SE7. These data suggest that attenuated degradation of cytokinins in SE7 inflorescences leads to higher cytokinin levels that stimulate meristem activity and result in production of more inflorescences. Gene expression was compared between SE7 and wild-type young inflorescences using the barley 12K cDNA array. The largest fraction of up-regulated genes in SE7 was related to transcription, translation, and cell proliferation, cell wall assembly/biosynthesis, and to growth regulation of young and meristematic tissues including floral formation. Other up-regulated genes were associated with protein and lipid degradation and mitochondrial energy production. Down-regulated genes were related to pathogen defence and stress response, primary metabolism, glycolysis, and the C:N balance. The results indicate a prolonged proliferation phase in SE7 young inflorescences characterized by up-regulated protein synthesis, cytokinesis, floral formation, and energy production. In contrast, wild-type inflorescences are similar to a more differentiated status characterized by regulated protein degradation, cell elongation, and defence/stress responses. It is concluded that attenuated degradation of cytokinins in SE7 inflorescences leads to higher cytokinin levels, which stimulate meristem activity, inflorescence formation, and seed set.

Cytokinin: !increases! Meristem activity
SE7: !attenuates degradation of! Cytokinin
Transcription/Translation: !up-regulated in! SE7
Cell Wall Assembly/Biosynthesis: !up-regulated in! SE7
Growth Regulation: !up-regulated in! SE7
Protein/Lipid Degradation: !up-regulated in! SE7
Mitochondrial Energy Production: !up-regulated in! SE7
Pathogen Defence/Stress Response: !down-regulated in! SE7
Primary Metabolism/Glycolysis/C:N Balance: !down-regulated in! SE7