['22902692', 'The Arabidopsis B3-domain transcription factor FUSCA3 (FUS3) is a master  regulator of seed maturation and also a central modulator of hormonal responses  during late embryogenesis and germination. Recently, we have identified AKIN10,  the Arabidopsis ortholog of Snf1 (Sucrose Non-Fermenting-1)-Related Kinase1  (SnRK1), as a FUS3-interacting protein. We demonstrated that AKIN10 physically  interacts with and phosphorylates FUS3 at its N-terminal region, and genetically  interacts with FUS3 to regulate developmental phase transition and lateral organ  growth. Snf1/AMPK/SnRK1 kinases are important sensors of the cellular energy  level, and they are activated in response to starvation and cellular stress. Here  we present findings that indicate FUS3 and AKIN10 functionally overlap in ABA  signaling, but play different roles in sugar responses during germination. Seeds  overexpressing FUS3 and AKIN10 both display ABA-hypersensitivity and delayed  germination. The latter is partly dependent on de novo ABA synthesis in both  genotypes, as delayed germination can be partially rescued by the ABA  biosynthesis inhibitor, fluridone. However, seeds and seedlings overexpressing  FUS3 and AKIN10 show different sugar responses. AKIN10-overexpressing seeds and  seedlings are hypersensitive to glucose, while those overexpressing FUS3 display  overall defects in osmotic stress, primarily during seedling growth, as they show  increased sensitivity toward sorbitol and glucose. Hypersensitivity to sugar  and/or osmotic stress during germination are partly dependent on de novo ABA  synthesis for both genotypes, although are likely to act through distinct  pathways. This data suggests that AKIN10 and FUS3 both act as positive regulators  of seed responses to ABA, and that AKIN10 regulates sugar signaling while FUS3  mediates osmotic stress responses.', '2012 Oct 1', 'Plant Signal Behav', '10.4161/psb.21549', 'Gazzarrini']

FUS3: !interacts with! AKIN10
AKIN10: !physically interacts with and phosphorylates! FUS3
FUS3: !genetically interacts with! AKIN10
FUS3: !regulates! developmental phase transition and lateral organ growth
Snf1/AMPK/SnRK1 kinases: !activated in response to! starvation and cellular stress
FUS3: !overlaps with! AKIN10 in ABA signaling
FUS3: !plays different role in! sugar responses during germination
FUS3 and AKIN10: !overexpressing both display! ABA-hypersensitivity and delayed germination
FUS3 and AKIN10: !hypersensitivity to sugar and/or osmotic stress during germination! partly dependent on de novo ABA synthesis
AKIN10: !regulates! sugar signaling
FUS3: !mediates! osmotic stress responses