['22912871', 'The expression of auxin-responsive genes is regulated by the TIR1/AFB auxin  receptor-dependent degradation of Aux/IAA transcriptional repressors, which  interact with auxin-responsive factors (ARFs). Most of the 29 Aux/IAA genes  present in Arabidopsis have not been functionally characterized to date. IAA8  appears to have a distinct function from the other Aux/IAA genes, due to its  unique transcriptional response to auxin and the stability of its encoded  protein. In this study, we characterized the function of Arabidopsis IAA8 in  various developmental processes governed by auxin and in the transcriptional  regulation of the auxin response. Transgenic plants expressing estrogen-inducible  IAA8 (XVE::IAA8) exhibited significantly fewer lateral roots than the wild type,  and an IAA8 loss-of-function mutant exhibited significantly more. Ectopic  overexpression of IAA8 resulted in abnormal gravitropism. The strong induction of  early auxin-responsive marker genes by auxin treatment was delayed by IAA8  overexpression. GFP-fusion analysis revealed that IAA8 localized not only to the  nucleus, but, in contrast to other Aux/IAAs, also to the cytosol. Furthermore, we  demonstrated that IAA8 interacts with TIR1, in an auxin-dependent fashion, and  with ARF proteins, both in yeast and in planta. Taken together, our results show  that IAA8 is involved in lateral root formation, and that this process is  regulated through the interaction with the TIR1 auxin receptor and ARF  transcription factors in the nucleus.', '2012', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0043414', 'Kaminaka']

TIR1/AFB: !regulates! expression of auxin-responsive genes 
Aux/IAA: !interacts with! auxin-responsive factors 
IAA8: !distinct from! other Aux/IAA genes 
XVE::IAA8: !exhibits fewer! lateral roots 
IAA8 mutant: !exhibits more! lateral roots 
Ectopic overexpression of IAA8: !causes abnormal! gravitropism 
IAA8: !delays induction of! early auxin-responsive marker genes 
IAA8: !localizes to! nucleus and cytosol 
IAA8: !interacts with! TIR1 and ARF proteins