['22933714', 'Nucleotide sugar transporters (NSTs) are antiporters comprising a gene family  that plays a fundamental role in the biosynthesis of complex cell wall  polysaccharides and glycoproteins in plants. However, due to the limited number  of related mutants that have observable phenotypes, the biological function(s) of  most NSTs in cell wall biosynthesis and assembly have remained elusive. Here, we  report the characterization of AtUTr7 from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana (L.)  Heynh.), which is homologous to multi-specific UDP-sugar transporters from  Drosophila melanogaster, humans, and Caenorhabditis elegans. We show that AtUTr7  possesses the common structural characteristics conserved among NSTs. Using a  green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged version, we demonstrate that AtUTr7 is  localized in the Golgi apparatus. We also show that AtUTr7 is widely expressed,  especially in the roots and in specific floral organs. Additionally, the results  of an in vitro nucleotide sugar transport assay carried out with a tobacco and a  yeast expression system suggest that AtUTr7 is capable of transferring UDP-Gal  and UDP-Glc, but not a range of other UDP- and GDP-sugars, into the Golgi lumen.  Mutants lacking expression of AtUTr7 exhibited an early proliferation of lateral  roots as well as distorted root hairs when cultivated at high sucrose  concentrations. Furthermore, the distribution of homogalacturonan with a low  degree of methyl esterification differed in lateral root tips of the mutant  compared to wild-type plants, although additional analytical procedures revealed  no further differences in the composition of the root cell walls. This evidence  suggests that the transport of UDP-Gal and UDP-Glc into the Golgi under  conditions of high root biomass production plays a role in lateral root and root  hair development.', '2012 Nov', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/sss074', 'Orellana']

AtUTr7: !localizes to! Golgi apparatus 
AtUTr7: !transports! UDP-Gal and UDP-Glc 
AtUTr7: !enhances! lateral root and root hair development 
Mutant lacking AtUTr7: !exhibits! early proliferation of lateral roots and distorted root hairs 
Mutant lacking AtUTr7: !differs in! homogalacturonan distribution