['22933713', 'Nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) is a highly conserved transcription factor presented in  all eukaryotic organisms, and is a heterotrimer consisting of three subunits:  NF-YA, NF-YB, and NF-YC. In Arabidopsis, these three subunits are encoded by  multigene families. The best-studied member of the NF-Y transcription factors is  LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1), a NF-YB family member, which plays a critical role in  embryogenesis and seed maturation. However, the function of most NF-Y genes  remains elusive. Here, we report the characterization of four genes in the NF-YA  family. We found that a gain-of-function mutant of NF-YA1 showed defects in male  gametogenesis and embryogenesis. Consistently, overexpression of NF-YA1, 5, 6,  and 9 affects male gametogenesis, embryogenesis, seed morphology, and seed  germination, with a stronger phenotype when overexpressing NF-YA1 and NF-YA9.  Moreover, overexpression of these NF-YA genes also causes hypersensitivity to  abscisic acid (ABA) during seed germination, retarded seedling growth, and late  flowering at different degrees. Intriguingly, overexpression of NF-YA1, 5, 6, and  9 is sufficient to induce the formation of somatic embryos from the vegetative  tissues. However, single or double mutants of these NF-YA genes do not have  detectable phenotype. Collectively, these results provide evidence that NF-YA1,  5, 6, and 9 play redundant roles in male gametophyte development, embryogenesis,  seed development, and post-germinative growth.', '2013 Jan', 'Mol Plant', '10.1093/mp/sss061', 'Zuo']

NF-Y: !consists of! NF-YA, NF-YB, NF-YC 
LEC1: !plays a role in! embryogenesis and seed maturation 
NF-YA1: !affects! male gametogenesis and embryogenesis 
NF-YA1, 5, 6, 9: !overexpression affects! male gametogenesis, embryogenesis, seed morphology, seed germination, ABA sensitivity, retarded seedling growth, late flowering 
NF-YA1, 5, 6, 9: !induces! somatic embryo formation 
NF-YA1, 5, 6, 9: !play redundant roles in! male gametophyte development, embryogenesis, seed development, post-germinative growth