['22960247', 'Ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis regulates multiple aspects of plant growth and  development, but little is known about its role in ambient temperature-responsive  flowering. In addition to being regulated by daylength, the onset of flowering in  many plants can also be delayed by low ambient temperatures. Here, we show that  HIGH EXPRESSION OF OSMOTICALLY RESPONSIVE GENES 1 (HOS1), which encodes an E3  ubiquitin ligase, controls flowering time in response to ambient temperatures (16  and 23 degrees C) and intermittent cold. hos1 mutants flowered early, and were  insensitive to ambient temperature, but responded normally to vernalization and  gibberellic acid. Genetic analyses suggested that this ambient  temperature-insensitive flowering was independent of FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC).  Also, FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) and TWIN SISTER OF FT (TSF) expression was  up-regulated in hos1 mutants at both temperatures. The ft tsf mutation almost  completely suppressed the early flowering of hos1 mutants at different  temperatures, suggesting that FT and TSF are downstream of HOS1 in the ambient  temperature response. A lesion in CONSTANS (CO) did not affect the ambient  temperature-insensitive flowering phenotype of hos1-3 mutants. In silico analysis  showed that FVE was spatiotemporally co-expressed with HOS1. A HOS1-green  fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion co-localized with FVE-GFP in the nucleus at both  16 and 23 degrees C. HOS1 physically interacted with FVE and FLK in yeast two-hybrid and  co-immunoprecipitation assays. Moreover, hos1 mutants were insensitive to  intermittent cold. Collectively, our results suggest that HOS1 acts as a common  regulator in the signaling pathways that control flowering time in response to  low ambient temperature.', '2012 Oct', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcs123', 'Ahn']

HOS1: !regulates! flowering time 
HOS1: !up-regulates! FT, TSF 
HOS1: !independent of! FLC 
ft tsf: !suppresses! early flowering of hos1 mutants 
CO: !does not affect! ambient temperature-insensitive flowering phenotype of hos1-3 mutants 
FVE: !co-expressed with! HOS1 
FVE: !co-localizes with! HOS1 in nucleus 
FVE: !interacts with! HOS1, FLK