The objective of this study was to investigate whether the content of cell wall-bound phenolics can simultaneously influence both the productivity and the water status of triticale under soil drought conditions. Two parallel treatments were carried out. The T1 treatment involved plants being subjected to soil drought twice, during the tillering phase and then during the flowering phase. The T2 treatment included drought only during the flowering phase. After T1 treatment, the majority of cultivars exhibited better PSII functioning at the flowering phase in comparison to T2, which could be related to better adaptation of the photosynthetic apparatus to leaf dehydration. Simultaneously, the higher activity of the photosynthetic apparatus of flag leaves for T1 was significantly correlated with the higher content of cell wall-bound phenolics. The dry mass of plants was markedly lower in the T1 treatment and was correlated with a higher content of cell wall-bound phenolics. Moreover, cultivars subjected to the T1 treatment showed a significantly higher water content in comparison to the T2 treatment. The delay in the leaf rolling and the ageing of plants in the T1 treatment, which induced a higher level of cell wall-bound phenolics, was visual proof of the improvement in the water status of plants. Phenolic compounds that form cross-bridges with carbohydrates of the cell wall can be considered a more effective biochemical protective mechanism than free phenolics during the dehydration of leaves. This potentially higher level of effectiveness is likely the result of the double action of phenolic compounds, both as photoprotectors of the photosynthetic apparatus and hydrophobic stabilizers, preventing water loss from the apoplast.

T1: !enhances! PSII functioning
T1: !correlated with! higher content of cell wall-bound phenolics
T1: !correlated with! lower dry mass
T1: !correlated with! higher water content
Phenolic compounds: !form cross-bridges with! carbohydrates of the cell wall
Phenolic compounds: !double action of! photoprotectors and hydrophobic stabilizers