['23027663', 'Like many other viruses, Tobacco mosaic virus replicates in association with the  endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and exploits this membrane network for intercellular  spread through plasmodesmata (PD), a process depending on virus-encoded movement  protein (MP). The movement process involves interactions of MP with the ER and  the cytoskeleton as well as its targeting to PD. Later in the infection cycle,  the MP further accumulates and localizes to ER-associated inclusions, the viral  factories, and along microtubules before it is finally degraded. Although these  patterns of MP accumulation have been described in great detail, the underlying  mechanisms that control MP fate and function during infection are not known.  Here, we identify CELL-DIVISION-CYCLE protein48 (CDC48), a conserved chaperone  controlling protein fate in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and animal cells by  extracting protein substrates from membranes or complexes, as a cellular factor  regulating MP accumulation patterns in plant cells. We demonstrate that  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) CDC48 is induced upon infection, interacts  with MP in ER inclusions dependent on the MP N terminus, and promotes degradation  of the protein. We further provide evidence that CDC48 extracts MP from ER  inclusions to the cytosol, where it subsequently accumulates on and stabilizes  microtubules. We show that virus movement is impaired upon overexpression of  CDC48, suggesting that CDC48 further functions in controlling virus movement by  removal of MP from the ER transport pathway and by promoting interference of MP  with microtubule dynamics. CDC48 acts also in response to other proteins  expressed in the ER, thus suggesting a general role of CDC48 in ER membrane  maintenance upon ER stress.', '2012 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.207399', 'Heinlein']

MP: !interacts with! CDC48 
CDC48: !induces! MP 
CDC48: !extracts! MP 
CDC48: !promotes degradation of! MP 
CDC48: !stabilizes! microtubules 
CDC48: !impairs! virus movement 
CDC48: !responds to! other proteins expressed in ER