Although Agrobacterium-mediated transformation technology is now used widely in rice, many varieties of indica-type rice are still recalcitrant to Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. It was reported recently that T-DNA integration into the rice genome could be the limiting step in this method. Here, we attempted to establish an efficient sequential monitoring system for stable transformation events by visualizing stable transgene expression using a non-destructive and highly sensitive visible marker. Our results demonstrate that click beetle luciferase (ELuc) is an excellent marker allowing the observation of transformed cells in rice callus, exhibiting a sensitivity >30-fold higher than that of firefly luciferase. Since we have previously shown that green fluorescent protein (GFP) is a useful visual marker with which to follow transient and/or stable expression of transgenes in rice, we constructed an enhancer trap vector using both the gfbsd2 (GFP fused to the N-terminus of blasticidin S deaminase) and eluc genes. In this vector, the eluc gene is under the control of the Cauliflower mosaic virus 35S minimal promoter, while the gfbsd2 gene is under the control of the full-length rice elongation factor gene promoter. Observation of transformed callus under a dissecting microscope demonstrated that the level of ELuc luminescence reflected exclusively stable transgene expression, and that both transient and stable expression could be monitored by the level of GFP fluorescence. Moreover, we show that our system enables sequential quantification of transgene expression via differential measurement of ELuc luminescence and GFP fluorescence.

Agrobacterium-mediated transformation: !used widely in! rice 
T-DNA integration: !limiting step in! Agrobacterium-mediated transformation 
click beetle luciferase (ELuc): !excellent marker for! stable transgene expression 
green fluorescent protein (GFP): !useful visual marker for! transient and/or stable expression 
enhancer trap vector: !contains! gfbsd2 and eluc genes 
Cauliflower mosaic virus 35S minimal promoter: !controls! eluc gene 
rice elongation factor gene promoter: !controls! gfbsd2 gene 
dissecting microscope: !observes! transformed callus 
ELuc luminescence: !reflects! stable transgene expression 
GFP fluorescence: !monitors! transient and stable expression 
differential measurement: !enables quantification of! transgene expression