['23031218', 'The Arabidopsis SUC5 protein represents a classical sucrose/H(+) symporter.  Functional analyses previously revealed that SUC5 also transports biotin, an  essential co-factor for fatty acid synthesis. However, evidence for a dual role  in transport of the structurally unrelated compounds sucrose and biotin in plants  was lacking. Here we show that SUC5 localizes to the plasma membrane, and that  the SUC5 gene is expressed in developing embryos, confirming the role of the SUC5  protein as substrate carrier across apoplastic barriers in seeds. We show that  transport of biotin but not of sucrose across these barriers is impaired in suc5  mutant embryos. In addition, we show that SUC5 is essential for the delivery of  biotin into the embryo of biotin biosynthesis-defective mutants (bio1 and bio2).  We compared embryo and seedling development as well as triacylglycerol  accumulation and fatty acid composition in seeds of single mutants (suc5, bio1 or  bio2), double mutants (suc5 bio1 and suc5 bio2) and wild-type plants. Although  suc5 mutants were like the wild-type, bio1 and bio2 mutants showed developmental  defects and reduced triacylglycerol contents. In suc5 bio1 and suc5 bio2 double  mutants, developmental defects were severely increased and the triacylglycerol  content was reduced to a greater extent in comparison to the single mutants.  Supplementation with externally applied biotin helped to reduce symptoms in both  single and double mutants, but the efficacy of supplementation was significantly  lower in double than in single mutants, showing that transport of biotin into the  embryo is lower in the absence of SUC5.', '2013 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12037', 'Sauer']

SUC5: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
SUC5: !expresses in! developing embryos 
SUC5: !transports! biotin 
SUC5: !essential for! delivery of biotin into embryo 
bio1/2 mutants: !show! developmental defects 
bio1/2 mutants: !reduced! triacylglycerol contents 
suc5 bio1/2 double mutants: !severely increased! developmental defects 
suc5 bio1/2 double mutants: !greater reduction! triacylglycerol content 
externally applied biotin: !helps reduce! symptoms in single/double mutants