Turgor pressure in plant cells is involved in many important processes. Stable and normal turgor pressure is required for healthy growth of a plant, and changes in turgor pressure are indicative of changes taking place within the plant tissue. The ability to quantify the turgor pressure of plant cells in vivo would provide opportunities to understand better the process of pressure regulation within plants, especially when plant stress is considered, and to understand the role of turgor pressure in cellular signaling. Current experimental methods do not separate the influence of the turgor pressure from the effects associated with deformation of the cell wall when estimates of turgor pressure are made. In this paper, nanoindentation measurements are combined with finite element simulations to determine the turgor pressure of cells in vivo while explicitly separating the cell-wall properties from the turgor pressure effects. Quasi-static cyclic tests with variable depth form the basis of the measurements, while relaxation tests at low depth are used to determine the viscoelastic material properties of the cell wall. Turgor pressure is quantified using measurements on Arabidopsis thaliana under three pressure states (control, turgid and plasmolyzed) and at various stages of plant development. These measurements are performed on cells in vivo without causing damage to the cells, such that pressure changes may be studied for a variety of conditions to provide new insights into the biological response to plant stress conditions.

Turgor pressure: !involved in! many important processes 
Turgor pressure: !quantified by! nanoindentation measurements 
Nanoindentation measurements: !combined with! finite element simulations 
Finite element simulations: !separate! influence of turgor pressure from effects associated with deformation of cell wall 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !measured under! three pressure states 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !measured at! various stages of plant development 
Pressure changes: !studied for! variety of conditions