Festuca arundinacea is one of the most drought-tolerant species within the Lolium-Festuca complex and was used as a model for research aimed at identifying the chloroplast components involved in the proteomic response for drought stress in forage grasses. Individual F. arundinacea genotypes with contrasting levels of drought tolerance, the high-drought-tolerant (HDT) and the low-drought-tolerant (LDT) genotypes, were selected for comparative physiological and proteomic work. Measurements of water uptake, chlorophyll fluorescence, relative water content, electrolyte leakage, and gas exchange during drought and rewatering periods were followed by investigations on accumulation levels of chloroplast proteins before drought conditions, on d 3 and 11 of drought treatment, and after 10 d of subsequent watering, using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The proteins that were accumulated differentially between the selected plants were then identified by mass spectrometry. The LDT genotype revealed lower levels of water uptake and relative water content as drought progressed, and this was accompanied by lower levels of transpiration and net photosynthesis, and a higher level of electrolyte leakage observed in this genotype. Eighty-two protein accumulation profiles were compared between the HDT and LDT genotypes and ten proteins were shown to be differentially accumulated between them. The functions of the selected proteins in plant cells and their probable influence on the process of recovery after drought treatment in F. arundinacea are discussed.

HDT genotype: !exhibits! higher levels of water uptake
LDT genotype: !exhibits! lower levels of water uptake
HDT genotype: !exhibits! higher levels of relative water content
LDT genotype: !exhibits! lower levels of relative water content
HDT genotype: !exhibits! higher levels of transpiration
LDT genotype: !exhibits! lower levels of transpiration
HDT genotype: !exhibits! higher levels of net photosynthesis
LDT genotype: !exhibits! lower levels of net photosynthesis
HDT genotype: !exhibits! lower levels of electrolyte leakage
LDT genotype: !exhibits! higher levels of electrolyte leakage
82 proteins: !compared between! HDT and LDT genotypes
10 proteins: !differentially accumulated between! HDT and LDT genotypes
Proteins: !influence! process of recovery after drought treatment