Leaf senescence is a natural age-dependent process that is induced prematurely by various environmental stresses. Typical alterations during leaf senescence include breakdown of chlorophyll, a shift to catabolism of energy reserves, and induction of senescence-associated genes, all of which can occur during submergence, drought, and constant darkness. Here, we evaluated the influence of the submergence tolerance regulator, SUBMERGENCE1A (SUB1A), in the acclimation responses during leaf senescence caused by prolonged darkness in rice (Oryza sativa). SUB1A messenger RNA was highly induced by prolonged darkness in a near-isogenic line containing SUB1A. Genotypes with conditional and ectopic overexpression of SUB1A significantly delayed loss of leaf color and enhanced recovery from dark stress. Physiological analysis revealed that SUB1A postpones dark-induced senescence through the maintenance of chlorophyll and carbohydrate reserves in photosynthetic tissue. This delay allowed leaves of SUB1A genotypes to recover photosynthetic activity more quickly upon reexposure to light. SUB1A also restricted the transcript accumulation of representative senescence-associated genes. Jasmonate and salicylic acid are positive regulators of leaf senescence, but ectopic overexpression of SUB1A dampened responsiveness to both hormones in the context of senescence. We found that ethylene accelerated senescence stimulated by darkness and jasmonate, although SUB1A significantly restrained dark-induced ethylene accumulation. Overall, SUB1A genotypes displayed altered responses to prolonged darkness by limiting ethylene production and responsiveness to jasmonate and salicylic acid, thereby dampening the breakdown of chlorophyll, carbohydrates, and the accumulation of senescence-associated messenger RNAs. A delay of leaf senescence conferred by SUB1A can contribute to the enhancement of tolerance to submergence, drought, and oxidative stress.

SUB1A: !delays! Leaf senescence 
SUB1A: !maintains! Chlorophyll and carbohydrate reserves 
SUB1A: !restricts! Transcript accumulation of senescence-associated genes 
Jasmonate/Salicylic acid: !positively regulate! Leaf senescence 
SUB1A: !dampens! Responsiveness to jasmonate/salicylic acid 
Ethylene: !accelerates! Senescence stimulated by darkness/jasmonate 
SUB1A: !restrains! Dark-induced ethylene accumulation