Flavonols and hydroxycinnamic acids are known to contribute to plant resistance against pathogens, but there are few reports on the implication of flavonols in the resistance of grapevine against Plasmopara viticola, and none on the involvement of hydroxycinnamic acids. In order to analyze the effect of flavonols on P. viticola infection, variable amounts of flavonols were induced by different light conditions in otherwise phenologically identical leaves. Differences in content of leaf hydroxycinnamic acids were induced at the same time. A non-invasive monitoring of flavonols and hydroxycinnamic acids was performed with Dualex leaf-clip optical sensors. Whatever the light condition, there were no significant changes in flavonol or in hydroxycinnamic acid contents for control and inoculated leaves during the development of P. viticola until 6 days after inoculation. The violet-blue autofluorescence of stilbenes, the main phytoalexins of grapevine that accumulate in inoculated leaves, was used as an indicator of infection by P. viticola. The implication of leaf constitutive flavonols and hydroxycinnamic acids in the defence of Vitis vinifera against P. viticola could be investigated in vivo thanks to this indicator. The increase in stilbene violet-blue autofluorescence started earlier for leaves with low flavonol content than for leaves with higher content, suggesting that constitutive flavonols are able to slow down the infection by P. viticola. On the contrary, constitutive hydroxycinnamic acids did not seem to play a role in defence against P. viticola. The non-destructive nature of the methods used alleviates the major problem of destructive experiments: the large variability in leaf phenolic contents.

Flavonols: !affects! P. viticola infection 
Hydroxycinnamic acids: !affects! P. viticola infection 
Light conditions: !induces! Flavonols 
Light conditions: !induces! Hydroxycinnamic acids 
Dualex leaf-clip optical sensors: !monitors! Flavonols 
Dualex leaf-clip optical sensors: !monitors! Hydroxycinnamic acids 
Stilbenes: !indicates! P. viticola infection 
Low flavonol content: !accelerates! P. viticola infection 
High flavonol content: !slows down! P. viticola infection 
Constitutive hydroxycinnamic acids: !does not affect! P. viticola infection