Whole-genome duplication through the formation of diploid gametes is a major route for polyploidization, speciation, and diversification in plants. The prevalence of polyploids in adverse climates led us to hypothesize that abiotic stress conditions can induce or stimulate diploid gamete production. In this study, we show that short periods of cold stress induce the production of diploid and polyploid pollen in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Using a combination of cytological and genetic analyses, we demonstrate that cold stress alters the formation of radial microtubule arrays at telophase II and consequently leads to defects in postmeiotic cytokinesis and cell wall formation. As a result, cold-stressed male meiosis generates triads, dyads, and monads that contain binuclear and polynuclear microspores. Fusion of nuclei in binuclear and polynuclear microspores occurs spontaneously before pollen mitosis I and eventually leads to the formation of diploid and polyploid pollen grains. Using segregation analyses, we also found that the majority of cold-induced dyads and triads are genetically equivalent to a second division restitution and produce diploid gametes that are highly homozygous. In a broader perspective, these findings offer insights into the fundamental mechanisms that regulate male gametogenesis in plants and demonstrate that their sensitivity to environmental stress has evolutionary significance and agronomic relevance in terms of polyploidization.

Cold stress: !induces! diploid gamete production
Radial microtubule arrays: !altered by! cold stress
Telophase II: !localizes to! radial microtubule arrays
Postmeiotic cytokinesis: !defective due to! cold stress
Cell wall formation: !defective due to! cold stress
Binuclear and polynuclear microspores: !generated by! cold-stressed male meiosis
Nuclei: !fuse spontaneously in! binuclear and polynuclear microspores
Diploid and polyploid pollen grains: !formed by! fusion of nuclei
Second division restitution: !equivalent to! dyads and triads
Diploid gametes: !highly homozygous due to! second division restitution