Coronatine is a toxin produced by the pathogen Pseudomonas syringae. This compound has received much attention recently for its potential to act as a plant growth regulator and elicitor of plant secondary metabolism. To gain more insight into the mechanism by which elicitors can affect the biosynthesis of paclitaxel (Px) and related taxanes, the effect of coronatine (Cor) and methyl jasmonate (MeJA) on Taxus media cell cultures has been studied. For this study, a two-stage cell culture was established, in which cells were first cultured for 14 days in a medium optimised for growth, after which the cells were transferred to medium optimised for secondary metabolite production. The two elicitors were added to the medium at the beginning of the second stage. Total taxane production in the cell suspension was significantly enhanced by both elicitors, increasing from a maximum level of 8.14mg/L in control conditions to 21.48mg/L (day 12) with MeJA and 77.46mg/L (day 16) with Cor. Expression analysis indicated that the txs, t13oh, t2oh, t7oh, dbat, pam, bata and dbtnbt genes were variably induced by the presence of the elicitors. Genes encoding enzymes involved in the formation of the polihydroxylated hypothetical intermediate (TXS, T13OH, T2OH, T7OH) and the phenylalanoil CoA chain (PAM) were stronger induced than those encoding enzymes catalysing the last steps of the Px biosynthetic pathway (DBAT, BAPT and DBTNBT). Notably, although taxane accumulation differed qualitatively and quantitatively following MeJA- or Cor-elicitation, gene expression induction patterns were similar, inferring that both elicitors may involve distinct but yet uncharacterised regulatory mechanisms.

Coronatine: !enhances! Taxane production 
MeJA: !enhances! Taxane production 
TXS, T13OH, T2OH, T7OH: !induced by! Coronatine 
TXS, T13OH, T2OH, T7OH: !induced by! MeJA 
PAM: !induced by! Coronatine 
PAM: !induced by! MeJA 
DBAT, BAPT, DBTNBT: !induced by! Coronatine 
DBAT, BAPT, DBTNBT: !induced by! MeJA