['23104861', 'The molecular basis of primary wall extension endures as one of the central  enigmas in plant cell morphogenesis. Classical cell wall models suggest that  xyloglucan endo-transglycosylase activity is the primary catalyst (together with  expansins) of controlled cell wall loosening through the transient cleavage and  religation of xyloglucan-cellulose cross links. The genome of Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) contains 33 phylogenetically diverse XYLOGLUCAN  ENDO-TRANSGLYCOSYLASE/HYDROLASE (XTH) gene products, two of which were predicted  to be predominant xyloglucan endohydrolases due to clustering into group III-A.  Enzyme kinetic analysis of recombinant AtXTH31 confirmed this prediction and  indicated that this enzyme had similar catalytic properties to the nasturtium  (Tropaeolum majus) xyloglucanase1 responsible for storage xyloglucan hydrolysis  during germination. Global analysis of Genevestigator data indicated that AtXTH31  and the paralogous AtXTH32 were abundantly expressed in expanding tissues.  Microscopy analysis, utilizing the resorufin beta-glycoside of the xyloglucan  oligosaccharide XXXG as an in situ probe, indicated significant xyloglucan  endohydrolase activity in specific regions of both roots and hypocotyls, in good  correlation with transcriptomic data. Moreover, this hydrolytic activity was  essentially completely eliminated in AtXTH31/AtXTH32 double knockout lines.  However, single and double knockout lines, as well as individual overexpressing  lines, of AtXTH31 and AtXTH32 did not demonstrate significant growth or  developmental phenotypes. These results suggest that although xyloglucan  polysaccharide hydrolysis occurs in parallel with primary wall expansion,  morphological effects are subtle or may be compensated by other mechanisms. We  hypothesize that there is likely to be an interplay between these xyloglucan  endohydrolases and recently discovered apoplastic exo-glycosidases in the  hydrolytic modification of matrix xyloglucans.', '2013 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.207308', 'Brumer']

AtXTH31: !synthesizes! xyloglucan endohydrolase 
AtXTH32: !synthesizes! xyloglucan endohydrolase 
AtXTH31/AtXTH32: !eliminates! xyloglucan endohydrolase activity 
AtXTH31/AtXTH32: !lacks! growth/developmental phenotypes 
xyloglucan endohydrolases: !interacts with! apoplastic exo-glycosidases