The heat shock transcription factor (Hsf) family includes key regulators of the physiological response to heat stress. Here, we present a systematic analysis of the Hsf family in rice using a phylogenomics-based approach that integrates multi-omics data into the context of a phylogenetic tree. For 25 previously identified Hsfs, we integrated anatomical meta-profiling data from 983 Affymetrix arrays into a phylogenetic tree, revealing a global view of the functional redundancy within this family. Interestingly, most of the Hsfs showed significant fluctuation in gene expression patterns, suggesting that they have condition- or stress-dependent roles. Therefore, we further analyzed the abiotic stress responses of the Hsfs using log(2-)fold change data in response to heat, cold, drought and salt stresses. Subsequently, we identified 19 Hsfs that are positively associated with heat stress, 11 with drought, 9 with salt, and 7 with cold stress, as indicated by at least a 2-fold change and coefficient of variation less than 1. The Hsf subfamily A2 was conserved in the heat stress response. The Hsf subfamily C showed a strong positive association with drought, salt and cold stresses. Downregulation of three members in the Hsf subfamily B in response to cold stress is characteristic. More interestingly, half of the Hsf subfamily B genes were upregulated by heat, drought and salt stresses, while one gene in the other half was downregulated by drought, salt, and cold stresses. Finally, we developed a hypothetical functional gene network mediated by OsHsfA2e/OsHsf-12 that is involved in thermotolerance as well as upregulated in response to heat. We expect that our data will help researchers design more efficient strategies to study the rice Hsf family with information about probable functional redundancy.

Hsf: !regulates! physiological response to heat stress
Hsf: !fluctuates in! gene expression patterns
Hsf: !positively associated with! heat, drought, salt and cold stresses
Hsf: !conserved in! heat stress response
Hsf: !strongly associated with! drought, salt and cold stresses
Hsf: !downregulated by! cold stress
Hsf: !upregulated by! heat, drought and salt stresses
Hsf: !involved in! thermotolerance