['23129203', 'The methylesterification status of cell wall homogalacturonans, mediated through  the action of pectin methylesterases (PMEs), influences the biophysical  properties of plant cell walls such as elasticity and porosity, important  parameters for cell elongation and water uptake. The completion of seed  germination requires cell wall extensibility changes in both the radicle itself  and in the micropylar tissues surrounding the radicle. In wild-type seeds of  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), PME activities peaked around the time of  testa rupture but declined just before the completion of germination (endosperm  weakening and rupture). We overexpressed an Arabidopsis PME inhibitor to  investigate PME involvement in seed germination. Seeds of the resultant lines  showed a denser methylesterification status of their cell wall homogalacturonans,  but there were no changes in the neutral sugar and uronic acid composition of the  cell walls. As compared with wild-type seeds, the PME activities of the  overexpressing lines were greatly reduced throughout germination, and the low  steady-state levels neither increased nor decreased. The most striking phenotype  was a significantly faster rate of germination, which was not connected to  altered testa rupture morphology but to alterations of the micropylar endosperm  cells, evident by environmental scanning electron microscopy. The transgenic  seeds also exhibited an apparent reduced sensitivity to abscisic acid with  respect to its inhibitory effects on germination. We speculate that PME activity  contributes to the temporal regulation of radicle emergence in endospermic seeds  by altering the mechanical properties of the cell walls and thereby the balance  between the two opposing forces of radicle elongation and mechanical resistance  of the endosperm.', '2013 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.205724', 'Kermode']

PMEs: !mediate! methylesterification status of cell wall homogalacturonans 
PMEs: !influence! biophysical properties of plant cell walls 
PMEs: !regulate! temporal regulation of radicle emergence in endospermic seeds 
PME inhibitor: !overexpressed! to investigate PME involvement in seed germination 
PME inhibitor: !reduces! PME activities throughout germination 
PME inhibitor: !accelerates! rate of germination 
PME inhibitor: !alters! mechanical properties of cell walls