['23133621', 'A direct interaction of the Arabidopsis thaliana immunophilin ROF1 with  phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate and phosphatidylinositol-3,5-bisphosphate was  identified using a phosphatidylinositol-phosphate affinity chromatography of cell  suspension extracts, combined with a mass spectrometry (nano LC ESI-MS/MS)  analysis. The first FK506 binding domain was shown sufficient to bind to both  phosphatidylinositol-phosphate stereoisomers. GFP-tagged ROF1 under the control  of a 35S promoter was localised in the cytoplasm and the cell periphery of  Nicotiana tabacum leaf explants. Immunofluorescence microscopy of Arabidopsis  thaliana root tips verified its cytoplasmic localization and membrane association  and showed ROF1 localization in the elongation zone which was expanded to the  meristematic zone in plants grown on high salt media. Endogenous ROF1 was shown  to accumulate in response to high salt treatment in Arabidopsis thaliana young  leaves as well as in seedlings germinated on high salt media (0.15 and 0.2 M  NaCl) at both an mRNA and protein level. Plants over-expressing ROF1, (WSROF1OE),  exhibited enhanced germination under salinity stress which was significantly  reduced in the rof1(-) knock out mutants and abolished in the double mutants of  ROF1 and of its interacting homologue ROF2 (WSrof1(-)/2(-)). Our results show  that ROF1 plays an important role in the osmotic/salt stress responses of  germinating Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings and suggest its involvement in  salinity stress responses through a phosphatidylinositol-phosphate related  protein quality control pathway.', '2012', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0048241', 'Farmaki']

ROF1: !interacts with! phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate 
ROF1: !interacts with! phosphatidylinositol-3,5-bisphosphate 
ROF1: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
ROF1: !localizes to! cell periphery 
ROF1: !accumulates in response to! high salt treatment 
ROF1: !enhances! germination under salinity stress 
ROF1: !represses! rof1(-) knock out mutants 
ROF1: !represses! WSrof1(-)/2(-) double mutants