['23132787', "In prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, the 3'-5'-exonucleolytic decay and  processing of RNAs are essential for RNA metabolism. However, the understanding  of the mechanism of 3'-5'-exonucleolytic decay in plants is very limited. Here,  we report the characterization of an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) transfer  DNA insertional mutant that shows severe growth defects in early seedling growth,  including delayed germination and cotyledon expansion, thinner yellow/pale-green  leaves, and a slower growth rate. High-efficiency thermal asymmetric interlaced  polymerase chain reaction analysis showed that the insertional locus was in the  sixth exon of AT4G27490, encoding a predicted 3'-5'-exonuclease, that contained a  conserved RNase phosphorolytic domain with high similarity to RRP41, designated  RRP41L. Interestingly, we detected highly accumulated messenger RNAs (mRNAs) that  encode seed storage protein and abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthesis and signaling  pathway-related protein during the early growth stage in rrp41l mutants. The mRNA  decay kinetics analysis for seed storage proteins, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid  dioxygenases, and ABA INSENSITIVEs revealed that RRP41L catalyzed the decay of  these mRNAs in the cytoplasm. Consistent with these results, the rrp41l mutant  was more sensitive to ABA in germination and root growth than wild-type plants,  whereas overexpression lines of RRP41L were more resistant to ABA in germination  and root growth than wild-type plants. RRP41L was localized to both the cytoplasm  and nucleus, and RRP41L was preferentially expressed in seedlings. Altogether,  our results showed that RRP41L plays an important role in seed germination and  early seedling growth by mediating specific cytoplasmic mRNA decay in  Arabidopsis.", '2013 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.206706', 'Han']

RRP41L: !affects! Seed germination and early seedling growth 
RRP41L: !localizes to! Cytoplasm and nucleus 
RRP41L: !enhances! ABA resistance 
RRP41L: !represses! mRNA decay 
RRP41L: !synthesizes! Seed storage proteins, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenases, and ABA INSENSITIVEs