Hydrogen sulfide (H2 S) is a newly-discovered signaling molecule in plants and has caused increasing attention in recent years, but its function in stomatal movement is unclear. In plants, H2 S is synthesized via cysteine degradation catalyzed by D-/L-cysteine desulfhydrase (D-/L-CDes). AtD-/L-CDes::GUS transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. plants were generated and used to investigate gene expression patterns, and results showed that AtD-/L-CDes can be expressed in guard cells. We also determined the subcellular localization of AtD-/L-CDes using transgenic plants of AtD-/L-CDes::GFP, and the results showed that AtD-CDes and AtL-CDes are located in the chloroplast and in the cytoplasm, respectively. The transcript levels of AtD-CDes and AtL-CDes were affected by the chemicals that cause stomatal closure. Among these factors, ACC, a precursor of ethylene, has the most significant effect, which indicates that the H2 S generated from D-/L-CDes may play an important role in ethylene-induced stomatal closure. Meanwhile, H2 S synthetic inhibitors significantly inhibited ethylene-induced stomatal closure in Arabidopsis. Ethylene treatment caused an increase of H2 S production and of AtD-/L-CDes activity in Arabidopsis leaves. AtD-/L-CDes over-expressing plants exhibited enhanced induction of stomatal closure compared to the wild-type after ethylene treatment; however, the effect was not observed in the Atd-cdes and Atl-cdes mutants. In conclusion, our results suggest that the D-/L-CDes-generated H2 S is involved in the regulation of ethylene-induced stomatal closure in Arabidopsis thaliana.

AtD-/L-CDes::GUS: !localizes to! guard cells 
AtD-/L-CDes::GFP: !localizes to! chloroplast and cytoplasm 
ACC: !affects! AtD-/L-CDes transcript levels 
H2 S synthetic inhibitors: !inhibit! ethylene-induced stomatal closure 
Ethylene: !increases! H2 S production and AtD-/L-CDes activity 
AtD-/L-CDes over-expressing plants: !enhance! induction of stomatal closure 
Atd-cdes and Atl-cdes mutants: !no effect! on induction of stomatal closure