['23145086', 'Arabidopsis thaliana contains two genes encoding farnesyl diphosphate (FPP)  synthase (FPS), the prenyl diphoshate synthase that catalyzes the synthesis of  FPP from isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP). In  this study, we provide evidence that the two Arabidopsis short FPS isozymes FPS1S  and FPS2 localize to the cytosol. Both enzymes were expressed in E. coli,  purified and biochemically characterized. Despite FPS1S and FPS2 share more than  90% amino acid sequence identity, FPS2 was found to be more efficient as a  catalyst, more sensitive to the inhibitory effect of NaCl, and more resistant to  thermal inactivation than FPS1S. Homology modelling for FPS1S and FPS2 and  analysis of the amino acid differences between the two enzymes revealed an  increase in surface polarity and a greater capacity to form surface salt bridges  of FPS2 compared to FPS1S. These factors most likely account for the enhanced  thermostability of FPS2. Expression analysis of FPS::GUS genes in seeds showed  that FPS1 and FPS2 display complementary patterns of expression particularly at  late stages of seed development, which suggests that Arabidopsis seeds have two  spatially segregated sources of FPP. Functional complementation studies of the  Arabidopsis fps2 knockout mutant seed phenotypes demonstrated that under normal  conditions FPS1S and FPS2 are functionally interchangeable. A putative role for  FPS2 in maintaining seed germination capacity under adverse environmental  conditions is discussed.', '2012', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0049109', 'Ferrer']

FPS1S: !localizes to! cytosol
FPS2: !localizes to! cytosol
FPS2: !more efficient than! FPS1S
FPS2: !more sensitive to! NaCl
FPS2: !more resistant to! thermal inactivation
FPS2: !increased surface polarity compared to! FPS1S
FPS2: !greater capacity to form surface salt bridges compared to! FPS1S
FPS1: !complementary expression pattern to! FPS2
FPS2: !functionally interchangeable with! FPS1S
FPS2: !putative role in! maintaining seed germination capacity