['23148846', 'BACKGROUND: Homeodomain transcription factors play critical roles in metazoan  development. BELLRINGER (BLR), one such transcription factor, is involved in  diverse developmental processes in Arabidopsis, acting in vascular  differentiation, phyllotaxy, flower and fruit development. BLR also has a  redundant role in meristem maintenance. Cell wall remodelling underpins many of  these processes, and BLR has recently been shown to regulate expression of PECTIN  METHYL-ESTERASE 5 (PME5), a cell wall modifying enzyme in control of phyllotaxy.  We have further explored the role of BLR in plant development by analysing  phenotypes and gene expression in a series of plants over-expressing BLR, and  generating combinatorial mutants with blr, brevipedicellus (bp), a member of the  KNOX1 family of transcription factors that has previously been shown to interact  with blr, and the homeodomain transcription factor revoluta (rev), required for  radial patterning of the stem. RESULTS: Plants over-expressing BLR exhibited a  wide range of phenotypes. Some were defective in cell size and demonstrated  misregulation of genes predominantly affecting cell wall development. Other lines  with more extreme phenotypes failed to generate lateral organs, consistent with  BLR repressing transcription in the shoot apex. Cell wall dynamics are also  affected in blr mutant plants, and BLR has previously been shown to regulate  vascular development in conjunction with BP. We found that when bp and blr were  combined with rev, a set of defects was observed that were distinct from those of  bp blr lines. In these triple mutants xylem development was most strikingly  affected, resulting in an almost complete lack of vessels and xylem parenchyma  with secondary thickening. CONCLUSIONS: Our data support a role for BLR in  ordering the shoot apex and, in conjunction with BP and REV, playing a part in  determining the composition and organisation of the vascular system. Microarray  analysis strongly indicates that the striking vascular phenotypes of blr bp rev  triple mutants and plants over-expressing BLR result from the misregulation of a  suite of genes, targets of BLR in wild type plants, that determine cell size and  structure in the developing vasculature.', '2012 Nov 13', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-12-212', 'Dickinson']

BLR: !regulates! PME5
BLR: !represses! transcription
BLR: !interacts with! BP
BLR: !combined with! REV
BP: !interacts with! BLR
REV: !combined with! BLR
BLR: !orders! shoot apex
BLR: !determines! composition/organisation of vascular system
BLR: !misregulates! suite of genes