['23155454', 'The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has a unique, network-like morphology. The ER  structures are composed of tubules, cisternae, and three-way junctions. This  morphology is highly conserved among eukaryotes, but the molecular mechanism that  maintains ER morphology has not yet been elucidated. In addition, certain  Brassicaceae plants develop a unique ER-derived organelle called the ER body.  This organelle accumulates large amounts of PYK10, a beta-glucosidase, but its  physiological functions are still obscure. We aimed to identify a novel factor  required for maintaining the morphology of the ER, including ER bodies, and  employed a forward-genetic approach using transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana (GFP-h)  with fluorescently-labeled ER. We isolated and investigated a mutant (designated  endoplasmic reticulum morphology3, ermo3) with huge aggregates and abnormal  punctate structures of ER. ERMO3 encodes a GDSL-lipase/esterase family protein,  also known as MVP1. Here, we showed that, although ERMO3/MVP1/GOLD36 was  expressed ubiquitously, the morphological defects of ermo3 were specifically seen  in a certain type of cells where ER bodies developed. Coimmunoprecipitation  analysis combined with mass spectrometry revealed that ERMO3/MVP1/GOLD36  interacts with the PYK10 complex, a huge protein complex that is thought to be  important for ER body-related defense systems. We also found that the depletion  of transcription factor NAI1, a master regulator for ER body formation,  suppressed the formation of ER-aggregates in ermo3 cells, suggesting that NAI1  expression plays an important role in the abnormal aggregation of ER. Our results  suggest that ERMO3/MVP1/GOLD36 is required for preventing ER and other organelles  from abnormal aggregation and for maintaining proper ER morphology in a  coordinated manner with NAI1.', '2012', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0049103', 'Hara-Nishimura']

ER: !composed of! tubules, cisternae, and three-way junctions 
ERMO3/MVP1/GOLD36: !localizes to! certain type of cells 
ERMO3/MVP1/GOLD36: !interacts with! PYK10 complex 
NAI1: !regulates! ER body formation 
ERMO3/MVP1/GOLD36: !coordinates with! NAI1