['23169619', 'The plant hormone jasmonate (JA) plays an important role in regulating growth,  development and immunity. A key step in JA signaling is ligand-dependent assembly  of a coreceptor complex consisting of the F-box protein COI1 and JAZ  transcriptional repressors. Assembly of this receptor complex results in  proteasome-mediated degradation of JAZ repressors, which at resting state bind to  and repress the MYC transcription factors. Although the JA receptor complex is  believed to function within the nucleus, how this receptor complex enters the  nucleus and, more generally, the cell biology of jasmonate signaling are not well  understood. In this study, we conducted mutational analysis of the C termini  (containing the conserved Jas motif) of two JAZ repressors, JAZ1 and JAZ9. These  analyses unexpectedly revealed different subcellular localization patterns of  JAZ1DeltaJas and JAZ9DeltaJas, which were associated with differential interaction of  JAZ1DeltaJas and JAZ9DeltaJas with MYC2 and differential repressor activity in vivo.  Importantly, physical interaction with MYC2 appears to play an active role in the  nuclear targeting of JAZ1 and JAZ9, and the nuclear localization of JAZ9 was  compromised in myc2 mutant plants. We identified a highly conserved arginine  residue in the Jas motif that is critical for coupling MYC2 interaction with  nuclear localization of JAZ9 and JAZ9 repressor function in vivo. Our results  suggest a model for explaining why some JAZDeltaJas proteins, but not others, confer  constitutive JA-insensitivity when overexpressed in plants. Results also provide  evidence for a transcription factor-dependent mechanism for nuclear import of a  cognate transcriptional repressor JAZ9 in plants.', '2012 Dec 4', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1210054109', 'He']

Jasmonate: !regulates! Growth/Development/Immunity
COI1: !assembles with! JAZ transcriptional repressors
JAZ repressors: !bind to and repress! MYC transcription factors
JAZ1DeltaJas/JAZ9DeltaJas: !have different subcellular localization patterns! 
JAZ1DeltaJas/JAZ9DeltaJas: !interact differently with! MYC2
JAZ9: !requires! MYC2 interaction for nuclear targeting
Jas motif: !contains! Arginine residue critical for coupling MYC2 interaction with nuclear localization of JAZ9