['23179445', 'This work presents the isolation and the biochemical characterization of the  Arabidopsis thaliana gene AtSgpp. This gene shows homology with the Arabidopsis  low molecular weight phosphatases AtGpp1 and AtGpp2 and the yeast counterpart  GPP1 and GPP2, which have a high specificity for DL-glycerol-3-phosphate. In  addition, it exhibits homology with DOG1 and DOG2 that dephosphorylate  2-deoxy-D-glucose-6-phosphate. Using a comparative genomic approach, we  identified the AtSgpp gene as a conceptual translated haloacid dehalogenase-like  hydrolase HAD protein. AtSgpp (locus tag At2g38740), encodes a protein with a  predicted Mw of 26.7 kDa and a pI of 4.6. Its sequence motifs and expected  structure revealed that AtSgpp belongs to the HAD hydrolases subfamily I, with  the C1-type cap domain. In the presence of Mg(2+) ions, the enzyme has a  phosphatase activity over a wide range of phosphosugars substrates (pH optima at  7.0 and K m in the range of 3.6-7.7 mM). AtSgpp promiscuity is preferentially  detectable on D-ribose-5-phosphate, 2-deoxy-D-ribose-5-phosphate,  2-deoxy-D-glucose-6-phosphate, D-mannose-6-phosphate, D-fructose-1-phosphate,  D-glucose-6-phosphate, DL-glycerol-3-phosphate, and D-fructose-6-phosphate, as  substrates. AtSgpp is ubiquitously expressed throughout development in most plant  organs, mainly in sepal and guard cell. Interestingly, expression is affected by  abiotic and biotic stresses, being the greatest under Pi starvation and  cyclopentenone oxylipins induction. Based on both, substrate lax specificity and  gene expression, the physiological function of AtSgpp in housekeeping  detoxification, modulation of sugar-phosphate balance and Pi homeostasis, is  provisionally assigned.', '2013 Apr', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-012-1809-5', 'Culianez-Macia']

AtSgpp: !exhibits homology with! AtGpp1, AtGpp2, GPP1, GPP2, DOG1, DOG2 
AtSgpp: !belongs to! HAD hydrolases subfamily I 
AtSgpp: !has phosphatase activity over! wide range of phosphosugars substrates 
AtSgpp: !promiscuity is preferentially detectable on! D-ribose-5-phosphate, 2-deoxy-D-ribose-5-phosphate, 2-deoxy-D-glucose-6-phosphate, D-mannose-6-phosphate, D-fructose-1-phosphate, D-glucose-6-phosphate, DL-glycerol-3-phosphate, D-fructose-6-phosphate 
AtSgpp: !is ubiquitously expressed throughout development in! most plant organs 
AtSgpp: !expression is affected by! abiotic and biotic stresses 
AtSgpp: !physiological function is! housekeeping detoxification