['23204523', 'Calcium (Ca(2+)) is a key second messenger in eukaryotes and regulates diverse  cellular processes, most notably via calmodulin (CaM). In Arabidopsis thaliana,  IQD1 (IQ67 domain 1) is the founding member of the IQD family of putative CaM  targets. The 33 predicted IQD proteins share a conserved domain of 67 amino acids  that is characterized by a unique arrangement of multiple CaM recruitment motifs,  including so-called IQ motifs. Whereas IQD1 has been implicated in the regulation  of defense metabolism, the biochemical functions of IQD proteins remain to be  elucidated. In this study we show that IQD1 binds to multiple Arabidopsis CaM and  CaM-like (CML) proteins in vitro and in yeast two-hybrid interaction assays. CaM  overlay assays revealed moderate affinity of IQD1 to CaM2 (K(d)  approximately  0.6 mum).  Deletion mapping of IQD1 demonstrated the importance of the IQ67 domain for CaM2  binding in vitro, which is corroborated by interaction of the shortest IQD  member, IQD20, with Arabidopsis CaM/CMLs in yeast. A genetic screen of a cDNA  library identified Arabidopsis kinesin light chain-related protein-1 (KLCR1) as  an IQD1 interactor. The subcellular localization of GFP-tagged IQD1 proteins to  microtubules and the cell nucleus in transiently and stably transformed plant  tissues (tobacco leaves and Arabidopsis seedlings) suggests direct interaction of  IQD1 and KLCR1 in planta that is supported by GFP approximately IQD1-dependent recruitment of  RFP approximately KLCR1 and RFP approximately CaM2 to microtubules. Collectively, the prospect arises that  IQD1 and related proteins provide Ca(2+)/CaM-regulated scaffolds for facilitating  cellular transport of specific cargo along microtubular tracks via kinesin motor  proteins.', '2013 Jan 18', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M112.396200', 'Abel']

Calcium: !regulates! cellular processes 
IQD1: !binds to! CaM 
IQ67 domain: !important for! CaM2 binding 
KLCR1: !interacts with! IQD1 
GFP-tagged IQD1: !localizes to! microtubules and cell nucleus 
IQD1: !facilitates! cellular transport of cargo via kinesin motor proteins