In wheat, tillering and water-soluble carbohydrates (WSCs) in the stem are potential traits for adaptation to different environments and are of interest as targets for selective breeding. This study investigated the observation that a high stem WSC concentration (WSCc) is often related to low tillering. The proposition tested was that stem WSC accumulation is plant density dependent and could be an emergent property of tillering, whether driven by genotype or by environment. A small subset of recombinant inbred lines (RILs) contrasting for tillering was grown at different plant densities or on different sowing dates in multiple field experiments. Both tillering and WSCc were highly influenced by the environment, with a smaller, distinct genotypic component; the genotype × environment range covered 350-750 stems m(-2) and 25-210 mg g(-1) WSCc. Stem WSCc was inversely related to stem number m(-2), but genotypic rankings for stem WSCc persisted when RILs were compared at similar stem density. Low tillering-high WSCc RILs had similar leaf area index, larger individual leaves, and stems with larger internode cross-section and wall area when compared with high tillering-low WSCc RILs. The maximum number of stems per plant was positively associated with growth and relative growth rate per plant, tillering rate and duration, and also, in some treatments, with leaf appearance rate and final leaf number. A common threshold of the red:far red ratio (0.39-0.44; standard error of the difference=0.055) coincided with the maximum stem number per plant across genotypes and plant densities, and could be effectively used in crop simulation modelling as a 'cut-off' rule for tillering. The relationship between tillering, WSCc, and their component traits, as well as the possible implications for crop simulation and breeding, is discussed.

tillering: !inversely related to! WSCc
genotype: !influences! tillering
genotype: !influences! WSCc
plant density: !influences! tillering
plant density: !influences! WSCc
leaf area index: !similar in! low tillering-high WSCc RILs
individual leaves: !larger in! low tillering-high WSCc RILs
internode cross-section: !larger in! low tillering-high WSCc RILs
wall area: !larger in! low tillering-high WSCc RILs
growth: !positively associated with! maximum stem number per plant
relative growth rate: !positively associated with! maximum stem number per plant
tillering rate: !positively associated with! maximum stem number per plant
tillering duration: !positively associated with! maximum stem number per plant
leaf appearance rate: !positively associated with! maximum stem number per plant
final leaf number: !positively associated with! maximum stem number per plant
red:far red ratio: !coincides with! maximum stem number per plant