To find if cytosolic glycolysis dynamical metabolism plays a role in mediating respiration homeostasis and its relationship with mitochondrial electron transport chain (miETC) flexibility, we selected two tomato genotypes that differ in chilling tolerance and compared the responses of miETC, cytosolic glycolysis and respiratory homeostasis at 7ʡC. Our results showed that the transcripts of both classical and bypass component genes for miETC and glycolysis were comparable for both genotypes when grown at 25ʡC. However, there was a rapid global increase in the expression of most respiratory genes in response to chilling at 7ʡC for both genotypes. When normally grown plant was set as the control for each genotype, the transcripts of most COX family members, ATP synthase, AOX1b, and UCP are highly up-regulated in chilling-tolerant Zhefen No. 208 plants in contrast to the sensitive Zhefen No. 212 plants. Both genotypes mobilized the energy-saving sucrose synthase pathway for sucrose degradation by cytosolic glycolysis, but this mechanism is evidently more effective in tolerant Zhefen No. 208 plants. Furthermore, only Zhefen No. 208 plants were able to partially switch from low-energy efficiency pathways to ATP conserving pathways to carry out fructose-6-phosphate conversion and pyruvate production. This metabolic flexibility in miETC and cytosolic glycolysis were coupled to higher ATP synthesis and lower ROS accumulation, which may be essential for sustaining the higher leaf respiration and homeostasis of chilling-tolerant plants.

miETC: !differs in! chilling tolerance
glycolysis: !differs in! chilling tolerance
Zhefen No. 208: !up-regulates! COX family members, ATP synthase, AOX1b, UCP
Zhefen No. 212: !down-regulates! COX family members, ATP synthase, AOX1b, UCP
Zhefen No. 208: !mobilizes! energy-saving sucrose synthase pathway
Zhefen No. 208: !switches to! ATP conserving pathways
ATP synthesis: !enhances! metabolic flexibility
ROS accumulation: !decreases! with metabolic flexibility
metabolic flexibility: !sustains! higher leaf respiration and homeostasis