Mature native periderm that exhibits resistance to excoriation (RE) is the primary defense for potato tubers against abiotic and biotic challenges. However, little is known about the physiology of periderm maturation and associated gene expressions. In this study, periderm maturation events and associated gene expressions were determined in tubers of two diverse potato genotypes (NDTX4271-5R (ND) and Russet Burbank (RB); 2008 and 2009 crops) at four harvest maturities ranging from immature (non-senesced vines and low RE) to mature (senesced vines and high RE). Approximately 104 d after planting, the fine balance of accumulation and loss of periderm phellem cell layers showed signs of subsiding, indicating cessation of cell division by the phellogen. Phellogen radial cell walls thickened as periderm matured throughout the harvests, increasing RE/skin-set. In both genotypes, the cell cycle gene cyclin-dependent kinase B (StCDKB) rapidly down-regulated after the second harvest coinciding with apparent cessation of cell division. Expression patterns of genes encoding epidermal growth factor binding protein (StEBP) and cyclin-dependent kinase regulatory subunit (StCKS1At) were less indicative of phellogen inactivation and periderm maturation. Genes encoding the structural cell wall proteins extensin (StExt1) for ND and extensin-like (StExtlk) for ND and RB remained up-regulated respectively by the second harvest, suggesting involvement with completion of phellem cell accumulation and on-set of periderm maturation. The expression of genes encoding pectin methyl esterase (StPME), StExt1 and a cell wall strengthening "tyrosine-and lysine-rich protein" (StTLRP) increased in phellogen cells from later harvests of ND tubers, but were down regulated in RB tubers; this suggests roles in phellem cell generation and completion of delayed cell wall development in non-meristematic phellogen cells of ND, a red skinned phenotype. StCDKB and StPrePME genes were rapidly down-regulated by the third harvest for both genotypes. Collectively, these results suggest that down-regulation of these genes coordinates with on-set of periderm maturation and skin-set progression.

StCDKB: !down-regulates! with periderm maturation
StEBP: !associated with! phellogen inactivation
StCKS1At: !associated with! phellogen inactivation
StExt1: !up-regulated! with completion of phellem cell accumulation
StExtlk: !up-regulated! with completion of phellem cell accumulation
StPME: !increases! in phellogen cells of ND tubers
StTLRP: !increases! in phellogen cells of ND tubers
StPrePME: !down-regulated! by third harvest for both genotypes