The sucrose-induced resumption of cell cycle in the Vicia faba root meristem cells, blocked in two principal control points PCP1/2 by carbohydrate starvation, occurs after 12 h of metabolic regeneration comprising increased activity of sucrose synthase (SuSy) and hexokinase (HK) as well as starch grain and cell wall matrix polysaccharide biosynthesis. Okadaic acid (OA), the specific protein phosphatase 1/2A inhibitor, supplied at the beginning of the recovery period (0-3 h) completely blocks these processes, making cell cycle resumption impossible. On the other hand, when added at the end (9-12 h), OA has a weak inhibitory effect. The aim of these studies was: (1) to establish how sucrose is transported into the cells and whether the above-mentioned effects are correlated with the intensity of its uptake at the beginning and at the end of the metabolic regeneration; and (2) to determine whether OA, blocking sucrose metabolism, also interferes with the process of sucrose uptake and distribution. The level of [(3)H]sucrose uptake was measured by liquid scintillation counting while sugar distribution was analyzed using microautoradiography and electron microscopy. The results showed that sucrose entered the meristematic cells along symplastic or apoplastic pathways and, to a lesser extent, through endocytosis. The cytoplasmic compartments (endoplasmic reticulum, vacuoles, plastids) and the nucleus were labeled. The intensity of [(3)H]sucrose uptake was nearly 2-fold lower during the initial than during the final period of metabolic regeneration. OA inhibited the apoplastic pathway of radioactive molecule uptake and its distribution between cell compartments, implicating PP1/2A involvement in the regulation of this transport.

sucrose: !enters cells via! symplastic/apoplastic pathways
sucrose: !intake intensity is! 2-fold lower at beginning of metabolic regeneration
OA: !inhibits! apoplastic pathway of sucrose uptake
OA: !blocks! sucrose metabolism
PP1/2A: !regulates! sucrose transport