Ethylene production and signalling play an important role in somatic embryogenesis, especially for species that are recalcitrant in in vitro culture. The AP2/ERF superfamily has been identified and classified in Hevea brasiliensis. This superfamily includes the ERFs involved in response to ethylene. The relative transcript abundance of ethylene biosynthesis genes and of AP2/ERF genes was analysed during somatic embryogenesis for callus lines with different regeneration potential, in order to identify genes regulated during that process. The analysis of relative transcript abundance was carried out by real-time RT-PCR for 142 genes. The transcripts of ERFs from group I, VII and VIII were abundant at all stages of the somatic embryogenesis process. Forty genetic expression markers for callus regeneration capacity were identified. Fourteen markers were found for proliferating calli and 35 markers for calli at the end of the embryogenesis induction phase. Sixteen markers discriminated between normal and abnormal embryos and, lastly, there were 36 markers of conversion into plantlets. A phylogenetic analysis comparing the sequences of the AP2 domains of Hevea and Arabidopsis genes enabled us to predict the function of 13 expression marker genes. This first characterization of the AP2/ERF superfamily in Hevea revealed dramatic regulation of the expression of AP2/ERF genes during the somatic embryogenesis process. The gene expression markers of proliferating callus capacity to regenerate plants by somatic embryogenesis should make it possible to predict callus lines suitable to be used for multiplication. Further functional characterization of these markers opens up prospects for discovering specific AP2/ERF functions in the Hevea species for which somatic embryogenesis is difficult.

Ethylene production: !affects! Somatic embryogenesis
AP2/ERF superfamily: !identified in! Hevea brasiliensis
ERFs: !involved in! Response to ethylene
Relative transcript abundance: !analysed during! Somatic embryogenesis
Real-time RT-PCR: !used for! 142 genes
Group I, VII and VIII ERFs: !abundant at! All stages of somatic embryogenesis
40 genetic expression markers: !identified for! Callus regeneration capacity
14 markers: !found for! Proliferating calli
35 markers: !found for! Calli at end of embryogenesis induction phase
16 markers: !discriminated between! Normal and abnormal embryos
36 markers: !found for! Conversion into plantlets
Phylogenetic analysis: !compared sequences of! AP2 domains of Hevea and Arabidopsis genes
13 expression marker genes: !predicted function of! 
AP2/ERF genes: !dramatically regulated during! Somatic embryogenesis process