Rice MKRN is a member of the makorin RING finger protein gene (MKRN) family, which encodes a protein with a characteristic array of zinc-finger motifs conserved in various eukaryotes. Using non-radioactive in situ hybridization, we investigated the spatio-temporal gene expression pattern of rice MKRN during embryogenesis, imbibition, seminal and lateral root development of Oryza sativa L. var. Nipponbare. MKRN expression was ubiquitous during early organogenesis in the embryo along the apical-basal and radial axes. The expression of MKRN decreased during embryonic organ elongation and maturation compared to early embryogenesis, but increased again during imbibition. Tissue-specific and position-dependent MKRN expression was found during embryonic and post-embryonic root and shoot development. Meristematic cells ubiquitously expressed MKRN transcripts, while differentiating cells showed a gradual reduction and termination of MKRN expression. Interestingly, during post-germination MKRN expression was prominent and continued in the metabolically active, differentiated companion cells of the phloem. The differential expression pattern was observed both in the differentiating and differentiated cells. Also, MKRN was expressed in the various developmental stages of the lateral root primordia and the cells surrounding them. Expression of MKRN was also observed after periclinal division of the presumptive pericycle founder cells. The MKRN expression pattern during development of various growth stages suggests an important role of makorin RING finger protein gene (MKRN) in embryonic and post-embryonic organogenesis in both apical-basal and radial developmental axes of rice.

MKRN: !localizes to! embryonic organogenesis 
MKRN: !decreases during! embryonic organ elongation 
MKRN: !increases during! imbibition 
MKRN: !expressed in! meristematic cells 
MKRN: !gradually reduces in! differentiating cells 
MKRN: !prominent in! metabolically active cells 
MKRN: !observed in! lateral root primordia 
MKRN: !important role in! apical-basal and radial developmental axes