['23271953', 'Genes directly involved in male/female and host/parasite interactions are  believed to be under positive selection. The flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana  has more than 300 defensin-like (DEFL) genes, which are likely to be involved in  both natural immunity and cell-to-cell communication including pollen-pistil  interactions. However, little is known of the relationship between the molecular  evolution of DEFL genes and their functions. Here, we identified a recently  evolved cluster of DEFL genes in A. thaliana and demonstrated that these DEFL  (cysteine-rich peptide [CRP810_1]) peptides, named AtLURE1 peptides, are pollen  tube attractants guiding pollen tubes to the ovular micropyle. The AtLURE1 genes  formed the sole species-specific cluster among DEFL genes compared to its close  relative, A. lyrata. No evidence for positive selection was detected in AtLURE1  genes and their orthologs, implying neutral evolution of AtLURE1 genes. AtLURE1  peptides were specifically expressed in egg-accompanying synergid cells and  secreted toward the funicular surface through the micropyle. Genetic analyses  showed that gametophytic mutants defective in micropylar guidance (myb98,  magatama3, and central cell guidance) do not express AtLURE1 peptides.  Downregulation of the expression of these peptides impaired precise pollen tube  attraction to the micropylar opening of some populations of ovules. Recombinant  AtLURE1 peptides attracted A. thaliana pollen tubes at a higher frequency  compared to A. lyrata pollen tubes, suggesting that these peptides are  species-preferential attractants in micropylar guidance. In support of this idea,  the heterologous expression of a single AtLURE1 peptide in the synergid cell of  Torenia fournieri was sufficient to guide A. thaliana pollen tubes to the T.  fournieri embryo sac and to permit entry into it. Our results suggest the unique  evolution of AtLURE1 genes, which are directly involved in male-female  interaction among the DEFL multigene family, and furthermore suggest that these  peptides are sufficient to overcome interspecific barriers in gametophytic  attraction and penetration.', '2012', 'PLoS Biol', '10.1371/journal.pbio.1001449', 'Higashiyama']

Genes: !believed to be under! Positive selection 
AtLURE1 genes: !formed the sole species-specific cluster among! DEFL genes 
AtLURE1 peptides: !expressed in! Egg-accompanying synergid cells 
AtLURE1 peptides: !secreted toward! Funicular surface 
AtLURE1 peptides: !attracted! A. thaliana pollen tubes 
AtLURE1 peptide: !sufficient to guide! A. thaliana pollen tubes