Widely distributed species, such as the perennial plant Arabidopsis lyrata, face a range of environmental conditions across space, creating selective pressures for local evolutionary adaptation. The species' fragmented distribution may reduce gene flow, which could either reduce or increase adaptive potential. The substantial variation in phenotypic traits observed across this species' northwestern European range may reflect a combination of plastic responses to environmental conditions, evolutionary adaptation and nonadaptive genetic differentiation. We conducted multi-site common garden experiments to study differences in plant performance in core and marginal areas. Plants from eight source populations representing the species' full geographic and altitudinal range in northwestern Europe were planted out in Iceland, Sweden, Scotland and Wales. We found evidence of both strong plastic responses and apparently adaptive differentiation in performance. Most evidence for local adaptation was found at range margins, with the strongest effects on reproductive output. Both biotic and abiotic factors affected performance, especially at range margins. Performance of most plants was best in the Scottish and Swedish common garden sites, in the core of the species' distribution. Despite adaptations at range margins, the performance of the species declines at distributional limits, with extreme southern populations looking particularly vulnerable.

Arabidopsis lyrata: !faces! Environmental conditions 
Environmental conditions: !creates! Selective pressures 
Fragmented distribution: !reduces! Gene flow 
Multi-site common garden experiments: !studies! Differences in plant performance 
Plants: !plastic responses to! Environmental conditions 
Evolutionary adaptation: !enhances! Performance 
Biotic and abiotic factors: !affects! Performance 
Range margins: !strongest effects on! Reproductive output 
Scottish and Swedish common garden sites: !best performance for! Plants 
Extreme southern populations: !vulnerable to! Performance decline