We analyzed how changes in BnNrt nitrate transporter gene expression induced by nitrate are associated with morphological changes in plantlets and osmotic water flow for growth. We hypothesized that in a Petri dish system, reduction in transpiration should induce conditions where nitrate and water fluxes for growth depend directly on nitrate transporter activity and nitrate signaling. Rape seedlings growing on agar plates were supplied with increasing external K (15)NO 3 concentrations from 0.05 to 20 mM. After 5 d of treatment, morphological switches in plantlet growth were observed between 0.5 and 5 mM nitrate supply. Root elongation was reduced by 50% while the cotyledon surface area was doubled. These morphological switches were strongly associated with increases in (15)NO 3(-) and water uptake rates as well as (15)N and water allocation to the shoot. These switches were also highly correlated with the upregulation of BnNrt1.1 and BnNrt2.1 in the root. However, while root expression of BnNrt2.1 was correlated linearly with a shoot growth-associated increase in (15)N and water uptake, BnNrt1.1 expression was correlated exponentially with both (15)N and water accumulation. In low transpiring conditions, the tight control exercised by nitrate transporters on K (15)NO 3 uptake and allocation clearly demonstrates that they modulated the nitrate-signaling cascade involved in cell growth and as a consequence, water uptake and allocation to the growing organs. Deciphering this signaling cascade in relation to acid growth theory seems to be the most important challenge for our understanding of the nitrate-signaling role in plant growth.

BnNrt1.1: !correlated exponentially with! (15)N and water accumulation
BnNrt2.1: !correlated linearly with! shoot growth-associated increase in (15)N and water uptake
BnNrt1.1/BnNrt2.1: !upregulated by! increasing external K (15)NO3 concentrations
BnNrt1.1/BnNrt2.1: !modulate! nitrate-signaling cascade involved in cell growth
Nitrate Transporters: !control! K (15)NO3 uptake and allocation