['23300481', 'Mini-chromosome maintenance (MCM) 2-9 proteins are related helicases. The first  six, MCM2-7, are essential for DNA replication in all eukaryotes. In contrast,  MCM8 is not always conserved in eukaryotes but is present in Arabidopsis  thaliana. MCM8 is required for 95% of meiotic crossovers (COs) in Drosophila and  is essential for meiosis completion in mouse, prompting us to study this gene in  Arabidopsis meiosis. Three allelic Atmcm8 mutants showed a limited level of  chromosome fragmentation at meiosis. This defect was dependent on programmed  meiotic double-strand break (DSB) formation, revealing a role for AtMCM8 in  meiotic DSB repair. In contrast, CO formation was not affected, as shown both  genetically and cytologically. The Atmcm8 DSB repair defect was greatly amplified  in the absence of the DMC1 recombinase or in mutants affected in DMC1 dynamics  (sds, asy1). The Atmcm8 fragmentation defect was also amplified in plants  heterozygous for a mutation in either recombinase, DMC1 or RAD51. Finally, in the  context of absence of homologous chromosomes (i.e. haploid), mutation of AtMCM8  also provoked a low level of chromosome fragmentation. This fragmentation was  amplified by the absence of DMC1 showing that both MCM8 and DMC1 can promote  repair on the sister chromatid in Arabidopsis haploids. Altogether, this  establishes a role for AtMCM8 in meiotic DSB repair, in parallel to DMC1. We  propose that MCM8 is involved with RAD51 in a backup pathway that repairs meiotic  DSB without giving CO when the major pathway, which relies on DMC1, fails.', '2013', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1003165', 'Mercier']

MCM2-7: !essential for! DNA replication 
MCM8: !required for! 95% of meiotic crossovers 
Atmcm8 mutants: !limited level of! chromosome fragmentation 
Atmcm8 DSB repair defect: !amplified by! absence of DMC1 
Atmcm8 fragmentation defect: !amplified by! mutation in recombinase 
AtMCM8: !promotes repair on! sister chromatid 
MCM8: !involved with! RAD51 
MCM8: !backup pathway for! meiotic DSB repair