['23316205', 'The cytosolic glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH, EC 1.2.1.12, GapC)  plays an important role in glycolysis by providing the cell with ATP and NADH.  Interestingly, despite its glycolytic function in the cytosol, GAPDH was reported  to possess additional non-glycolytic activities, correlating with its nuclear, or  cytoskeletal localization in animal cells. In transiently transformed mesophyll  protoplasts from Arabidopsis thaliana colocalization and interaction of the  glycolytic enzymes with the mitochondria and with the actin cytoskeleton was  visualized by confocal laser scanning microscopy (cLSM) using fluorescent protein  fusions and by bimolecular fluorescence complementation, respectively. Yeast  two-hybrid screens, dot-blot overlay assays, and co-sedimentation assays were  used to identify potential protein-protein interactions between two cytosolic  GAPDH isoforms (GapC1, At3g04120; GapC2, At1g13440) from A. thaliana with the  neighboring glycolytic enzyme, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA6,  At2g36460), the mitochondrial porin (VDAC3; At5g15090), and actin in vitro. From  these experiments, a mitochondrial association is suggested for both glycolytic  enzymes, GAPDH and aldolase, which appear to bind to the outer mitochondrial  membrane, in a redox-dependent manner. In addition, both glycolytic enzymes were  found to bind to F-actin in co-sedimentation assays, and lead to bundling of  purified rabbit actin, as visualized by cLSM. Actin-binding and bundling occurred  reversibly under oxidizing conditions. We speculate that such dynamic formation  of microcompartments is part of a redox-dependent retrograde signal transduction  network for adaptation upon oxidative stress.', '2012', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2012.00284', 'Scheibe']

GAPDH: !provides! ATP/NADH 
GAPDH: !localizes to! nucleus/cytoskeleton 
GAPDH: !interacts with! mitochondria/FBA6/VDAC3/actin 
GAPDH: !binds to! outer mitochondrial membrane/F-actin 
GAPDH: !bundles! rabbit actin 
GAPDH: !enhances! redox-dependent retrograde signal transduction