['23314942', 'Flowering plants bear beautiful flowers to attract pollinators. Petals are the  most variable organs in flowering plants, with their color, fragrance, and shape.  In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), petal primordia arise at a similar time to  stamen primordia and elongate at later stages through the narrow space between  anthers and sepals. Although many of the genes involved in regulating petal  identity and primordia growth are known, the molecular mechanism for the later  elongation process remains unknown. We found a mutant, folded petals1 (fop1), in  which normal petal development is inhibited during their growth through the  narrow space between sepals and anthers, resulting in formation of folded petals  at maturation. During elongation, the fop1 petals contact the sepal surface at  several sites. The conical-shaped petal epidermal cells are flattened in the fop1  mutant, as if they had been pressed from the top. Surgical or genetic removal of  sepals in young buds restores the regular growth of petals, suggesting that  narrow space within a bud is the cause of petal folding in the fop1 mutant. FOP1  encodes a member of the bifunctional wax ester synthase/diacylglycerol  acyltransferase family, WSD11, which is expressed in elongating petals and  localized to the plasma membrane. These results suggest that the FOP1/WSD11  products synthesized in the petal epidermis may act as a lubricant, enabling  uninhibited growth of the petals as they extend between the sepals and the  anthers.', '2013 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.212084', 'Okada']

Petal: !arises at! Stamen primordia 
Petal: !elongates through! Narrow space between anthers and sepals 
Mutant: !inhibits! Normal petal development 
Mutant: !contacts! Sepal surface 
Epidermal cells: !flattened in! fop1 mutant 
Surgical/genetic removal of sepals: !restores! Regular growth of petals 
FOP1: !encodes! WSD11 
WSD11: !expressed in! Elongating petals 
WSD11: !localized to! Plasma membrane 
FOP1/WSD11 products: !act as! Lubricant