['23321422', 'Arginine is an essential amino acid necessary for protein synthesis and is also a  nitrogen storage compound. The genes encoding the enzymes of arginine  biosynthesis in plants are not well characterized and have mainly been predicted  from homologies to bacterial and fungal genes. We report the cloning and  characterization of the TUMOR PRONE5 (TUP5) gene of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) encoding an acetylornithine aminotransferase (ACOAT), catalyzing the  fourth step of arginine biosynthesis. The free arginine content was strongly  reduced in the chemically induced recessive mutant tup5-1, root growth was  restored by supplementation with arginine and its metabolic precursors, and a  yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) ACOAT mutant was complemented by TUP5. Two null  alleles of TUP5 caused a reduced viability of gametes and embryo lethality,  possibly caused by insufficient Arg supply from maternal tissue. TUP5 expression  is positively regulated by light, and a TUP5-green fluorescent protein was  localized in chloroplasts. tup5-1 has a unique light-dependent short root  phenotype. Roots of light-grown tup5-1 seedlings switch from indeterminate growth  to determinate growth with arresting cell production and an exhausted root apical  meristem. The inhibitory activity was specific for blue light, and the inhibiting  light was perceived by the root. Thus, tup5-1 reveals a novel role of amino acids  and blue light in regulating root meristem function.', '2013 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.210583', 'Schmulling']

Gene: TUP5 !encodes! ACOAT 
ACOAT !catalyzes! fourth step of arginine biosynthesis 
TUP5 !regulates! free arginine content 
TUP5 !restores! root growth 
Yeast ACOAT mutant !complemented by! TUP5 
Null alleles of TUP5 !cause! reduced viability of gametes and embryo lethality 
TUP5 !positively regulated by! light 
TUP5-green fluorescent protein !localized in! chloroplasts 
tup5-1 !reveals! novel role of amino acids and blue light in regulating root meristem function