['23335625', 'A common response by plants to fungal attack is deposition of callose, a  (1,3)-beta-glucan polymer, in the form of cell wall thickenings called papillae, at  site of wall penetration. While it has been generally believed that the papillae  provide a structural barrier to slow fungal penetration, this idea has been  challenged in recent studies of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), where fungal  resistance was found to be independent of callose deposition. To the contrary, we  show that callose can strongly support penetration resistance when deposited in  elevated amounts at early time points of infection. We generated transgenic  Arabidopsis lines that express POWDERY MILDEW RESISTANT4 (PMR4), which encodes a  stress-induced callose synthase, under the control of the constitutive 35S  promoter. In these lines, we detected callose synthase activity that was four  times higher than that in wild-type plants 6 h post inoculation with the virulent  powdery mildew Golovinomyces cichoracearum. The callose synthase activity was  correlated with enlarged callose deposits and the focal accumulation of green  fluorescent protein-tagged PMR4 at sites of attempted fungal penetration. We  observed similar results from infection studies with the nonadapted powdery  mildew Blumeria graminis f. sp. hordei. Haustoria formation was prevented in  resistant transgenic lines during both types of powdery mildew infection, and  neither the salicylic acid-dependent nor jasmonate-dependent pathways were  induced. We present a schematic model that highlights the differences in callose  deposition between the resistant transgenic lines and the susceptible wild-type  plants during compatible and incompatible interactions between Arabidopsis and  powdery mildew.', '2013 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.211011', 'Voigt']

PMR4: !synthesizes! callose 
callose: !enhances! penetration resistance 
PMR4: !localizes to! sites of attempted fungal penetration 
Golovinomyces cichoracearum: !attempts! penetration 
Blumeria graminis f. sp. hordei: !attempts! penetration 
transgenic Arabidopsis lines: !prevents! haustoria formation 
salicylic acid-dependent pathway: !not induced! 
jasmonate-dependent pathway: !not induced!