The formation of auxin conjugates is one of the important regulatory mechanisms for modulating IAA action. Several auxin-responsive GH3 genes encode IAA-amide synthetases that are involved in the maintenance of hormonal homeostasis by conjugating excess IAA to amino acids. Recently, the data have revealed novel regulatory functions of several GH3 proteins in plant growth, organ development, fruit ripening, light signaling, abiotic stress tolerance and plant defense responses. Indole-3-acetyl-aspartate (IAA-Asp) synthetase catalyzing IAA conjugation to aspartic acid in immature seeds of pea (Pisum sativum L.) was purified and characterized during our previous investigations. In this study, we examined the effect of auxin and other plant hormones (ABA, GA, kinetin, JA, MeJA, SA), different light conditions (red, far-red, blue, white light), and auxinic herbicides (2,4-D, Dicamba, Picloram) on the expression of a putative GH3 gene and IAA-amide synthesizing activity in 10-d-old pea seedlings. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis indicated that the PsGH3-5 gene, weakly expressed in control sample, was visibly induced in response to all plant hormones, different light wavelengths and the auxinic herbicides tested. Protein A immunoprecipitation/gel blot analysis using anti-AtGH3.5 antibodies revealed a similar pattern of changes on the protein levels in response to all treatments. IAA-amide synthetase activity determined with aspartate as a substrate, not detectable in control seedlings, was positively affected by a majority of treatments. Based on these results, we suggest that PsGH3-5 may control the growth and development of pea plants in a way similar to the known GH3 genes from other plant species.

PsGH3-5: !affects! Plant growth and development 
Auxin: !induces! PsGH3-5 
ABA: !induces! PsGH3-5 
GA: !induces! PsGH3-5 
Kinetin: !induces! PsGH3-5 
JA: !induces! PsGH3-5 
MeJA: !induces! PsGH3-5 
SA: !induces! PsGH3-5 
Red light: !induces! PsGH3-5 
Far-red light: !induces! PsGH3-5 
Blue light: !induces! PsGH3-5 
White light: !induces! PsGH3-5 
2,4-D: !induces! PsGH3-5 
Dicamba: !induces! PsGH3-5 
Picloram: !induces! PsGH3-5 
PsGH3-5: !synthesizes! IAA-amide