Benzylisoquinoline alkaloids (BIAs) are a structurally diverse group of plant specialized metabolites with a long history of investigation. Although the ecophysiological functions of most BIAs are unknown, the medicinal properties of many compounds have been exploited for centuries. These include the narcotic analgesics codeine and morphine, the antimicrobial agents sanguinarine and berberine, and the antitussive and anticancer drug noscapine. BIA biosynthesis involves a restricted number of enzyme types that catalyze landmark coupling reactions and subsequent functional group modifications. A pathogenesis-related (PR)10/Bet v1 'Pictet-Spenglerase', several O-methyl-, N-methyl- and O-acetyltransferases, cytochromes P450, FAD-dependent oxidases, non-heme dioxygenases and NADPH-dependent reductases have been implicated in the multistep pathways leading to structurally diverse alkaloids. A small number of plant species, including opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) and other members of the Ranunculales, have emerged as model systems to study BIA metabolism. The expansion of resources to include a wider range of plant species is creating an opportunity to investigate previously uncharacterized BIA pathways. Contemporary knowledge of BIA metabolism reflects over a century of research coupled with the development of key innovations such as radioactive tracing, enzyme isolation and molecular cloning, and functional genomics approaches such as virus-induced gene silencing. Recently, the emergence of transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics has expedited the discovery of new BIA biosynthetic genes. The growing repository of BIA biosynthetic genes is providing the parts required to apply emerging synthetic biology platforms to the development of production systems in microbes as an alternative to plants as a commecial source of valuable BIAs.

PR10/Bet v1: !catalyzes! landmark coupling reactions
O-methyltransferases: !catalyzes! functional group modifications
cytochromes P450: !catalyzes! functional group modifications
FAD-dependent oxidases: !catalyzes! functional group modifications
non-heme dioxygenases: !catalyzes! functional group modifications
NADPH-dependent reductases: !catalyzes! functional group modifications
radioactive tracing: !facilitates! enzyme isolation
molecular cloning: !facilitates! enzyme isolation
functional genomics: !facilitates! virus-induced gene silencing
transcriptomics: !facilitates! discovery of new BIA biosynthetic genes
proteomics: !facilitates! discovery of new BIA biosynthetic genes
metabolomics: !facilitates! discovery of new BIA biosynthetic genes
synthetic biology: !applies! production systems in microbes