Plants are often exposed to a combination of stresses, which can occur simultaneously or at different times throughout their life. In this study, the effects of salinity, drought and cadmium pre-treatments were evaluated on the subsequent response of Cakile maritima, a halophytic species, to various levels of salinity (from 100 to 800 mM NaCl) after a recovery time of 2 weeks. Studies were performed in two sets of experiments in a glasshouse under short and long photoperiod (November and July, respectively). In both experiments and in contrast to control plants (not exposed to any previous stress), plants previously exposed to drought, salt or cadmium stress showed lower levels of hydrogen peroxide and malondialdehyde, an indicator of lipid peroxidation, upon salt treatment, particularly at high NaCl concentrations. Oxidative stress alleviation was not only observed at 800 mM NaCl under short photoperiod, but also at 600 and 800 mM NaCl under long photoperiod in terms of reduced salt-induced increases in hydrogen peroxide and malondialdehyde levels in plants previously exposed to drought, salt or cadmium stress. Previous exposure of plants to all stresses additionally caused decreased levels of jasmonic acid, which might be associated with a lower oxidative stress, differences being observed again at 800 mM NaCl only under short photoperiod and at 600 and 800 mM NaCl under long photoperiod. In conclusion, a relatively long-term stress memory was found in C. maritima pre-exposed to salinity, drought or cadmium, which resulted in a lower oxidative stress when subsequently exposed to salinity. The positive effects of drought and cadmium were of similar magnitude to those provided by salt pre-exposure, which indicated an effective cross-tolerance response in this species.

drought: !alleviates! oxidative stress
cadmium: !alleviates! oxidative stress
salinity: !alleviates! oxidative stress
drought: !decreases! jasmonic acid
cadmium: !decreases! jasmonic acid
salinity: !decreases! jasmonic acid