Germination is a complex process, highly dependent on various environmental factors, including temperature and water availability. Germinating soybean seeds are especially vulnerable to unfavorable environmental conditions and exposure to long-term abiotic stresses may result in diminishing much of the yield and most importantly - restrained germination. In the present study, a proteomic approach was employed to analyze influence of cold and osmotic stress on roots of germinated soybean (Glycine max, L.) seeds. Seeds were germinating under continuous conditions of cold stress (+10°C/H2O), osmotic stress (+25°C/-0.2MPa) as well as cold and osmotic stress combined (+10°C/-0.2MPa). Proteome maps established for control samples and stress-treated samples displayed 1272 CBB-stained spots. A total of 59 proteins, present in both control and stress-treated samples and showing significant differences in volume, were identified with LC/nanoESI-MS. Identified proteins divided into functional categories, revealed 9 proteins involved in plant defense, 8 proteins responsible for plant destination and storage and 10 proteins involved in various tracks of carbohydrate metabolism. Furthermore, a number of proteins were assigned to electron transport, range of metabolic pathways, secondary metabolism, protein synthesis, embryogenesis and development, signal transduction, cellular transport, translocation and storage. By analyzing differences in expression patterns, it was possible to trace the soybean response to long-term abiotic stress as well as to distinguish similarities and differences between response to cold and osmotic stress.

plant defense: !involves! 9 proteins 
plant destination and storage: !involves! 8 proteins 
carbohydrate metabolism: !involves! 10 proteins 
electron transport: !involves! a number of proteins 
metabolic pathways: !involves! a number of proteins 
secondary metabolism: !involves! a number of proteins 
protein synthesis: !involves! a number of proteins 
embryogenesis and development: !involves! a number of proteins 
signal transduction: !involves! a number of proteins 
cellular transport: !involves! a number of proteins 
translocation and storage: !involves! a number of proteins