Low-temperature stress is one of the major abiotic stresses in plants worldwide, and the dehydration responsive element binding protein (DREB) transcription factor induces expression of genes involved in environmental stress tolerance in plants. A proteomic approach based on two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) and subsequent mass spectrometric identification was used to study the changes in the leaf proteome profiles of rd29A:RdreB1BI transgenic and non-transgenic strawberries exposed to low-temperature conditions. By comparing the proteomic profiles, we located 21 protein spots that were reproducibly up- or down-regulated by more than twofold between transgenic and non-transgenic strawberries. Eight identified proteins function in energy and metabolism, four in biosynthetic processes, four were stress and defense related, three spots were identified as cold-stress related expressed sequence tags (ESTs), and two were unknown proteins. The change patterns of low-temperature tolerance proteins, including photosynthetic proteins (RuBisCO large subunit and RuBisCO activase), cytoplasmic Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (Cu/Zn-SOD), late embryogenesis abundant protein 14-A (Lea14-A), eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A), and cold-stress related ESTs, were differentially regulated between non-transgenic and rd29A:RdreB1BI transgenic strawberries. They are likely important gene products in the regulatory network of the RdreB1BI gene. Consequently, this study provides the first characterization of the transgenic strawberry proteome and the predicted target proteins of the RdreB1BI gene by using proteomic approaches.

RdreB1BI: !induces expression of! genes involved in environmental stress tolerance
photosynthetic proteins: !differentially regulated between! transgenic and non-transgenic strawberries
Cu/Zn-SOD: !differentially regulated between! transgenic and non-transgenic strawberries
Lea14-A: !differentially regulated between! transgenic and non-transgenic strawberries
eIF5A: !differentially regulated between! transgenic and non-transgenic strawberries
cold-stress related ESTs: !differentially regulated between! transgenic and non-transgenic strawberries