['23398165', "The 5' ends of many mitochondrial transcripts are generated  post-transcriptionally. Recently, we identified three RNA PROCESSING FACTORs  required for 5' end maturation of different mitochondrial mRNAs in Arabidopsis  thaliana. All of these factors are pentatricopeptide repeat proteins (PPRPs),  highly similar to RESTORERs OF FERTILTY (RF), that rescue male fertility in  cytoplasmic male-sterile lines from different species. Therefore, we suggested a  general role of these RF-like PPRPs in mitochondrial 5' processing. We now  identified RNA PROCESSING FACTOR 5, a PPRP not classified as an RF-like protein,  required for the efficient 5' maturation of the nad6 and atp9 mRNAs as well as  26S rRNA. The precursor molecules of these RNAs share conserved sequence  elements, approximately ranging from positions -50 to +9 relative to mature 5'  mRNA termini, suggesting these sequences to be at least part of the cis elements  required for processing. The knockout of RPF5 has only a moderate influence on 5'  processing of atp9 mRNA, whereas the generation of the mature nad6 mRNA and 26S  rRNA is almost completely abolished in the mutant. The latter leads to a 50%  decrease of total 26S rRNA species, resulting in an imbalance between the large  rRNA and 18S rRNA. Despite these severe changes in RNA levels and in the  proportion between the 26S and 18S rRNAs, mitochondrial protein levels appear to  be unaltered in the mutant, whereas seed germination capacity is markedly  reduced.", '2013 May', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12143', 'Binder']

RNA PROCESSING FACTORs: !affects! 5' end maturation of mitochondrial mRNAs 
RESTORERs OF FERTILTY: !highly similar to! RF-like PPRPs 
RNA PROCESSING FACTOR 5: !required for! efficient 5' maturation of nad6 and atp9 mRNAs 
RPF5: !has moderate influence on! atp9 mRNA 
nad6 mRNA: !almost completely abolished in! RPF5 mutant 
26S rRNA: !imbalance between! large rRNA and 18S rRNA 
mitochondrial protein levels: !appear to be unaltered in! RPF5 mutant 
seed germination capacity: !markedly reduced in! RPF5 mutant