['23396598', 'Among the three primary auxin-induced gene families, Auxin/Indole-3-Acetic Acid  (Aux/IAA), Gretchen Hagen3 (GH3) and SMALL AUXIN UP RNA (SAUR), the function of  SAUR genes remains unclear. Arabidopsis SAUR genes have been phylogenetically  classified into three clades. Recent work has suggested that SAUR19 (clade II)  and SAUR63 (clade I) promote cell expansion through the modulation of auxin  transport. Herein, we present our work on SAUR41, a clade III SAUR gene with a  distinctive expression pattern in root meristems. SAUR41 was normally expressed  in the quiescent center and cortex/endodermis initials; upon auxin stimulation,  the expression was provoked in the endodermal layer. During lateral root  development, SAUR41 was expressed in prospective stem cell niches of lateral root  primordia and in expanding endodermal cells surrounding the primordia.  SAUR41-EGFP (enhanced green fluorescent protein) fusion proteins localized to the  cytoplasm. Overexpression of SAUR41 from the Cauliflower mosaic virus 35S  promoter led to pleiotropic auxin-related phenotypes, including long hypocotyls,  increased vegetative biomass and lateral root development, expanded petals and  twisted inflorescence stems. Ectopic SAUR41 proteins were able to promote auxin  transport in hypocotyls. Tissue-specific expression of SAUR41 from the PIN1,  WOX5, PLT2 and ACR4 promoters induced the formation of new auxin  accumulation/signaling peaks above the quiescent centers, whereas tissue-specific  expression of SAUR41 from the PIN2 and PLT2 promoters enhanced root gravitropic  growth. Cells in the root stem cell niches of these transgenic seedlings were  differentially enlarged. The distinctive expression pattern of the SAUR41 gene  and the explicit function of SAUR41 proteins implied that further investigations  on the loss-of-function phenotypes of this gene in root development and  environmental responses are of great interest.', '2013 Apr', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pct028', 'Wang']

Aux/IAA: !affects! Gretchen Hagen3 
GH3: !interacts with! SMALL AUXIN UP RNA 
SAUR: !classified into! three clades 
SAUR19: !promotes! cell expansion 
SAUR41: !expressed in! root meristems 
SAUR41: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
SAUR41: !enhances! auxin transport 
SAUR41: !induces! auxin accumulation/signaling peaks 
SAUR41: !enhances! root gravitropic growth