The exact mechanism of helicase-mediated salinity tolerance is not yet understood. We have isolated a DESD-box containing cDNA from Pisum sativum (Pea) and named it as PDH45. It is a unique member of DEAD-box helicase family; containing DESD instead of DEAD/H. PDH45 overexpression driven by constitutive cauliflower mosaic virus-35S promoter in rice transgenic [Oryza sativa L. cv. Pusa Basmati 1 (PB1)] plants confers salinity tolerance by improving the photosynthesis and antioxidant machinery. The Na(+) ion concentration and oxidative stress parameters in leaves of the NaCl (0, 100 or 200 mM) treated PDH45 overexpressing T1 transgenic lines were lower as compared to wild type (WT) rice plants under similar conditions. The 200 mM NaCl significantly reduced the leaf area, plant dry mass, net photosynthetic rate (PN), stomatal conductance (gs), intercellular CO2 (Ci), chlorophyll (Chl) content in WT plants as compared to the transgenics. The T1 transgenics exhibited higher glutathione (GSH) and ascorbate (AsA) contents under salinity stress. The activities of antioxidant enzymes viz. superoxide dismutase (SOD), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), guaiacol peroxidase (GPX) and glutathione reductase (GR) were significantly higher in transgenics; suggesting the existence of an efficient antioxidant defence system to cope with salinity induced-oxidative damage. Yeast two-hybrid assay indicated that the PDH45 protein interacts with Cu/Zn SOD, adenosine-5'-phosphosulfate-kinase, cysteine proteinase and eIF(4G), thus confirming the involvement of ROS scavenging machinery in the transgenic plants to provide salt tolerance. Furthermore, the T2 transgenics were also able to grow, flower, and set viable seeds under continuous salinity stress of 200 mM NaCl. This study provides insights into the mechanism of PDH45 mediated salinity stress tolerance by controlling the generation of stress induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) and also by protecting the photosynthetic machinery through a strengthened antioxidant system.

PDH45: !overexpression! confers salinity tolerance
PDH45: !interacts with! Cu/Zn SOD
PDH45: !interacts with! adenosine-5'-phosphosulfate-kinase
PDH45: !interacts with! cysteine proteinase
PDH45: !interacts with! eIF(4G)
NaCl: !reduces! leaf area
NaCl: !reduces! plant dry mass
NaCl: !reduces! net photosynthetic rate (PN)
NaCl: !reduces! stomatal conductance (gs)
NaCl: !reduces! intercellular CO2 (Ci)
NaCl: !reduces! chlorophyll (Chl) content
GSH: !increases! in transgenics
AsA: !increases! in transgenics
SOD: !increases! in transgenics
APX: !increases! in transgenics
GPX: !increases! in transgenics
GR: !increases! in transgenics