['23479623', 'Throughout their life cycle, plants produce new organs, such as leaves, flowers,  and lateral roots. Organs that have served their purpose may be shed after  breakdown of primary cell walls between adjacent cell files at the site of  detachment. In Arabidopsis, floral organs abscise after pollination, and this  cell separation event is controlled by the peptide INFLORESCENCE DEFICIENT IN  ABSCISSION (IDA), which signals through the leucine-rich repeat receptor-like  kinases HAESA (HAE) and HAESA-LIKE2 (HSL2). Emergence of new lateral root  primordia, initiated deep inside the root under the influence of auxin, is  similarly dependent on cell wall dissolution between cells in the overlaying  endodermal, cortical, and epidermal tissues. Here we show that this process  requires IDA, HAE, and HSL2. Mutation in these genes constrains the passage of  the growing lateral root primordia through the overlaying layers, resulting in  altered shapes of the lateral root primordia and of the overlaying cells. The HAE  and HSL2 receptors are redundant in function during floral organ abscission, but  during lateral root emergence they are differentially involved in regulating cell  wall remodeling genes. In the root, IDA is strongly auxin-inducible and dependent  on key regulators of lateral root emergence--the auxin influx carrier LIKE AUX1-3  and AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR7. The expression levels of the receptor genes are only  transiently induced by auxin, suggesting they are limiting factors for cell  separation. We conclude that elements of the same cell separation signaling  module have been adapted to function in different developmental programs.', '2013 Mar 26', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1210835110', 'Aalen']

IDA: !signals through! HAE 
IDA: !signals through! HSL2 
HAE: !redundant in! floral organ abscission 
HSL2: !differentially involved in! cell wall remodeling genes 
IDA: !strongly auxin-inducible and dependent on! LIKE AUX1-3 
IDA: !strongly auxin-inducible and dependent on! AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR7