Salicylic acid (o-hydroxy benzoic acid) (SA) induced a rapid dose-dependent membrane hyperpolarization (within seconds) and a modification of the proton secretion (within minutes) of Mimosa pudica pulvinar cells at concentrations higher than 0.1mM. Observations on plasma membrane vesicles isolated from pulvinar tissues showed that SA acted directly at the membrane level through a protonophore action as suggested by the inhibition of the proton gradient and the lack of effect on H(+)-ATPase catalytic activity. Comparative data obtained with protonophores (carbonylcyanide-m-chlorophenylhydrazone and 2,4-dinitrophenol) and inhibitors of ATPases (vanadate, N,N'-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide, and diethylstilbestrol) corroborated this conclusion. Consequently, the collapse of the proton motive force led to an impairment in membrane functioning. This impairment is illustrated by the inhibition of the ion-driven turgor-mediated seismonastic reaction of the pulvinus following SA treatment. SA acted in a specific manner as its biosynthetic precursor benzoic acid induced much milder effects and the m- and p-OH benzoic acid derivatives did not trigger similar characteristic effects. Therefore, SA may be considered both a membrane signal molecule and a metabolic effector following its uptake in the cells.

Salicylic acid: !induces! membrane hyperpolarization
Salicylic acid: !acts as! protonophore
Proton gradient: !inhibited by! Salicylic acid
H(+)-ATPase: !unaffected by! Salicylic acid
Carbonylcyanide-m-chlorophenylhydrazone: !inhibits! Proton gradient
2,4-dinitrophenol: !inhibits! Proton gradient
Vanadate: !inhibits! H(+)-ATPase
N,N'-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide: !inhibits! H(+)-ATPase
Diethylstilbestrol: !inhibits! H(+)-ATPase
Membrane functioning: !impaired by! collapse of proton motive force
Turgor-mediated seismonastic reaction: !inhibited by! Salicylic acid
Benzoic acid: !induces! milder effects
m-OH benzoic acid derivatives: !do not induce! similar effects
p-OH benzoic acid derivatives: !do not induce! similar effects