 The role of Quaternary climatic shifts in shaping the distribution of Linaria elegans, an Iberian annual plant, was investigated using species distribution modelling and molecular phylogeographical analyses. Three hypotheses are proposed to explain the Quaternary history of its mountain ring range.  The distribution of L. elegans was modelled using the maximum entropy method and projected to the last interglacial and to the last glacial maximum (LGM) using two different paleoclimatic models: the Community Climate System Model (CCSM) and the Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate (MIROC). Two nuclear and three plastid DNA regions were sequenced for 24 populations (119 individuals sampled). Bayesian phylogenetic, phylogeographical, dating and coalescent-based population genetic analyses were conducted.  Molecular analyses indicated the existence of northern and southern glacial refugia and supported two routes of post-glacial recolonization. These results were consistent with the LGM distribution as inferred under the CCSM paleoclimatic model (but not under the MIROC model). Isolation between two major refugia was dated back to the Riss or Mindel glaciations, > 100 kyr before present (bp).  The Atlantic distribution of inferred refugia suggests that the oceanic (buffered)-continental (harsh) gradient may have played a key and previously unrecognized role in determining Quaternary distribution shifts of Mediterranean plants.

Gene: !affects! Distribution 
Quaternary climatic shifts: !shape! Distribution of Linaria elegans 
Maximum entropy method: !model! Distribution of L. elegans 
CCSM/MIROC paleoclimatic models: !project! Distribution to last interglacial/LGM 
Nuclear/plastid DNA regions: !sequenced! 24 populations 
Bayesian phylogenetic/phylogeographical/dating/coalescent-based population genetic analyses: !conducted! Molecular analyses 
Northern/southern glacial refugia: !inferred! From molecular analyses 
Riss/Mindel glaciations: !date! Isolation between two major refugia 
Oceanic/continental gradient: !play! Key role in determining Quaternary distribution shifts