['23508663', 'Lignins result from the oxidative polymerization of three hydroxycinnamyl  (p-coumaryl, coniferyl, and sinapyl) alcohols in a reaction mediated by  peroxidases. The most important of these is the cationic peroxidase from Zinnia  elegans (ZePrx), an enzyme considered to be responsible for the last step of  lignification in this plant. Bibliographical evidence indicates that the  arabidopsis peroxidase 72 (AtPrx72), which is homolog to ZePrx, could have an  important role in lignification. For this reason, we performed a bioinformatic,  histochemical, photosynthetic, and phenotypical and lignin composition analysis  of an arabidopsis knock-out mutant of AtPrx72 with the aim of characterizing the  effects that occurred due to the absence of expression of this peroxidase from  the aspects of plant physiology such as vascular development, lignification, and  photosynthesis. In silico analyses indicated a high homology between AtPrx72 and  ZePrx, cell wall localization and probably optimal levels of translation of  AtPrx72. The histochemical study revealed a low content in syringyl units and a  decrease in the amount of lignin in the atprx72 mutant plants compared to WT. The  atprx72 mutant plants grew more slowly than WT plants, with both smaller rosette  and principal stem, and with fewer branches and siliques than the WT plants.  Lastly, chlorophyll a fluorescence revealed a significant decrease in PhiPSII and q  L in atprx72 mutant plants that could be related to changes in carbon  partitioning and/or utilization of redox equivalents in arabidopsis metabolism.  The results suggest an important role of AtPrx72 in lignin biosynthesis. In  addition, knock-out plants were able to respond and adapt to an insufficiency of  lignification.', '2013 Jun', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-013-1865-5', 'Zapata']

AtPrx72: !mediates! lignification 
AtPrx72: !homologous to! ZePrx 
AtPrx72: !localizes to! cell wall 
atprx72 mutant plants: !have lower! lignin content 
atprx72 mutant plants: !grow more slowly than! WT plants 
atprx72 mutant plants: !have lower! PhiPSII and qL 
atprx72 mutant plants: !respond and adapt to! insufficiency of lignification