['23503980', 'The Arabidopsis SAUR36, renamed RAG1, integrates auxin and gibberellin signals to  regulate apical hook maintenance in etiolated seedlings, hypocotyl elongation in  the light and fertility. Phytohormone signalling intermediates integrate  responses to developmental cues and the variety of environmental inputs thereby  governing all aspects of plant growth and development. At the genetic level,  interactions of different phytohormone signalling pathways lead to the regulation  of overlapping sets of target genes. We have characterised SMALL AUXIN UP RNA 36  (SAUR36, At2g45210) whose expression is induced by auxins and repressed by  gibberellins. Its expression appears to be restricted to elongating tissues.  Germination responses to treatments with paclobutrazol and exogenous abscisic  acid were affected in knock-out, knock-down as well as ectopic expression lines.  At later stages of development, however, transgenic plants with reduced levels of  SAUR36 expression appeared similar to wild-type plants, while ectopic expression  of SAUR36 led to the absence of apical hooks in etiolated seedlings and longer  hypocotyls in light-grown seedlings. Mature plants ectopically expressing SAUR36  further displayed strongly reduced fertility and wavy growth of inflorescence  axes, the latter of which could be linked to defects in auxin transport. Taken  together, our data suggest that SAUR36 plays a role in the regulation of seed  germination by gibberellins and abscisic acid, light-dependent hypocotyl  elongation as well as apical hook formation or maintenance. Therefore, we propose  that it could act as one of the converging points of auxin and gibberellin signal  integration in controlling key plant developmental events. Hence, we named the  gene RESPONSE TO AUXINS AND GIBBERELLINS 1 (RAG1).', '2013 Jun', 'Plant Cell Rep', '10.1007/s00299-013-1406-5', 'Kumar']

SAUR36: !integrates! auxin and gibberellin signals 
SAUR36: !regulates! apical hook maintenance 
SAUR36: !induces! expression by auxins 
SAUR36: !represses! expression by gibberellins 
SAUR36: !affects! germination responses 
SAUR36: !controls! hypocotyl elongation 
SAUR36: !reduces! fertility 
SAUR36: !causes! wavy growth of inflorescence axes 
SAUR36: !converges! auxin and gibberellin signals