Silicon can alleviate salt damage to plants, although the mechanism(s) still remains to be elucidated. In this paper, we report the effect of silicon on chloride transport in rice (Oryza sativa L.) seedlings in saline conditions. In the absence of salinity, silicon enhanced the growth of shoots, but not roots in three cultivars (cv. GR4, IR36, and CSR10). Salinity reduced the growth of both shoots and roots in all three genotypes. In saline conditions, addition of silicon to the culture solution again improved the growth of shoots, but not of roots. Under these saline conditions, the concentrations of chloride in the shoot were markedly decreased by adding silicon and the ratio of K(+)/Cl(-) was significantly increased, while the concentration of chloride in the roots was unchanged. The decrease in chloride concentration in the shoot was correlated with the decrease in transpirational bypass flow in rice, as shown by the transport of the apoplastic tracer trisodium-8-hydroxy-1,3,6-pyrenetrisulphonic acid (PTS). Addition of silicon increased the net photosynthetic rate, stomata conductance, and transpiration of salt-stressed plants in cv. IR36, indicating that the reduction of chloride (and sodium) uptake by silicon was not through a reduction in transpiration rate. Silicon addition also increased the instantaneous water use efficiency of salt-stressed plants, while it did not change the relative growth rate of shoots. The results suggest that silicon addition decreased transpirational bypass flow in the roots, and therefore decreased the transport of chloride to the shoot.

Silicon: !alleviates! Salt Damage
Silicon: !enhances! Growth of Shoots
Salinity: !reduces! Growth of Shoots and Roots
Silicon: !decreases! Chloride Concentration in Shoot
Silicon: !increases! K(+)/Cl(-) Ratio
Silicon: !increases! Net Photosynthetic Rate
Silicon: !increases! Stomata Conductance
Silicon: !increases! Transpiration of Salt-Stressed Plants
Silicon: !increases! Instantaneous Water Use Efficiency