['23547968', 'BACKGROUND: Transcription factors (TF) play a crucial role in regulating gene  expression and are fit to regulate diverse cellular processes by interacting with  other proteins. A TF named calmodulin binding transcription activator (CAMTA) was  identified in Arabidopsis thaliana (AtCAMTA1-6). To explore the role of CAMTA1 in  drought response, the phenotypic differences and gene expression was studied  between camta1 and Col-0 under drought condition. RESULTS: In camta1, root  development was abolished showing high-susceptibility to induced osmotic stress  resulting in small wrinkled rosette leaves and stunted primary root. In camta1  under drought condition, we identified growth retardation, poor WUE, low  photosystem II efficiency, decline in RWC and higher sensitivity to drought with  reduced survivability. The microarray analysis of drought treated camta1 revealed  that CAMTA1 regulates "drought recovery" as most indicative pathway along with  other stress response, osmotic balance, apoptosis, DNA methylation and  photosynthesis. Interestingly, majority of positively regulated genes were  related to plasma membrane and chloroplast. Further, our analysis indicates that  CAMTA1 regulates several stress responsive genes including RD26, ERD7, RAB18,  LTPs, COR78, CBF1, HSPs etc. and promoter of these genes were enriched with CAMTA  recognition cis-element. CAMTA1 probably regulate drought recovery by regulating  expression of AP2-EREBP transcription factors and Abscisic acid response.  CONCLUSION: CAMTA1 rapidly changes broad spectrum of responsive genes of membrane  integrity and photosynthetic machinery by generating ABA response for challenging  drought stress. Our results demonstrate the important role of CAMTA1 in  regulating drought response in Arabidopsis, thus could be genetically engineered  for improving drought tolerance in crop.', '2013 Apr 2', 'BMC Genomics', '10.1186/1471-2164-14-216', 'Sawant']

CAMTA1: !regulates! Drought Recovery 
CAMTA1: !regulates expression of! AP2-EREBP transcription factors 
CAMTA1: !regulates expression of! Abscisic acid response 
CAMTA1: !enriches! Promoter of genes 
CAMTA1: !recognizes! CAMTA recognition cis-element 
CAMTA1: !induces! Growth retardation 
CAMTA1: !induces! Poor WUE 
CAMTA1: !induces! Low photosystem II efficiency 
CAMTA1: !induces! Decline in RWC 
CAMTA1: !induces! Higher sensitivity to drought