Ectomycorrhizal associations are of major ecological importance in temperate and boreal forests. The development of a functional ectomycorrhiza requires many genetic and biochemical changes. In this study, suppressive subtraction hybridization was used to identify differentially expressed genes in the roots of maritime pine (Pinus pinaster Aiton) inoculated with Laccaria bicolor, a mycorrhizal fungus. A total number of 200 unigenes were identified as being differentially regulated in maritime pine roots during the development of mycorrhiza. These unigenes were classified into 10 categories according to the function of their homologues in the GenBank database. Approximately, 40 % of the differentially expressed transcripts were genes that coded for unknown proteins in the databases or that had no homology to known genes. A group of these differentially expressed genes was selected to validate the results using quantitative real-time PCR. The transcript levels of the representative genes were compared between the non-inoculated and inoculated plants at 1, 5, 15 and 30 days after inoculation. The observed expression patterns indicate (1) changes in the composition of the wall cell, (2) tight regulation of defence genes during the development of mycorrhiza and (3) changes in carbon and nitrogen metabolism. Ammonium excess or deficiency dramatically affected the stability of ectomycorrhiza and altered gene expression in maritime pine roots.

Ectomycorrhizal associations: !affect! Ecological importance
Maritime pine roots: !inoculated with! Laccaria bicolor
Differentially expressed genes: !classified into! 10 categories
Unknown proteins: !coded for! Differentially expressed transcripts
Quantitative real-time PCR: !used to validate! Results
Wall cell composition: !changed by! Differentially expressed genes
Defence genes: !tightly regulated by! Development of mycorrhiza
Carbon and nitrogen metabolism: !altered by! Differentially expressed genes
Ammonium excess/deficiency: !dramatically affected! Stability of ectomycorrhiza