['23555952', 'The initiation of chloroplast development in the light is dependent on nuclear  encoded components. The nuclear genes encoding key components in the  photosynthetic machinery are regulated by signals originating in the plastids.  These plastid signals play an essential role in the regulation of photosynthesis  associated nuclear genes (PhANGs) when proplastids develop into chloroplasts. One  of the plastid signals is linked to the tetrapyrrole biosynthesis and  accumulation of the intermediates the Mg-ProtoIX and its methyl ester  Mg-ProtoIX-ME. Phytochrome-Associated Protein Phosphatase 5 (PAPP5) was isolated  in a previous study as a putative Mg-ProtoIX interacting protein. In order to  elucidate if there is a biological link between PAPP5 and the tetrapyrrole  mediated signal we generated double mutants between the Arabidopsis papp5 and the  crd mutants. The crd mutant over-accumulates Mg-ProtoIX and Mg-ProtoIX-ME and the  tetrapyrrole accumulation triggers retrograde signalling. The crd mutant exhibits  repression of PhANG expression, altered chloroplast morphology and a pale  phenotype. However, in the papp5crd double mutant, the crd phenotype is restored  and papp5crd accumulated wild type levels of chlorophyll, developed proper  chloroplasts and showed normal induction of PhANG expression in response to  light. Tetrapyrrole feeding experiments showed that PAPP5 is required to respond  correctly to accumulation of tetrapyrroles in the cell and that PAPP5 is most  likely a component in the plastid signalling pathway down stream of the  tetrapyrrole Mg-ProtoIX/Mg-ProtoIX-ME. Inhibition of phosphatase activity  phenocopied the papp5crd phenotype in the crd single mutant demonstrating that  PAPP5 phosphatase activity is essential to mediate the retrograde signal and to  suppress PhANG expression in the crd mutant. Thus, our results suggest that PAPP5  receives an inbalance in the tetrapyrrole biosynthesis through the accumulation  of Mg-ProtoIX and acts as a negative regulator of PhANG expression during  chloroplast biogenesis and development.', '2013', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0060305', 'Strand']

Plastid signals: !regulate! Photosynthesis associated nuclear genes
Tetrapyrrole biosynthesis: !triggers! Retrograde signalling
PAPP5: !interacts with! Mg-ProtoIX
PAPP5: !inhibits! PhANG expression
Mg-ProtoIX/Mg-ProtoIX-ME: !accumulates in! Cell
PAPP5: !mediates! Retrograde signal