Plant evolution is marked by major advances in structural characteristics that facilitated the highly successful colonization of dry land. Underlying these advances is the evolution of genes encoding specialized proteins that form novel microtubular arrays of the cytoskeleton. This review investigates the evolution of plant families of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) through the recently sequenced genomes of Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, Selaginella moellendorffii, Physcomitrella patens, Volvox carteri and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. The families of MAPs examined are AIR9, CLASP, CRIPT, MAP18, MOR1, TON, EB1, AtMAP70, SPR2, SPR1, WVD2 and MAP65 families (abbreviations are defined in the footnote to Table 1). Conjectures are made regarding the evolution of MAPs in plants in relation to the evolution of multicellularity, oriented cell division and vasculature. Angiosperms in particular have high numbers of proteins that are involved in promotion of helical growth or its suppression, and novel plant microtubular structures may have acted as a catalyst for the development of novel plant MAPs. Comparisons of plant MAP gene families with those of animals show that animals may have more flexibility in the structure of their microtubule cytoskeletons than plants, but with both plants and animals possessing many MAP splice variants.

AIR9: !facilitates! Plant evolution
CLASP: !facilitates! Plant evolution
CRIPT: !facilitates! Plant evolution
MAP18: !facilitates! Plant evolution
MOR1: !facilitates! Plant evolution
TON: !facilitates! Plant evolution
EB1: !facilitates! Plant evolution
AtMAP70: !facilitates! Plant evolution
SPR2: !facilitates! Plant evolution
SPR1: !facilitates! Plant evolution
WVD2: !facilitates! Plant evolution
MAP65: !facilitates! Plant evolution
Multicellularity: !promotes! Helical growth
Oriented cell division: !promotes! Helical growth
Vasculature: !promotes! Helical growth
Animals: !possess! Flexibility in microtubule cytoskeleton structure
Plants: !possess! Splice variants of MAPs