The rubber particle is a special organelle in which natural rubber is synthesised and stored in the laticifers of Hevea brasiliensis. To better understand the biological functions of rubber particles and to identify the candidate rubber biosynthesis-related proteins, a comprehensive proteome analysis was performed on H. brasiliensis rubber particles using shotgun tandem mass spectrometry profiling approaches-resulting in a thorough report on the rubber particle proteins. A total of 186 rubber particle proteins were identified, with a range in relative molecular mass of 3.9-194.2 kDa and in isoelectric point values of 4.0-11.2. The rubber particle proteins were analysed for gene ontology and could be categorised into eight major groups according to their functions: including rubber biosynthesis, stress- or defence-related responses, protein processing and folding, signal transduction and cellular transport. In addition to well-known rubber biosynthesis-related proteins such as rubber elongation factor (REF), small rubber particle protein (SRPP) and cis-prenyl transferase (CPT), many proteins were firstly identified to be on the rubber particles, including cyclophilin, phospholipase D, cytochrome P450, small GTP-binding protein, clathrin, eukaryotic translation initiation factor, annexin, ABC transporter, translationally controlled tumour protein, ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, and several homologues of REF, SRPP and CPT. A procedure of multiple reaction monitoring was established for further protein validation. This comprehensive proteome data of rubber particles would facilitate investigation into molecular mechanisms of biogenesis, self-homeostasis and rubber biosynthesis of the rubber particle, and might serve as valuable biomarkers in molecular breeding studies of H. brasiliensis and other alternative rubber-producing species.

rubber particle: !synthesizes! natural rubber 
rubber particle proteins: !categorized into! 8 major groups 
rubber biosynthesis-related proteins: !include! REF, SRPP, CPT 
cyclophilin: !identified on! rubber particles 
phospholipase D: !identified on! rubber particles 
cytochrome P450: !identified on! rubber particles 
small GTP-binding protein: !identified on! rubber particles 
clathrin: !identified on! rubber particles 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor: !identified on! rubber particles 
annexin: !identified on! rubber particles 
ABC transporter: !identified on! rubber particles 
translationally controlled tumour protein: !identified on! rubber particles 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes: !identified on! rubber particles 
REF homologues: !identified on! rubber particles 
SRPP homologues: !identified on! rubber particles 
CPT homologues: !identified on! rubber particles