['23569110', 'NAD-dependent glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is a ubiquitous  enzyme involved in the glycolytic pathway. It has been widely demonstrated that  mammalian GAPDH, in addition to its role in glycolysis, fulfills alternative  functions mainly linked to its susceptibility to oxidative posttranslational  modifications. Here, we investigated the responses of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) cytosolic GAPDH isoenzymes GAPC1 and GAPC2 to cadmium-induced stress in  seedlings roots. GAPC1 was more responsive to cadmium than GAPC2 at the  transcriptional level. In vivo, cadmium treatments induced different concomitant  effects, including (1) nitric oxide accumulation, (2) cytosolic oxidation (e.g.  oxidation of the redox-sensitive Green fluorescent protein2 probe), (3)  activation of the GAPC1 promoter, (4) GAPC1 protein accumulation in enzymatically  inactive form, and (5) strong relocalization of GAPC1 to the nucleus. All these  effects were detected in the same zone of the root tip. In vitro, GAPC1 was  inactivated by either nitric oxide donors or hydrogen peroxide, but no inhibition  was directly provided by cadmium. Interestingly, nuclear relocalization of GAPC1  under cadmium-induced oxidative stress was stimulated, rather than inhibited, by  mutating into serine the catalytic cysteine of GAPC1 (C155S), excluding an  essential role of GAPC1 nitrosylation in the mechanism of nuclear relocalization,  as found in mammalian cells. Although the function of GAPC1 in the nucleus is  unknown, our results suggest that glycolytic GAPC1, through its high sensitivity  to the cellular redox state, may play a role in oxidative stress signaling or  protection in plants.', '2013 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.215194', 'Costa']

GAPC1: !responds to! cadmium 
GAPC1: !accumulates in! inactive form 
GAPC1: !relocalizes to! nucleus 
GAPC1: !inactivated by! nitric oxide donors 
GAPC1: !inactivated by! hydrogen peroxide 
GAPC1: !stimulated by! C155S mutation