['23569225', 'Peptide signaling presumably occupies a central role in plant development, yet  only few concrete examples of receptor-ligand pairs that act in the context of  specific differentiation processes have been described. Here we report that  second-site null mutations in the Arabidopsis leucine-rich repeat receptor-like  kinase gene barely any meristem 3 (BAM3) perfectly suppress the postembryonic  root meristem growth defect and the associated perturbed protophloem development  of the brevis radix (brx) mutant. The roots of bam3 mutants specifically resist  growth inhibition by the CLAVATA3/ENDOSPERM SURROUNDING REGION 45 (CLE45) peptide  ligand. WT plants transformed with a construct for ectopic overexpression of  CLE45 could not be recovered, with the exception of a single severely dwarfed and  sterile plant that eventually died. By contrast, we obtained numerous transgenic  bam3 mutants transformed with the same construct. These transgenic plants  displayed a WT phenotype, however, supporting the notion that CLE45 is the likely  BAM3 ligand. The results correlate with the observation that external CLE45  application represses protophloem differentiation in WT, but not in bam3 mutants.  BAM3, BRX, and CLE45 are expressed in a similar spatiotemporal trend along the  developing protophloem, up to the end of the transition zone. Induction of BAM3  expression upon CLE45 application, ectopic overexpression of BAM3 in brx root  meristems, and laser ablation experiments suggest that intertwined regulatory  activity of BRX, BAM3, and CLE45 could be involved in the proper transition of  protophloem cells from proliferation to differentiation, thereby impinging on  postembryonic growth capacity of the root meristem.', '2013 Apr 23', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1222314110', 'Hardtke']

BAM3: !interacts with! CLE45 
BRX: !interacts with! BAM3 
CLE45: !represses! protophloem differentiation 
BAM3: !enhances! protophloem differentiation 
BRX: !synthesizes! CLE45 
BAM3: !localizes to! protophloem