['23573263', 'In a screen for delayed floral organ abscission in Arabidopsis, we have  identified a novel mutant of CORONATINE INSENSITIVE 1 (COI1), the F-box protein  that has been shown to be the jasmonic acid (JA) co-receptor. While JA has been  shown to have an important role in senescence, root development, pollen  dehiscence and defense responses, there has been little focus on its critical  role in floral organ abscission. Abscission, or the detachment of organs from the  main body of a plant, is an essential process during plant development and a  unique type of cell separation regulated by endogenous and exogenous signals.  Previous studies have indicated that auxin and ethylene are major plant hormones  regulating abscission; and here we show that regulation of floral organ  abscission is also controlled by jasmonic acid in Arabidopsis thaliana. Our  characterization of coi1-1 and a novel allele (coi1-37) has also revealed an  essential role in apical dominance and floral meristem arrest. In this study we  provide genetic evidence indicating that delayed abscission 4 (dab4-1) is allelic  to coi1-1 and that meristem arrest and apical dominance appear to be  evolutionarily divergent functions for COI1 that are governed in an  ecotype-dependent manner. Further characterizations of ethylene and JA responses  of dab4-1/coi1-37 also provide new information suggesting separate pathways for  ethylene and JA that control both floral organ abscission and hypocotyl growth in  young seedlings. Our study opens the door revealing new roles for JA and its  interaction with other hormones during plant development.', '2013', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0060505', 'Patterson']

COI1: !affects! floral organ abscission 
JA: !affects! senescence 
JA: !affects! root development 
JA: !affects! pollen dehiscence 
JA: !affects! defense responses 
Auxin: !affects! abscission 
Ethylene: !affects! abscission 
COI1: !affects! apical dominance 
COI1: !affects! floral meristem arrest 
dab4-1: !allelic to! coi1-1 
Ethylene: !interacts with! JA 
JA: !interacts with! Ethylene 
JA: !controls! hypocotyl growth