To understand the genotypic variation of citrus to mild salt stress, a proteomic approach has been carried out in parallel on two citrus genotypes ('Cleopatra' and 'Willow leaf' mandarins), which differ for Na(+) and Cl(-) accumulation, and their cognate autotetraploids (4×). Using two-dimensional electrophoresis approximately 910 protein spots were reproducibly detected in control and salt-stressed leaves of all genotypes. Among them, 44 protein spots showing significant variations at least in one genotype were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis for identification. Salt-responsive proteins were involved in several functions, including photosynthetic processes, ROS scavenging, stress defence, and signalling. Genotype factors affect the salt-responsive pattern, especially that of carbon metabolism. The no ion accumulator 'Cleopatra' mandarin genotype showed the highest number of salt-responsive proteins, and up-regulation of Calvin cycle-related proteins. Conversely the ion accumulator 'Willow leaf' mandarin showed high levels of several photorespiration-related enzymes. A common set of proteins (twelve spots) displayed higher levels in salt-stressed leaves of 2× and 4× 'Cleopatra' and 4× 'Willow leaf' mandarin. Interestingly, antioxidant enzymes and heat shock proteins showed higher constitutive levels in 4× 'Cleopatra' mandarin and 4× 'Willow leaf' mandarin compared with the cognate 2× genotype. This work provides for the first time information on the effect of 8 weeks of salt stress on citrus genotypes contrasting for ion accumulation and their cognate autotetraploids. Results underline that genetic factors have a predominant effect on the salt response, although a common stress response independent from genotype was also found.

genotype: !affects! salt-responsive pattern
photosynthetic processes: !enhanced by! salt stress
ROS scavenging: !enhanced by! salt stress
stress defence: !enhanced by! salt stress
signalling: !enhanced by! salt stress
Calvin cycle-related proteins: !upregulated by! 'Cleopatra' mandarin genotype
photorespiration-related enzymes: !upregulated by! 'Willow leaf' mandarin
antioxidant enzymes: !constitutively higher in! 4× 'Cleopatra' mandarin and 4× 'Willow leaf' mandarin
heat shock proteins: !constitutively higher in! 4× 'Cleopatra' mandarin and 4× 'Willow leaf' mandarin