['23620482', "Plant S1-like nucleases, often referred to as nuclease I enzymes, are the main  class of enzymes involved in nucleic acid degradation during plant programmed  cell death. The catalytically active site of these enzymes shows a significant  similarity to the well-described P1 nuclease from Penicillium citrinum.  Previously published studies reported that plant S1-like nucleases possess  catalytic activities similar to their fungal orthologs, i.e. they hydrolyze  single-stranded DNA and RNA, and less efficiently double-stranded DNA, in the  presence of zinc ions. Here we describe a comprehensive study of the nucleolytic  activities of all Arabidopsis S1-like paralogs. Our results revealed that  different members of this family are characterized by a surprisingly large  variety of catalytic properties. We found that, in addition to Zn(2+)-dependent  enzymes, this family also comprises nucleases activated by Ca(2+) and Mn(2+),  which implies that the apparently well-known S1 nuclease active site in plant  nucleases is able to cooperate with different activatory ions. Moreover,  particular members of this class differ in their optimum pH value and substrate  specificity. These results shed new light on the widely accepted classification  of plant nucleases which is based on the assumption that the catalytic  requirements of plant nucleases reflect their phylogenetic origin. Our results  imply the need to redefine the understanding of the term 'nuclease I'. Analysis  of the phylogenetic relationships between S1-like enzymes shows that plant  representatives of this family evolve toward an increase in catalytic diversity.  The importance of this process for the biological functions of plant S1-type  enzymes is discussed.", '2013 Jul', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pct061', 'Poreba']

Plant S1-like nucleases: !hydrolyze! single-stranded DNA and RNA 
Plant S1-like nucleases: !activated by! Zn(2+), Ca(2+) and Mn(2+) 
Plant S1-like nucleases: !differ in! optimum pH value and substrate specificity 
Plant S1-like nucleases: !evolve toward! increase in catalytic diversity