RNA editing is one of the post-transcriptional processes that commonly occur in plant plastids and mitochondria. In Arabidopsis, 34 C-to-U RNA editing events, affecting transcripts of 18 plastid genes, have been identified. Here, we examined the editing and expression of these transcripts in different organs, and in green and non-green seedlings (etiolated, cia5-2, ispF and ispG albino mutants, lincomycin-, and norflurazon-treated). The editing efficiency of Arabidopsis plastid transcripts varies from site to site, and may be specifically regulated in different tissues. Steady state levels of plastid transcripts are low or undetectable in etiolated seedlings, but most editing sites are edited with efficiencies similar to those observed in green seedlings. By contrast, the editing of some sites is completely lost or significantly reduced in other non-green tissues; for instance, the editing of ndhB-149, ndhB-1255, and ndhD-2 is completely lost in roots and in lincomycin-treated seedlings. The editing of ndhD-2 is also completely lost in albino mutants and norflurazon-treated seedlings. However, matK-640 is completely edited, and accD-794, atpF-92, psbE-214, psbF-77, psbZ-50, and rps14-50 are completely or highly edited in both green and non-green tissues. In addition, the expression of nucleus-encoded RNA polymerase dependent transcripts is specifically induced by lincomycin, and the splicing of ndhB transcripts is significantly reduced in the albino mutants and inhibitor-treated seedlings. Our results indicate that plastid gene expression, and the splicing and editing of plastid transcripts are specifically and differentially regulated in various types of non-green tissues.

RNA editing: !affects! transcripts of 18 plastid genes
Editing efficiency: !varies! between tissues
Expression levels: !low or undetectable! in etiolated seedlings
ndhB-149, ndhB-1255, and ndhD-2: !completely lost! in roots and lincomycin-treated seedlings
matK-640: !completely edited!
accD-794, atpF-92, psbE-214, psbF-77, psbZ-50, and rps14-50: !completely or highly edited! in green and non-green tissues
Nucleus-encoded RNA polymerase dependent transcripts: !induced! by lincomycin
Splicing of ndhB transcripts: !reduced! in albino mutants and inhibitor-treated seedlings
Plastid gene expression: !differentially regulated! in various types of non-green tissues