In Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, the disruption of the ndhF1 gene (slr0844), which encodes a subunit of one of the NDH-1 complexes (NDH-1L complex) serving for respiratory electron transfer, causes the largest change in Chl fluorescence induction kinetics among the kinetics of 750 disruptants searched in the Fluorome, the cyanobacterial Chl fluorescence database. The cause of the explicit phenotype of the ndhF1 disruptant was examined by measurements of the photosynthetic rate, Chl fluorescence and state transition. The results demonstrate that the defects in respiratory electron transfer obviously have great impact on Chl fluorescence in cyanobacteria. The inactivation of NDH-1L complexes involving electron transfer from NDH-1 to plastoquinone (PQ) would result in the oxidation of the PQ pool, leading to the transition to State 1, where the yield of Chl fluorescence is high. Apparently, respiration, although its rate is far lower than that of photosynthesis, could affect Chl fluorescence through the state transition as leverage. The disruption of the ndhF1 gene caused lower oxygen-evolving activity but the estimated electron transport rate from Chl fluorescence measurements was faster in the mutant than in the wild-type cells. The discrepancy could be ascribed to the decreased level of non-photochemical quenching due to state transition. One must be cautious when using the Chl fluorescence parameter to estimate photosynthesis in mutants defective in state transition.

ndhF1 gene: !encodes! subunit of NDH-1 complex 
ndhF1 disruptant: !causes largest change in! Chl fluorescence induction kinetics 
respiratory electron transfer: !affects! Chl fluorescence 
NDH-1L complexes: !involve! electron transfer from NDH-1 to plastoquinone 
PQ pool: !oxidized by! inactivation of NDH-1L complexes 
state transition: !leads to! high yield of Chl fluorescence 
mutant: !has lower! oxygen-evolving activity 
Chl fluorescence measurements: !estimate faster! electron transport rate in mutant than wild-type cells 
non-photochemical quenching: !decreased by! state transition