['23647163', 'Shade-avoider plants typically respond to shade-light signals by increasing the  rate of stem growth. CONSTITTUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS 1 (COP1) is an E3 ligase  involved in the ubiquitin labelling of proteins targeted for degradation. In  dark-grown seedlings, COP1 accumulates in the nucleus and light exposure causes  COP1 migration to the cytosol. Here, we show that in Arabidopsis thaliana, COP1  accumulates in the nucleus under natural or simulated shade, despite the presence  of far-red light. In plants grown under white light, the transfer to shade-light  conditions triggers an unexpectedly rapid re-accumulation of COP1 in the nucleus.  The partial simulation of shade by lowering either blue or red light levels  (maintaining far-red light) caused COP1 nuclear re-accumulation. Hypocotyl growth  of wild-type seedlings is more sensitive to afternoon shade than to morning  shade. A residual response to shade was observed in the cop1 mutant background,  but these seedlings showed inverted sensitivity as they responded to morning  shade and not to afternoon shade. COP1 overexpression exaggerated the wild-type  pattern by enhancing afternoon sensitivity and making morning shade inhibitory of  growth. COP1 nuclear re-accumulation also responded more strongly to afternoon  shade than to morning shade. These results are consistent with a signalling role  of COP1 in shade avoidance. We propose a function of COP1 in setting the daily  patterns of sensitivity to shade in the fluctuating light environments of plant  canopies.', '2013 Aug', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12226', 'Casal']

COP1: !accumulates in! nucleus 
COP1: !migrates to! cytosol 
COP1: !re-accumulates in! nucleus 
COP1: !enhances! afternoon sensitivity 
COP1: !inhibits! morning shade 
shade-light signals: !increase! stem growth 
white light: !triggers! COP1 nuclear re-accumulation 
far-red light: !maintains! COP1 nuclear re-accumulation 
blue/red light levels: !lower! COP1 nuclear re-accumulation 
wild-type seedlings: !respond to! afternoon shade 
cop1 mutant background: !respond to! morning shade 
COP1 overexpression: !exaggerates! wild-type pattern