['23656895', 'Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE Ds (CDKDs)  phosphorylate the C-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II.  Arabidopsis CYCLIN H;1 (CYCH;1) interacts with and activates CDKDs; however, the  physiological function of CYCH;1 has not been determined. Here, we report that  CYCH;1, which is localized to the nucleus, positively regulates blue  light-induced stomatal opening. Reduced-function cych;1 RNA interference (cych;1  RNAi) plants exhibited a drought tolerance phenotype. CYCH;1 is predominantly  expressed in guard cells, and its expression was substantially down-regulated by  dehydration. Transpiration of intact leaves was reduced in cych;1 RNAi plants  compared with the wild-type control in light but not in darkness. CYCH;1  down-regulation impaired blue light-induced stomatal opening but did not affect  guard cell development or abscisic acid-mediated stomatal closure. Microarray and  real-time polymerase chain reaction analyses indicated that CYCH;1 did not  regulate the expression of abscisic acid-responsive genes or light-induced  stomatal opening signaling determinants, such as MYB60, MYB61, Hypersensitive to  red and blue1, and Protein phosphatase7. CYCH;1 down-regulation induced the  expression of redox homeostasis genes, such as LIPOXYGENASE3 (LOX3), LOX4,  ARABIDOPSIS GLUTATHIONE PEROXIDASE 7 (ATGPX7), EARLY LIGHT-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN1  (ELIP1), and ELIP2, and increased hydrogen peroxide production in guard cells.  Furthermore, loss-of-function mutations in CDKD;2 or CDKD;3 did not affect  responsiveness to drought stress, suggesting that CYCH;1 regulates the drought  stress response in a CDKD-independent manner. We propose that CYCH;1 regulates  blue light-mediated stomatal opening by controlling reactive oxygen species  homeostasis.', '2013 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.215798', 'Jin']

CYCH;1: !interacts with! CDKDs
CYCH;1: !activates! CDKDs
CYCH;1: !localizes to! nucleus
CYCH;1: !enhances! blue light-induced stomatal opening
CYCH;1: !represses! dehydration
CYCH;1: !synthesizes! redox homeostasis genes
CDKD;2: !does not affect! responsiveness to drought stress
CDKD;3: !does not affect! responsiveness to drought stress