['23650594', 'The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains a small group of bipartite F-box  proteins, consisting of an N-terminal F-box domain and a C-terminal domain  sharing sequence similarity with Nictaba, the jasmonate-induced glycan-binding  protein (lectin) from tobacco. Based on the high sequence similarity between the  C-terminal domain of these proteins and Nictaba, the hypothesis was put forward  that the so-called F-box-Nictaba proteins possess carbohydrate-binding activity  and accordingly can be considered functional homologs of the mammalian  sugar-binding F-box or Fbs proteins which are involved in proteasomal degradation  of glycoproteins. To obtain experimental evidence for the carbohydrate-binding  activity and specificity of the A. thaliana F-box-Nictaba proteins, both the  complete F-box-Nictaba sequence of one selected Arabidopsis F-box protein (in  casu At2g02360) as well as the Nictaba-like domain only were expressed in Pichia  pastoris and analyzed by affinity chromatography, agglutination assays and glycan  micro-array binding assays. These results demonstrated that the C-terminal  Nictaba-like domain provides the F-box-protein with a carbohydrate-binding  activity that is specifically directed against N- and O-glycans containing  N-acetyllactosamine (Galbeta1-3GlcNAc and Galbeta1-4GlcNAc) and  poly-N-acetyllactosamine ([Galbeta1-4GlcNAc]n) as well as Lewis A  (Galbeta1-3(Fucalpha1-4)GlcNAc), Lewis X (Galbeta1-4(Fucalpha1-3)GlcNAc, Lewis Y  (Fucalpha1-2Galbeta1-4(Fucalpha1-3)GlcNAc) and blood type B (Galalpha1-3(Fucalpha1-2)Galbeta1-3GlcNAc)  motifs. Based on these findings one can reasonably conclude that at least the A.  thaliana F-box-Nictaba protein encoded by At2g02360 can act as a  carbohydrate-binding protein. The results from the glycan array assays revealed  differences in sugar-binding specificity between the F-box protein and Nictaba,  indicating that the same carbohydrate-binding motif can accommodate unrelated  oligosaccharides.', '2012', 'FEBS Open Bio', '10.1016/j.fob.2012.06.002', 'Van']

F-box-Nictaba protein: !binds! N- and O-glycans 
F-box-Nictaba protein: !binds! Lewis A, Lewis X, Lewis Y, and blood type B motifs 
F-box-Nictaba protein: !differs in specificity from! Nictaba