Disjunct distribution patterns in plant lineages are usually explained according to three hypotheses: vicariance, geodispersal, and long-distance dispersal. The role of these hypotheses is tested in Urgineoideae (Hyacinthaceae), a subfamily disjunctly distributed in Africa, Madagascar, India, and the Mediterranean region. The potential ancestral range, dispersal routes, and factors responsible for the current distribution in Urgineoideae are investigated using divergence time estimations. Urgineoideae originated in Southern Africa approximately 48.9 Mya. Two independent dispersal events in the Western Mediterranean region possibly occurred during Early Oligocene and Miocene (29.9-8.5 Mya) via Eastern and Northwestern Africa. A dispersal from Northwestern Africa to India could have occurred between 16.3 and 7.6 Mya. Vicariance and extinction events occurred approximately 21.6 Mya. Colonization of Madagascar occurred between 30.6 and 16.6 Mya, after a single transoceanic dispersal event from Southern Africa. The current disjunct distributions of Urgineoideae are not satisfactorily explained by Gondwana fragmentation or dispersal via boreotropical forests, due to the younger divergence time estimates. The flattened winged seeds of Urgineoideae could have played an important role in long-distance dispersal by strong winds and big storms, whereas geodispersal could have also occurred from Southern Africa to Asia and the Mediterranean region via the so-called arid and high-altitude corridors.

Vicariance: !explains! Disjunct distribution
Geodispersal: !explains! Disjunct distribution
Long-distance dispersal: !explains! Disjunct distribution
Southern Africa: !originated in! Urgineoideae
Eastern Africa: !dispersed to! Western Mediterranean
Northwestern Africa: !dispersed to! India
Vicariance: !occurred! 21.6 Mya
Madagascar: !colonized from! Southern Africa
Gondwana fragmentation: !unable to explain! Disjunct distributions
Boreotropical forests: !unable to explain! Disjunct distributions
Flattened winged seeds: !facilitated! Long-distance dispersal
Strong winds: !facilitated! Long-distance dispersal
Big storms: !facilitated! Long-distance dispersal
Arid corridors: !facilitated! Geodispersal
High-altitude corridors: !facilitated! Geodispersal