['23717215', "In the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, multiple quantitative trait loci (QTLs),  including RFO2, account for the strong resistance of accession Columbia-0 (Col-0)  and relative susceptibility of Taynuilt-0 (Ty-0) to the vascular wilt fungus  Fusarium oxysporum forma specialis matthioli. We find that RFO2 corresponds to  diversity in receptor-like protein (RLP) genes. In Col-0, there is a tandem pair  of RLP genes: RFO2/At1g17250 confers resistance while RLP2 does not. In Ty-0, the  highly diverged RFO2 locus has one RLP gene conferring weaker resistance. While  the endogenous RFO2 makes a modest contribution to resistance, transgenic RFO2  provides strong pathogen-specific resistance. The extracellular leucine-rich  repeats (eLRRs) in RFO2 and RLP2 are interchangeable for resistance and  remarkably similar to eLRRs in the receptor-like kinase PSY1R, which perceives  tyrosine-sulfated peptide PSY1. Reduced infection in psy1r and mutants of related  phytosulfokine (PSK) receptor genes PSKR1 and PSKR2 shows that tyrosine-sulfated  peptide signaling promotes susceptibility. The related eLRRs in RFO2 and PSY1R  are not interchangeable; and expression of the RLP nPcR, in which eLRRs in RFO2  are replaced with eLRRs in PSY1R, results in constitutive resistance.  Counterintuitively, PSY1 signaling suppresses nPcR because psy1r nPcR is lethal.  The fact that PSK signaling does not similarly affect nPcR argues that PSY1  signaling directly downregulates the expression of nPcR. Our results support a  speculative but intriguing model to explain RFO2's role in resistance. We propose  that F. oxysporum produces an effector that inhibits the normal negative feedback  regulation of PSY1R, which stabilizes PSY1 signaling and induces susceptibility.  However, RFO2, acting as a decoy receptor for PSY1R, is also stabilized by the  effector and instead induces host immunity. Overall, the quantitative resistance  of RFO2 is reminiscent of the better-studied monogenic resistance traits.", '2013 May', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1003525', 'Diener']

RFO2: !corresponds to! RLP genes 
RFO2/At1g17250: !confers! resistance 
RLP2: !does not confer! resistance 
RFO2: !provides! strong pathogen-specific resistance 
eLRRs in RFO2 and RLP2: !are interchangeable! for resistance 
eLRRs in RFO2 and PSY1R: !are not interchangeable! 
PSY1 signaling: !promotes! susceptibility 
PSK signaling: !does not affect! nPcR 
PSY1 signaling: !downregulates! expression of nPcR 
F. oxysporum effector: !inhibits! negative feedback regulation of PSY1R 
RFO2: !acts as a decoy receptor! for PSY1R