['23711240', 'Cytidinediphosphate diacylglycerol synthase (CDS) catalyzes the activation of  phosphatidic acid to cytidinediphosphate (CDP)-diacylglycerol, a central  intermediate in glycerolipid biosynthesis in prokaryotic and eukaryotic  organisms. Cytidinediphosphate-diacylglycerol is the precursor to  phosphatidylinositol, phosphatidylglycerol (PG) and cardiolipin of eukaryotic  phospholipids that are essential for various cellular functions. Isoforms of CDS  are located in plastids, mitochondria and the endomembrane system of plants and  are encoded by five genes in Arabidopsis. Two genes have previously been shown to  code for the plastidial isoforms which are indispensable for the biosynthesis of  plastidial PG, and thus biogenesis and function of thylakoid membranes. Here we  have focused on the extraplastidial CDS isoforms, encoded by CDS1 and CDS2 which  are constitutively expressed contrary to CDS3. We provide evidence that these  closely related CDS genes code for membrane proteins located in the endoplasmic  reticulum and possess very similar enzymatic properties. Development and analysis  of Arabidopsis mutants lacking either one or both CDS1 and CDS2 genes clearly  shows that these two genes have redundant functions. As reflected in the seedling  lethal phenotype of the cds1cds2 double mutant, plant cells require at least one  catalytically active microsomal CDS isoform for cell division and expansion.  According to the altered glycerolipid composition of the double mutant in  comparison with wild-type seedlings, it is likely that the drastic decrease in  the level of phosphatidylinositol and the increase in phosphatidic acid cause  defects in cell division and expansion.', '2013 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12248', 'Frentzen']

CDS: !catalyzes! phosphatidic acid 
CDS: !encoded by! 5 genes 
CDS1/2: !located in! endoplasmic reticulum 
CDS1/2: !have similar! enzymatic properties 
CDS1/2: !redundant functions! in plants 
CDS1/2: !required for! cell division/expansion 
CDS1/2: !affects! glycerolipid composition 
CDS1/2: !causes defects in! cell division/expansion