The profiling of ribosome footprints by deep sequencing has revolutionized the analysis of translation by mapping ribosomes with high resolution on a genome-wide scale. We present a variation on this approach that offers a rapid and cost-effective alternative for the genome-wide profiling of chloroplast ribosomes. Ribosome footprints from leaf tissue are hybridized to oligonucleotide tiling microarrays of the plastid ORFeome and report the abundance and translational status of every chloroplast mRNA. Each assay replaces several time-consuming traditional methods while also providing information that was previously inaccessible. To illustrate the utility of the approach, we show that it detects known defects in chloroplast gene expression in several nuclear mutants of maize (Zea mays) and that it reveals previously unsuspected defects. Furthermore, it provided firm answers to several lingering questions in chloroplast gene expression: (1) the overlapping atpB/atpE open reading frames, whose translation had been proposed to be coupled, are translated independently in vivo; (2) splicing is not a prerequisite for translation initiation on an intron-containing chloroplast RNA; and (3) a feedback control mechanism that links the synthesis of ATP synthase subunits in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii does not exist in maize. An analogous approach is likely to be useful for studies of mitochondrial gene expression.

Ribosome footprints: !map! Genome-wide 
Ribosome footprints: !hybridize to! Oligonucleotide tiling microarrays 
Ribosome footprints: !reveal! Abundance and translational status of chloroplast mRNA 
Ribosome footprints: !detect! Defects in chloroplast gene expression 
Ribosome footprints: !show! Translation of overlapping atpB/atpE open reading frames is independent 
Ribosome footprints: !indicate! Splicing not prerequisite for translation initiation on intron-containing chloroplast RNA 
Ribosome footprints: !demonstrate! No feedback control mechanism linking ATP synthase subunits in maize