Reverse genetics approaches have contributed enormously to the elucidation of gene functions in plastid genomes and the determination of structure-function relationships in chloroplast multiprotein complexes. Gene knock-outs are usually performed by disrupting the reading frame of interest with a selectable marker cassette. Site-directed mutagenesis is done by placing the marker into the adjacent intergenic spacer and relying on co-integration of the desired mutation by homologous recombination. These strategies are not applicable to genes residing in large multigene operons or other gene-dense genomic regions, because insertion of the marker cassette into an operon-internal gene or into the nearest intergenic spacer is likely to interfere with expression of adjacent genes in the operon or disrupt cis-elements for the expression of neighboring genes and operons. Here we have explored the possibility of using a co-transformation strategy to mutate a small gene of unknown function (psbN) that is embedded in a complex multigene operon. Although inactivation of psbN resulted in strong impairment of photosynthesis, homoplasmic knock-out lines were readily recovered by co-transformation with a selectable marker integrating >38 kb away from the targeted psbN. Our results suggest co-transformation as a suitable strategy for the functional analysis of plastid genes and operons, which allows the recovery of unselected homoplasmic mutants even if the introduced mutations entail a significant selective disadvantage. Moreover, our data provide evidence for involvement of the psbN gene product in the biogenesis of both photosystem I and photosystem II. We therefore propose to rename the gene product 'photosystem biogenesis factor 1' and the gene pbf1.

Gene: !knock-outs! performed by disrupting reading frame
Gene: !site-directed mutagenesis! done by placing marker into intergenic spacer
Gene: !co-transformation! used to mutate small gene of unknown function
Gene: !inactivation of psbN! resulted in strong impairment of photosynthesis
Gene: !co-transformation! allows recovery of unselected homoplasmic mutants
Gene: !psbN gene product! involved in biogenesis of photosystem I and II