Tomato line 30.4 was obtained engineering the nucleocapsid (N) gene of tomato spotted wilt virus into plant genome, and immunity to tomato spotted wilt virus infection of its self-pollinated homozygous progeny was observed. Despite the presence of a high amount of transgenic transcripts, transgenic proteins have not been detected, suggesting a mechanism of resistance mediated by RNA. In the present study, we identify post-transcriptional gene silencing as the main mechanism of resistance, which is able to spread systemically through grafting, and show that the line 30.4 resistant plants produce both 24 and 21-22 nt N-gene specific siRNA classes. The transgenic locus in chromosome 4 shows complex multiple insertions of four T-DNA copies in various orientations, all with 3' end deletions in the terminator and part of the N gene. However, for three of them, polyadenylated transcripts are produced, due to flanking tomato genome sequences acting as alternative terminators. Interestingly, starting at the fifth generation after the transformation event, some individual plants show a tomato spotted wilt virus-susceptible phenotype. The change is associated with the disappearance of transgene-specific transcripts and siRNAs, and with hyper-methylation of the transgene, which proceeds gradually through the generations. Once it reaches a critical threshold, the shift from post-transcriptional gene silencing to transcriptional silencing of the transgene eliminates the previously well established virus resistance.

N gene: !engineered into! Tomato line 30.4 
Tomato line 30.4: !immunity to! Tomato spotted wilt virus infection 
Transgenic proteins: !not detected! Suggesting RNA mechanism of resistance 
Post-transcriptional gene silencing: !main mechanism of resistance! Spreads systemically through grafting 
24 and 21-22 nt N-gene specific siRNA classes: !produced by! Line 30.4 resistant plants 
Four T-DNA copies: !inserted in! Transgenic locus in chromosome 4 
Flanking tomato genome sequences: !act as! Alternative terminators 
Fifth generation: !some individual plants show! Tomato spotted wilt virus-susceptible phenotype 
Transgene-specific transcripts and siRNAs: !disappear! Hyper-methylation of transgene proceeds gradually 
Critical threshold: !shift from! Post-transcriptional gene silencing to transcriptional silencing of transgene