['23735511', "The generally low bioavailability of iron in aerobic soil systems forced plants  to evolve sophisticated genetic strategies to improve the acquisition of iron  from sparingly soluble and immobile iron pools. To distinguish between conserved  and species-dependent components of such strategies, we analyzed iron  deficiency-induced changes in the transcriptome of two model species, Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) and Medicago truncatula. Transcriptional profiling by RNA  sequencing revealed a massive up-regulation of genes coding for enzymes involved  in riboflavin biosynthesis in M. truncatula and phenylpropanoid synthesis in  Arabidopsis upon iron deficiency. Coexpression and promoter analysis indicated  that the synthesis of flavins and phenylpropanoids is tightly linked to and  putatively coregulated with other genes encoding proteins involved in iron  uptake. We further provide evidence that the production and secretion of phenolic  compounds is critical for the uptake of iron from sources with low  bioavailability but dispensable under conditions where iron is readily available.  In Arabidopsis, homozygous mutations in the Fe(II)- and 2-oxoglutarate-dependent  dioxygenase family gene F6'H1 and defects in the expression of PLEIOTROPIC DRUG  RESISTANCE9, encoding a putative efflux transporter for products from the  phenylpropanoid pathway, compromised iron uptake from an iron source of low  bioavailability. Both mutants were partially rescued when grown alongside  wild-type Arabidopsis or M. truncatula seedlings, presumably by secreted  phenolics and flavins. We concluded that production and secretion of compounds  that facilitate the uptake of iron is an essential but poorly understood aspect  of the reduction-based iron acquisition strategy, which is likely to contribute  substantially to the efficiency of iron uptake in natural conditions.", '2013 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.220426', 'Schmidt']

Gene: !affects! Iron uptake 
Gene: !synthesizes! Flavins 
Gene: !synthesizes! Phenylpropanoids 
Gene: !coregulates with! Other genes 
Gene: !enhances! Iron uptake from low bioavailability sources 
Gene: !represses! F6'H1 gene 
Gene: !represses! PDR9 gene 
Gene: !rescued by! Wild-type Arabidopsis/M. truncatula seedlings