Leaf movements in Mimosa pudica, are in response to thermal stress, touch, and light or darkness, appear to be regulated by electrical, hydrodynamical, and chemical signal transduction. The pulvinus of the M. pudica shows elastic properties. We have found that the movements of the petiole, or pinnules, are accompanied by a change of the pulvinus morphing structures. After brief flaming of a pinna, the volume of the lower part of the pulvinus decreases and the volume of the upper part increases due to the redistribution of electrolytes between these parts of the pulvinus; as a result of these changes the petiole falls. During the relaxation of the petiole, the process goes in the opposite direction. Ion and water channel blockers, uncouplers as well as anesthetic agents diethyl ether or chloroform decrease the speed of alert wave propagation along the plant. Brief flaming of a pinna induces bidirectional propagation of electrical signal in pulvini. Transduction of electrical signals along a pulvinus induces generation of an action potential in perpendicular direction between extensor and flexor sides of a pulvinus. Inhibition of signal transduction and mechanical responses in M. pudica by volatile anesthetic agents chloroform or by blockers of voltage gated ion channels shows that the generation and propagation of electrical signals is a primary effect responsible for turgor change and propagation of an excitation. There is an electrical coupling in a pulvinus similar to the electrical synapse in the animal nerves.

Thermal stress: !affects! Leaf movements
Touch: !affects! Leaf movements
Light/darkness: !affects! Leaf movements
Electrolytes: !redistribute between! Upper and lower parts of pulvinus
Ion channel blockers: !inhibit! Signal transduction
Water channel blockers: !inhibit! Signal transduction
Uncouplers: !inhibit! Signal transduction
Anesthetic agents: !inhibit! Signal transduction
Brief flaming: !induces! Bidirectional propagation of electrical signal
Action potential: !generated in! Perpendicular direction between extensor and flexor sides of a pulvinus
Voltage gated ion channels: !blocked by! Blockers