The transcriptomic and metabolic consequences of the lack of plastidic glutamine (Gln) synthetase in the model legume Lotus japonicus were investigated. Wild-type and mutant plants lacking the plastidic isoform of Gln synthetase were grown in conditions that suppress photorespiration and then transferred for different lengths of time to photorespiratory conditions. Transcript and metabolite levels were determined at the different time points considered. Under photorespiratory active conditions, the mutant accumulated high levels of ammonium, followed by its subsequent decline. A coordinate repression of the photorespiratory genes was observed in the mutant background. This was part of a greater modulation of the transcriptome, especially in the mutant, that was paralleled by changes in the levels of several key metabolites. The data obtained for the mutant represent the first direct experimental evidence for a coordinate regulation of photorespiratory genes over time. Metabolomic analysis demonstrated that mutant plants under active photorespiratory conditions accumulated high levels of several amino acids and organic acids, including intermediates of the Krebs cycle. An increase in Gln levels was also detected in the mutant, which was paralleled by an increase in cytosolic Gln synthetase1 gene transcription and enzyme activity levels. The global panoramic of the transcripts and metabolites that changed in L. japonicus plants during the transfer from photorespiration-suppressed to photorespiration-active conditions highlighted the link between photorespiration and several other cellular processes, including central carbon metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and secondary metabolism.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !represses! Photorespiratory genes
Gene: !synthesizes! Glutamine
Gene: !enhances! Cytosolic Gln synthetase1 gene transcription
Gene: !interacts with! Central carbon metabolism
Gene: !interacts with! Amino acid metabolism
Gene: !interacts with! Secondary metabolism