Pine wilt disease (PWD) caused by pine wood nematode (PWN), Bursaphelenchus xylophilus, is the most destructive diseases of pine and poses a threat of serious economic losses worldwide. Although several of the mechanisms involved in disease progression have been discovered, the molecular response of Pinus massoniana to PWN infection has not been explored. We constructed four subtractive suppression hybridization cDNA libraries by taking time-course samples from PWN-inoculated Masson pine trees. One-hundred forty-four significantly differentially expressed sequence tags (ESTs) were identified, and 124 high-quality sequences with transcriptional features were selected for gene ontology (GO) and individual gene analyses. There were marked differences in the types of transcripts, as well as in the timing and levels of transcript expression in the pine trees following PWN inoculation. Genes involved in signal transduction, transcription and translation and secondary metabolism were highly expressed after 24 h and 72 h, while stress response genes were highly expressed only after 72 h. Certain transcripts responding to PWN infection were discriminative; pathogenesis and cell wall-related genes were more abundant, while detoxification or redox process-related genes were less abundant. This study provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms that control the biochemical and physiological responses of pine trees to PWN infection, particularly during the initial stage of infection.

PWN: !causes! Pine wilt disease 
Signal transduction: !highly expressed after! 24 h and 72 h 
Transcription/translation: !highly expressed after! 24 h and 72 h 
Secondary metabolism: !highly expressed after! 24 h and 72 h 
Stress response: !highly expressed after! 72 h 
Pathogenesis: !more abundant in! PWN-inoculated Masson pine trees 
Cell wall: !more abundant in! PWN-inoculated Masson pine trees 
Detoxification: !less abundant in! PWN-inoculated Masson pine trees 
Redox process: !less abundant in! PWN-inoculated Masson pine trees