['23750584', 'The proper transmission of DNA in dividing cells is crucial for the survival of  eukaryotic organisms. During cell division, faithful segregation of replicated  chromosomes requires their tight attachment, known as sister chromatid cohesion,  until anaphase. Sister chromatid cohesion is established during S-phase in a  process requiring an acetyltransferase that in yeast is known as Establishment of  cohesion 1 (Eco1). Inactivation of Eco1 typically disrupts chromosome segregation  and homologous recombination-dependent DNA repair in dividing cells, ultimately  resulting in lethality. We report here the isolation and detailed  characterization of two homozygous T-DNA insertion mutants for the Arabidopsis  thaliana Eco1 homolog, CHROMOSOME TRANSMISSION FIDELITY 7/ESTABLISHMENT OF  COHESION 1 (CTF7/ECO1), called ctf7-1 and ctf7-2. Mutants exhibited dwarfism,  poor anther development and sterility. Analysis of somatic tissues by flow  cytometry, scanning electron microscopy and quantitative real-time PCR identified  defects in DNA repair and cell division, including an increase in the area of  leaf epidermal cells, an increase in DNA content and the upregulation of genes  involved in DNA repair including BRCA1 and PARP2. No significant change was  observed in the expression of genes that influence entry into the endocycle.  Analysis of meiocytes identified changes in chromosome morphology and defective  segregation; the abundance of chromosomal-bound cohesion subunits was also  reduced. Transcript levels for several meiotic genes, including the recombinase  genes DMC1 and RAD51C and the S-phase licensing factor CDC45 were elevated in  mutant anthers. Taken together our results demonstrate that Arabidopsis CTF7/ECO1  plays important roles in the preservation of genome integrity and meiosis.', '2013 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12261', 'Jauh']

Eco1: !establishes! Sister chromatid cohesion 
CTF7/ECO1: !affects! DNA repair 
CTF7/ECO1: !influences! Cell division 
CTF7/ECO1: !regulates! Expression of genes involved in DNA repair 
CTF7/ECO1: !alters! Chromosome morphology 
CTF7/ECO1: !impacts! Segregation of chromosomes 
CTF7/ECO1: !modulates! Expression of meiotic genes