['23759547', 'The plant hormone auxin modulates cell proliferation and cell expansion in part  by changing gene expression. Among the three primary auxin response gene  families, Aux/IAA, GH3 and SAUR, the function of SAUR genes remains unclear. SAUR  transcripts were initially identified in epidermal and cortical cells of  elongating tissues and thus were supposed to regulate cell expansion downstream  of auxin transport and auxin signaling. Recent studies have proposed that SAUR  proteins are able to modulate auxin transport and cell expansion by an unknown  mechanism. We present our work on the SAUR41 subfamily genes of Arabidopsis  (SAUR41, SAUR40, SAUR71 and SAUR72). Similar to the fusion protein between SAUR41  and EGFP, both SAUR40-EGFP and SAUR71-EGFP were identified in the cytoplasm of  all types of root tip cells. This result indicated that the subcellular location  pattern of SAUR proteins among the members of the same subfamily could be similar  to each other, although the overall location pattern of SAUR proteins appeared to  be highly diverse. SAUR41 was distinctively expressed in the quiescent center and  cortex/endodermis initials of root stem cell niches and in the endodermis of  hypocotyls, whereas SAUR71 and SAUR72 were expressed in the steles of young roots  and hypocotyls. In addition, SAUR71 was differentially expressed during stomatal  formation. The tissue-specific and developmentally regulated expression patterns  of the SAUR41 subfamily genes imply that SAUR transcripts or SAUR proteins might  serve as signal molecules to ensure the coordination of cell proliferation and  cell expansion. Finally, Arabidopsis seedlings expressing TAP (tandem affinity  peptide) tagged SAUR41 displayed phenotypes, indicating that it was rational to  use the TAP approach for identification of potential binding partners of SAUR41  proteins.', '2013 Aug', 'Plant Signal Behav', '10.4161/psb.25283', 'Wang']

Auxin: !modulates! Cell proliferation and expansion
SAUR genes: !regulate! Cell expansion
SAUR41 subfamily genes: !localize to! Quiescent center, cortex/endodermis initials, endodermis, steles of young roots and hypocotyls
SAUR41 subfamily genes: !differentially express! During stomatal formation
SAUR transcripts/proteins: !serve as! Signal molecules
SAUR41 proteins: !interact with! Potential binding partners