['23781226', 'The presence of lignin in secondary cell walls (SCW) is a major factor preventing  hydrolytic enzymes from gaining access to cellulose, thereby limiting the  saccharification potential of plant biomass. To understand how lignification is  regulated is a prerequisite for selecting plant biomass better adapted to  bioethanol production. Because transcriptional regulation is a major mechanism  controlling the expression of genes involved in lignin biosynthesis, our aim was  to identify novel transcription factors (TFs) dictating lignin profiles in the  model plant Arabidopsis. To this end, we have developed a post-genomic approach  by combining four independent in-house SCW-related transcriptome datasets  obtained from (1) the fiber cell wall-deficient wat1 Arabidopsis mutant, (2)  Arabidopsis lines over-expressing either the master regulatory activator EgMYB2  or (3) the repressor EgMYB1 and finally (4) Arabidopsis orthologs of Eucalyptus  xylem-expressed genes. This allowed us to identify 502 up- or down-regulated TFs.  We preferentially selected those present in more than one dataset and further  analyzed their in silico expression patterns as an additional selection criteria.  This selection process led to 80 candidates. Notably, 16 of them were already  proven to regulate SCW formation, thereby validating the overall strategy. Then,  we phenotyped 43 corresponding mutant lines focusing on histological observations  of xylem and interfascicular fibers. This phenotypic screen revealed six mutant  lines exhibiting altered lignification patterns. Two of them [Bel-like HomeoBox6  (blh6) and a zinc finger TF] presented hypolignified SCW. Three others (myb52,  myb-like TF, hb5) showed hyperlignified SCW whereas the last one (hb15) showed  ectopic lignification. In addition, our meta-analyses highlighted a reservoir of  new potential regulators adding to the gene network regulating SCW but also  opening new avenues to ultimately improve SCW composition for biofuel production.', '2013', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2013.00189', 'Grima-Pettenati']

EgMYB2: !activates! lignin biosynthesis
EgMYB1: !represses! lignin biosynthesis
Bel-like HomeoBox6 (blh6): !reduces! lignin biosynthesis
Myb52: !increases! lignin biosynthesis
Myb-like TF: !increases! lignin biosynthesis
HB5: !increases! lignin biosynthesis
HB15: !causes! ectopic lignification