MIKC(c)-type MADS-domain transcription factors include important regulators of floral development that interact in protein complexes to control the development of floral organs, as described by the ABC model. Members of the SEPALLATA (SEP) and AGAMOUS (AG) MADS clades include proteins involved in stamen and carpel specification and certain members of these families, such as tomato (Solanum lycopersicon) SlRIN and SlTAGL1, have been shown to regulate fruit development and ripening initiation. A number of expression studies have shown that several floral homeotic MADS genes are expressed during grapevine (Vitis vinifera) berry development, including potential homologues of these characterized ripening regulators. To gain insight into the regulation of berry development and ripening in grapevine, we studied the interactions and functions of grapevine floral homeotic MADS genes. Using the yeast 2- and 3-hybrid systems, we determined that the complexes formed during fruit development and ripening may involve several classes of floral homeotic MADS proteins. We found that a heterologously expressed grapevine SEP gene, VviSEP4, is capable of partially complementing the non-ripening phenotype of the tomato rin mutant, indicating that a role for this gene in ripening regulation may be conserved in fleshy fruit ripening. We also found that ectopic expression of a grapevine AG clade gene, VviAG1, in tomato results in the development of fleshy sepals with the chemical characteristics of tomato fruit pericarp. Additionally, we performed 2-hybrid screens on a library prepared from Pinot noir véraison-stage berry and identified proteins that may interact with the MADS factors that are expressed during berry development and that may represent regulatory functions in grape berry development.

MIKC(c)-type MADS-domain transcription factors: !interact in protein complexes! floral development
SlRIN and SlTAGL1: !regulate! fruit development and ripening initiation
VviSEP4: !partially complements! non-ripening phenotype of tomato rin mutant
VviAG1: !induces! fleshy sepals with chemical characteristics of tomato fruit pericarp
2-hybrid screens: !identify proteins! interact with MADS factors expressed during berry development