['23805258', 'Kinesin-like calmodulin binding protein (KCBP), a Kinesin-14 family motor  protein, is involved in the structural organization of microtubules during  mitosis and trichome morphogenesis in plants. The molecular mechanism of  microtubule bundling by KCBP remains unknown. KCBP binding to microtubules is  regulated by Ca(2+)-binding proteins that recognize its C-terminal regulatory  domain. In this work, we have discovered a new function of the regulatory domain.  We present a crystal structure of an Arabidopsis KCBP fragment showing that the  C-terminal regulatory domain forms a dimerization interface for KCBP. This  dimerization site is distinct from the dimerization interface within the  N-terminal domain. Side chains of hydrophobic residues of the calmodulin binding  helix of the regulatory domain form the C-terminal dimerization interface.  Biochemical experiments show that another segment of the regulatory domain  located beyond the dimerization interface, its negatively charged coil, is  unexpectedly and absolutely required to stabilize the dimers. The strong  microtubule bundling properties of KCBP are unaffected by deletion of the  C-terminal regulatory domain. The slow minus-end directed motility of KCBP is  also unchanged in vitro. Although the C-terminal domain is not essential for  microtubule bundling, we suggest that KCBP may use its two independent  dimerization interfaces to support different types of bundled microtubule  structures in cells. Two distinct dimerization sites may provide a mechanism for  microtubule rearrangement in response to Ca(2+) signaling since Ca(2+)- binding  proteins can disengage KCBP dimers dependent on its C-terminal dimerization  interface.', '2013', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0066669', 'Fletterick']

KCBP: !binds to! microtubules 
C-terminal regulatory domain: !forms! dimerization interface 
hydrophobic residues: !stabilize! dimers 
C-terminal domain: !not essential for! microtubule bundling 
KCBP: !uses! two independent dimerization interfaces 
Ca(2+)-binding proteins: !disengage! KCBP dimers