The world population continually faces challenges of water scarcity for agriculture. A common strategy called water-balance control has evolved to adapt plant growth to these challenges. Aquaporins are a family of integral membrane proteins that play a central role in water-balance control. In this study, we identified 34 members of the rice aquaporin gene family, adding a novel member to the previous list. A combination of phylogenetic tree and anatomical meta-expression profiling data consisting of 983 Affymetrix arrays and 209 Agilent 44 K arrays was used to identify tissue-preferred aquaporin genes and evaluate functional redundancy among aquaporin family members. Eight aquaporins showed root-preferred expression in the vegetative growth stage, while 4 showed leaf/shoot-preferred expression. Integrating stress-induced expression patterns into phylogenetic tree and semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses revealed that 3 rice aquaporin genes were markedly downregulated and 4 were upregulated by water deficiency in the root, suggesting that these candidate genes are key regulators of water uptake from the soil. Finally, we constructed a functional network of genes mediated by water stress and refined the network by confirming the differential expression using RT-PCR and real-time PCR. Our data will be useful to elucidate the molecular mechanism of water-balance control in rice root.

Aquaporins: !play a role in! water-balance control 
Phylogenetic tree: !used to identify! tissue-preferred aquaporin genes 
Stress-induced expression patterns: !integrated into! phylogenetic tree 
Semi-quantitative RT-PCR: !used to evaluate! functional redundancy 
8 aquaporins: !showed root-preferred expression! in vegetative growth stage 
3 rice aquaporin genes: !markedly downregulated by! water deficiency 
4 rice aquaporin genes: !markedly upregulated by! water deficiency 
Functional network of genes: !constructed and refined by! RT-PCR and real-time PCR