['23802992', 'Most proteins found in the thylakoid lumen are synthesized in the cytosol with an  N-terminal extension consisting of transient signals for chloroplast import and  thylakoid transfer in tandem. The thylakoid-transfer signal is required for  protein sorting from the stroma to thylakoids, mainly via the cpSEC or cpTAT  pathway, and is removed by the thylakoidal processing peptidase in the lumen. An  Arabidopsis mutant lacking one of the thylakoidal processing peptidase homologs,  Plsp1, contains plastids with anomalous thylakoids and is seedling-lethal.  Furthermore, the mutant plastids accumulate two cpSEC substrates (PsbO and PetE)  and one cpTAT substrate (PsbP) as intermediate forms. These properties of  plsp1-null plastids suggest that complete maturation of lumenal proteins is a  critical step for proper thylakoid assembly. Here we tested the effects of  inhibition of thylakoid-transfer signal removal on protein targeting and  accumulation by examining the localization of non-mature lumenal proteins in the  Arabidopsis plsp1-null mutant and performing a protein import assay using pea  chloroplasts. In plsp1-null plastids, the two cpSEC substrates were shown to be  tightly associated with the membrane, while non-mature PsbP was found in the  stroma. The import assay revealed that inhibition of thylakoid-transfer signal  removal did not disrupt cpSEC- and cpTAT-dependent translocation, but prevented  release of proteins from the membrane. Interestingly, non-mature PetE2 was  quickly degraded under light, and unprocessed PsbO1 and PsbP1 were found in a  440-kDa complex and as a monomer, respectively. These results indicate that the  cpTAT pathway may be disrupted in the plsp1-null mutant, and that there are  multiple mechanisms to control unprocessed lumenal proteins in thylakoids.', '2013 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12273', 'Inoue']

N-terminal extension: !consists of! transient signals 
transient signals: !required for! protein sorting 
thylakoidal processing peptidase: !removes! thylakoid-transfer signal 
plsp1-null mutant: !accumulates! cpSEC substrates 
cpSEC substrates: !tightly associated with! membrane 
inhibition of thylakoid-transfer signal removal: !prevents! release of proteins 
non-mature PetE2: !quickly degraded under! light 
unprocessed PsbO1 and PsbP1: !found in! 440-kDa complex