['23818851', 'In higher eukaryotes, induced resistance associates with acquisition of a priming  state of the cells for a more effective activation of innate immunity; however,  the nature of the components for mounting this type of immunological memory is  not well known. We identified an extracellular subtilase from Arabidopsis,  SBT3.3, the overexpression of which enhances innate immune responses while the  loss of function compromises them. SBT3.3 expression initiates a durable  autoinduction mechanism that promotes chromatin remodeling and activates a  salicylic acid(SA)-dependent mechanism of priming of defense genes for amplified  response. Moreover, SBT3.3 expression-sensitized plants for enhanced expression  of the OXI1 kinase gene and activation of MAP kinases following pathogen attack,  providing additional clues for the regulation of immune priming by SBT3.3.  Conversely, in sbt3.3 mutant plants pathogen-mediated induction of SA-related  defense gene expression is drastically reduced and activation of MAP kinases  inhibited. Moreover, chromatin remodeling of defense-related genes normally  associated with activation of an immune priming response appear inhibited in  sbt3.3 plants, further indicating the importance of the extracellular SBT3.3  subtilase in the establishment of immune priming. Our results also point to an  epigenetic control in the regulation of plant immunity, since SBT3.3 is  up-regulated and priming activated when epigenetic control is impeded. SBT3.3  represents a new regulator of primed immunity.', '2013', 'PLoS Pathog', '10.1371/journal.ppat.1003445', 'Vera']

SBT3.3: !enhances! innate immune responses 
SBT3.3: !promotes! chromatin remodeling 
SBT3.3: !activates! SA-dependent mechanism 
SBT3.3: !sensitizes! OXI1 kinase gene expression 
SBT3.3: !activates! MAP kinases 
sbt3.3 mutant plants: !reduce! SA-related defense gene expression 
sbt3.3 mutant plants: !inhibit! MAP kinases activation 
sbt3.3 mutant plants: !inhibit! chromatin remodeling of defense-related genes 
SBT3.3: !up-regulated! when epigenetic control is impeded