['23818596', 'Light signaling pathways and the circadian clock interact to help organisms  synchronize physiological and developmental processes with periodic environmental  cycles. The plant photoreceptors responsible for clock resetting have been  characterized, but signaling components that link the photoreceptors to the clock  remain to be identified. Here we describe a family of night light-inducible and  clock-regulated genes (LNK) that play a key role linking light regulation of gene  expression to the control of daily and seasonal rhythms in Arabidopsis thaliana.  A genomewide transcriptome analysis revealed that most light-induced genes  respond more strongly to light during the subjective day, which is consistent  with the diurnal nature of most physiological processes in plants. However, a  handful of genes, including the homologous genes LNK1 and LNK2, are more strongly  induced by light in the middle of the night, when the clock is most responsive to  this signal. Further analysis revealed that the morning phased LNK1 and LNK2  genes control circadian rhythms, photomorphogenic responses, and photoperiodic  dependent flowering, most likely by regulating a subset of clock and flowering  time genes in the afternoon. LNK1 and LNK2 themselves are directly repressed by  members of the TIMING OF CAB1 EXPRESSION/PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR family of  core-clock genes in the afternoon and early night. Thus, LNK1 and LNK2 integrate  early light signals with temporal information provided by core oscillator  components to control the expression of afternoon genes, allowing plants to keep  track of seasonal changes in day length.', '2013 Jul 16', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1302170110', 'Yanovsky']

Light signaling pathways: !interact with! circadian clock 
LNK1 and LNK2 genes: !are regulated by! core-clock genes 
LNK1 and LNK2 genes: !control! circadian rhythms, photomorphogenic responses, and photoperiodic dependent flowering 
Light: !induces! LNK1 and LNK2 genes 
Light: !represses! TIMING OF CAB1 EXPRESSION/PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR family of core-clock genes