Flavonoids are ubiquitously present in plants and play important roles in these organisms as well as in the human diet. Flavonol synthase (FLS) is a key enzyme of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway, acting at the diverging point into the flavonol subclass branch. We isolated and characterized a FLS isoform gene, FtFLS2, from tartary buckwheat (Fagopyrum tataricum). FtFLS2 shares 48% identity and 67% similarity with the previously reported FtFLS1, whereas both genes share 47-65% identity and 65-69% similarity with FLSs from other plant species. Using quantitative real-time PCR and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), the expression of FtFLS1/2 and the production of 3 main flavonols (kaempferol, myricetin and quercetin) was detected in roots, leaves, stems, flowers and different stages of developing seeds. The relationship between the expression of the 2 FLS genes and the accumulation of the 3 basic flavonols was analyzed in 2 tartary buckwheat cultivars. FtFLS1 and FtFLS2 exhibited differential transcriptional levels between the tartary buckwheat cultivars 'Hokkai T10' and 'Hokkai T8'. Generally, higher transcript levels of FtFLS1 and FtFLS2 and a higher amount of flavonols were observed in the 'Hokkai T10' cultivar than 'Hokkai T8'. The content of flavonols showed tissue-specific accumulation between the 2 cultivars. The transcription of FtFLS1 was inhibited by the exogenous application of abscisic acid (ABA), salicylic acid (SA) and sodium chloride (NaCl), while FtFLS2 was not affected by ABA but up-regulated by SA and NaCl. These data indicate that the 2 FtFLS isoforms of buckwheat have different functions in the response of buckwheat to environmental stress.

FtFLS1: !shares identity with! FtFLS2 
FtFLS1/2: !detected in! roots, leaves, stems, flowers and different stages of developing seeds 
FtFLS1/2: !differential transcriptional levels between! 'Hokkai T10' and 'Hokkai T8' cultivars 
FtFLS1: !inhibited by! abscisic acid (ABA), salicylic acid (SA) and sodium chloride (NaCl) 
FtFLS2: !up-regulated by! SA and NaCl