Calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs), which are important sensors of Ca(2+) flux in plants, are known to play essential roles in plant development and adaptation to abiotic stresses. In the present work, we studied expression of CDPK genes under osmotic and temperature stress treatments in wild-growing grapevine Vitis amurensis Rupr., which is known to possess high adaptive potential and a high level of resistance against adverse environmental conditions. In this study, using RT-PCR with degenerate primers, DNA sequencing and frequency analysis of RT-PCR products, we identified 13 CDPK genes that are actively expressed in healthy V. amurensis cuttings under high salt, high mannitol, desiccation, and temperature stress conditions. 12 CDPKs, namely VaCPK1, VaCPK2, VaCPK3, VaCPK9, VaCPK13, VaCPK16, VaCPK20, VaCPK21, VaCPK25, VaCPK26, VaCPK29 and VaCPK30, were novel for Vitaceae, and their full cDNAs were obtained and described. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR demonstrated that mRNA levels of 10 VaCPK genes were differentially up-regulated under the osmotic and temperature stress treatments, while the abundance of 3 VaCPK transcript variants, VaCPK3a, VaCPK25, and VaCPK30, was not markedly changed. Expression profiling of the VaCPK genes in leaves, leaf petioles, stems, inflorescences, berries, and seeds of V. amurensis revealed that the genes exhibit different organ-specific expression patterns. The stimulatory effect of abiotic stress on the expression of the VaCPK1, 2, 3, 9, 13, 16, 20, 21, 26, and VaCPK29 genes is suggestive of their implication in the grapevine response to osmotic and temperature stresses, while the variability in their organ-specific expression patterns indicates that the enzymes perform distinct biological functions.

VaCPK1: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK2: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK3: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK9: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK13: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK16: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK20: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK21: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK25: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK26: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK29: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPK30: !up-regulated under! osmotic and temperature stress
VaCPKs: !play essential roles in! plant development
VaCPKs: !implication in! grapevine response to osmotic and temperature stresses
VaCPKs: