Vesicle trafficking plays an important role in cell division, establishment of cell polarity, and translation of environmental cues to developmental responses. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating vesicle trafficking remain poorly understood. Here, we report that the evolutionarily conserved caspase-related protease separase (extra spindle poles [ESP]) is required for the establishment of cell polarity and cytokinesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. At the cellular level, separase colocalizes with microtubules and RabA2a (for RAS genes from rat brainA2a) GTPase-positive structures. Separase facilitates polar targeting of the auxin efflux carrier PIN-formed2 (PIN2) to the rootward side of the root cortex cells. Plants with the radially swollen4 (rsw4) allele with compromised separase activity, in addition to mitotic failure, display isotropic cell growth, perturbation of auxin gradient formation, slower gravitropic response in roots, and cytokinetic failure. Measurements of the dynamics of vesicle markers on the cell plate revealed an overall reduction of the delivery rates of KNOLLE and RabA2a GTPase in separase-deficient roots. Furthermore, dissociation of the clathrin light chain, a protein that plays major role in the formation of coated vesicles, was slower in rsw4 than in the control. Our results demonstrate that separase is a key regulator of vesicle trafficking, which is indispensable for cytokinesis and the establishment of cell polarity.

separase: !colocalizes with! microtubules 
separase: !facilitates targeting of! PIN2 
separase: !required for! establishment of cell polarity 
separase: !required for! cytokinesis 
separase: !regulates! vesicle trafficking 
rsw4: !displays! mitotic failure 
rsw4: !displays! isotropic cell growth 
rsw4: !perturbs! auxin gradient formation 
rsw4: !slows! gravitropic response in roots 
rsw4: !causes! cytokinetic failure 
KNOLLE: !delivery rate reduced! in separase-deficient roots 
RabA2a GTPase: !delivery rate reduced! in separase-deficient roots 
clathrin light chain: !dissociation slower! in rsw4 than control