['23893173', 'Switch (SWI)/Sucrose Nonfermenting (SNF)-type chromatin-remodeling complexes  (CRCs) are involved in regulation of transcription, DNA replication and repair,  and cell cycle. Mutations of conserved subunits of plant CRCs severely impair  growth and development; however, the underlying causes of these phenotypes are  largely unknown. Here, we show that inactivation of SWI3C, the core component of  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) SWI/SNF CRCs, interferes with normal  functioning of several plant hormone pathways and alters transcriptional  regulation of key genes of gibberellin (GA) biosynthesis. The resulting reduction  of GA4 causes severe inhibition of hypocotyl and root elongation, which can be  rescued by exogenous GA treatment. In addition, the swi3c mutation inhibits  DELLA-dependent transcriptional activation of GIBBERELLIN-INSENSITIVE DWARF1  (GID1) GA receptor genes. Down-regulation of GID1a in parallel with the DELLA  repressor gene REPRESSOR OF GA1-3 1 in swi3c indicates that lack of SWI3C also  leads to defects in GA signaling. Together with the recent demonstration of  function of SWI/SNF ATPase BRAHMA in the GA pathway, these results reveal a  critical role of SWI/SNF CRC in the regulation of GA biosynthesis and signaling.  Moreover, we demonstrate that SWI3C is capable of in vitro binding to, and shows  in vivo bimolecular fluorescence complementation interaction in cell nuclei with,  the DELLA proteins RGA-LIKE2 and RGA-LIKE3, which affect transcriptional  activation of GID1 and GA3ox (GIBBERELLIN 3-OXIDASE) genes controlling GA  perception and biosynthesis, respectively. Furthermore, we show that SWI3C also  interacts with the O-GlcNAc (O-linked N-acetylglucosamine) transferase SPINDLY  required for proper functioning of DELLAs and acts hypostatically to (SPINDLY) in  the GA response pathway. These findings suggest that DELLA-mediated effects in GA  signaling as well as their role as a hub in hormonal cross talk may be, at least  in part, dependent on their direct physical interaction with complexes  responsible for modulation of chromatin structure.', '2013 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.223933', 'Sarnowski']

SWI3C: !interacts with! DELLA proteins 
SWI3C: !interacts with! SPINDLY 
DELLA proteins: !affects! transcriptional activation of GID1 and GA3ox genes 
SPINDLY: !affects! functioning of DELLAs 
GID1: !regulates! GA signaling 
GA3ox: !controls! GA biosynthesis