Salicylic acid (SA) has long been implicated in plant responses to oxidative stress. SA overproduction in Arabidopsis thaliana leads to dwarfism, making in planta assessment of SA effects difficult in this model system. We report that transgenic Populus tremula × alba expressing a bacterial SA synthase hyperaccumulated SA and SA conjugates without negative growth consequences. In the absence of stress, endogenously elevated SA elicited widespread metabolic and transcriptional changes that resembled those of wild-type plants exposed to oxidative stress-promoting heat treatments. Potential signaling and oxidative stress markers azelaic and gluconic acids as well as antioxidant chlorogenic acids were strongly coregulated with SA, while soluble sugars and other phenylpropanoids were inversely correlated. Photosynthetic responses to heat were attenuated in SA-overproducing plants. Network analysis identified potential drivers of SA-mediated transcriptome rewiring, including receptor-like kinases and WRKY transcription factors. Orthologs of Arabidopsis SA signaling components NON-EXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1 and thioredoxins were not represented. However, all members of the expanded Populus nucleoredoxin-1 family exhibited increased expression and increased network connectivity in SA-overproducing Populus, suggesting a previously undescribed role in SA-mediated redox regulation. The SA response in Populus involved a reprogramming of carbon uptake and partitioning during stress that is compatible with constitutive chemical defense and sustained growth, contrasting with the SA response in Arabidopsis, which is transient and compromises growth if sustained.

SA: !overproduction in! Arabidopsis thaliana 
SA: !hyperaccumulated in! Populus tremula × alba 
SA: !elicited! metabolic and transcriptional changes 
SA: !coregulated with! azelaic and gluconic acids 
SA: !inversely correlated with! soluble sugars 
SA: !attenuated! photosynthetic responses to heat 
Receptor-like kinases: !potential drivers of! SA-mediated transcriptome rewiring 
WRKY transcription factors: !potential drivers of! SA-mediated transcriptome rewiring 
Nucleoredoxin-1 family: !increased expression and network connectivity in! SA-overproducing Populus 
SA response: !contrasts with! Arabidopsis