['23903439', 'NEDD8 (NEURAL PRECURSOR CELL-EXPRESSED, DEVELOPMENTALLY DOWN-REGULATED PROTEIN8)  is an evolutionarily conserved 8-kD protein that is closely related to ubiquitin  and that can be conjugated like ubiquitin to specific lysine residues of target  proteins in eukaryotes. In contrast to ubiquitin, for which a broad range of  substrate proteins are known, only a very limited number of NEDD8 target proteins  have been identified to date. Best understood, and also evolutionarily conserved,  is the NEDD8 modification (neddylation) of cullins, core subunits of the  cullin-RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligases that promote the polyubiquitylation of  degradation targets in eukaryotes. Here, we show that Myeloid differentiation  factor-2-related lipid-recognition domain protein ML3 is an NEDD8- as well as  ubiquitin-modified protein in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and examine the  functional role of ML3 in the plant cell. Our analysis indicates that ML3 resides  in the vacuole as well as in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) bodies. ER bodies are  Brassicales-specific ER-derived organelles and, similar to other ER body  proteins, ML3 orthologs can only be identified in this order of flowering plants.  ML3 gene expression is promoted by wounding as well as by the phytohormone  jasmonic acid and repressed by ethylene, signals that are known to induce and  repress ER body formation, respectively. Furthermore, ML3 protein abundance is  dependent on NAI1, a master regulator of ER body formation in Arabidopsis. The  regulation of ML3 expression and the localization of ML3 in ER bodies and the  vacuole is in agreement with a demonstrated importance of ML3 in the defense to  herbivore attack. Here, we extend the spectrum of ML3 biological functions by  demonstrating a role in the response to microbial pathogens.', '2013 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.221341', 'Schwechheimer']

NEDD8: !modifies! Cullins 
ML3: !localizes to! Vacuole 
ML3: !localizes to! ER bodies 
Wounding: !promotes! ML3 gene expression 
Jasmonic acid: !promotes! ML3 gene expression 
Ethylene: !represses! ML3 gene expression 
NAI1: !regulates! ML3 protein abundance 
ML3: !important in! Defense to herbivore attack 
ML3: !important in! Response to microbial pathogens