The objective of this study was to identify barley leaf proteins differentially regulated in response to drought and heat and the combined stresses in context of the morphological and physiological changes that also occur. The Syrian landrace Arta and the Australian cultivar Keel were subjected to drought, high temperature, or a combination of both treatments starting at heading. Changes in the leaf proteome were identified using differential gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. The drought treatment caused strong reductions of biomass and yield, while photosynthetic performance and the proteome were not significantly changed. In contrast, the heat treatment and the combination of heat and drought reduced photosynthetic performance and caused changes of the leaf proteome. The proteomic analysis identified 99 protein spots differentially regulated in response to heat treatment, 14 of which were regulated in a genotype-specific manner. Differentially regulated proteins predominantly had functions in photosynthesis, but also in detoxification, energy metabolism, and protein biosynthesis. The analysis indicated that de novo protein biosynthesis, protein quality control mediated by chaperones and proteases, and the use of alternative energy resources, i.e. glycolysis, play important roles in adaptation to heat stress. In addition, genetic variation identified in the proteome, in plant growth and photosynthetic performance in response to drought and heat represent stress adaption mechanisms to be exploited in future crop breeding efforts.

drought: !causes! reduction of biomass and yield
heat: !reduces! photosynthetic performance
heat: !causes! changes in leaf proteome
genotype: !regulates! 14 proteins
photosynthesis: !involves! differentially regulated proteins
detoxification: !involves! differentially regulated proteins
energy metabolism: !involves! differentially regulated proteins
protein biosynthesis: !involves! differentially regulated proteins
de novo protein biosynthesis: !plays important role in! adaptation to heat stress
chaperones/proteases: !play important role in! protein quality control
glycolysis: !plays important role in! alternative energy resources
genetic variation: !represents! stress adaption mechanisms