['23929493', 'In plants as in other eukaryotes, the structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC)  protein complexes cohesin, condensin and SMC5/6 are essential for sister  chromatid cohesion, chromosome condensation, DNA repair and recombination. The  presence of paralogous genes for various components of the different SMC  complexes suggests the diversification of their biological functions during the  evolution of higher plants. In Arabidopsis thaliana, we identified two candidate  genes (Cap-D2 and Cap-D3) which may express conserved proteins presumably  associated with condensin. In silico analyses using public databases suggest that  both genes are controlled by factors acting in a cell cycle-dependent manner.  Cap-D2 is essential because homozygous T-DNA insertion mutants were not viable.  The heterozygous mutant showed wild-type growth habit but reduced fertility. For  Cap-D3, we selected two homozygous mutants expressing truncated transcripts which  are obviously not fully functional. Both mutants show reduced pollen fertility  and seed set (one of them also reduced plant vigour), a lower chromatin density  and frequent (peri)centromere association in interphase nuclei. Sister chromatid  cohesion was impaired compared to wild-type in the cap-D3 mutants but not in the  heterozygous cap-D2 mutant. At superresolution (Structured Illumination  Microscopy), we found no alteration of chromatin substructure for both cap-D  mutants. Chromosome-associated polypeptide (CAP)-D3 and the cohesin subunit SMC3  form similar but positionally non-overlapping reticulate structures in 2C-16C  nuclei, suggesting their importance for interphase chromatin architecture in  differentiated nuclei. Thus, we presume that CAP-D proteins are required for  fertility, growth, chromatin organisation, sister chromatid cohesion and in a  process preventing the association of centromeric repeats.', '2013 Dec', 'Chromosoma', '10.1007/s00412-013-0424-y', 'Schubert']

Cap-D2: !affects! Fertility 
Cap-D3: !affects! Fertility 
Cap-D2: !affects! Growth 
Cap-D3: !affects! Growth 
Cap-D2: !affects! Chromatin Organisation 
Cap-D3: !affects! Chromatin Organisation 
Cap-D2: !affects! Sister Chromatid Cohesion 
Cap-D3: !affects! Sister Chromatid Cohesion 
Cap-D3: !prevents! Association of Centromeric Repeats 
SMC3: !interacts with! CAP-D3