Yeast elicitor (YEL) induces stomatal closure that is mediated by a Ca(2+)-dependent signaling pathway. A Ca(2+)-dependent protein kinase, CPK6, positively regulates activation of ion channels in abscisic acid and methyl jasmonate signaling, leading to stomatal closure in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). YEL also inhibits light-induced stomatal opening. However, it remains unknown whether CPK6 is involved in induction by YEL of stomatal closure or in inhibition by YEL of light-induced stomatal opening. In this study, we investigated the roles of CPK6 in induction by YEL of stomatal closure and inhibition by YEL of light-induced stomatal opening in Arabidopsis. Disruption of CPK6 gene impaired induction by YEL of stomatal closure and inhibition by YEL of light-induced stomatal opening. Activation by YEL of nonselective Ca(2+)-permeable cation channels was impaired in cpk6-2 guard cells, and transient elevations elicited by YEL in cytosolic-free Ca(2+) concentration were suppressed in cpk6-2 and cpk6-1 guard cells. YEL activated slow anion channels in wild-type guard cells but not in cpk6-2 or cpk6-1 and inhibited inward-rectifying K(+) channels in wild-type guard cells but not in cpk6-2 or cpk6-1. The cpk6-2 and cpk6-1 mutations inhibited YEL-induced hydrogen peroxide accumulation in guard cells and apoplast of rosette leaves but did not affect YEL-induced hydrogen peroxide production in the apoplast of rosette leaves. These results suggest that CPK6 positively functions in induction by YEL of stomatal closure and inhibition by YEL of light-induced stomatal opening in Arabidopsis and is a convergent point of signaling pathways for stomatal closure in response to abiotic and biotic stress.

YEL: !induces! stomatal closure
CPK6: !positively regulates! YEL-induced stomatal closure
CPK6: !activates! Ca(2+)-permeable cation channels
CPK6: !enhances! YEL-induced Ca(2+) concentration
CPK6: !inhibits! inward-rectifying K(+) channels
CPK6: !promotes! YEL-induced hydrogen peroxide accumulation