['23951039', 'Aphids are insects that cause direct damage to crops by the removal of phloem  sap, but more importantly they spread devastating viruses. Aphids use their  sophisticated mouthpart (i.e. stylet) to feed from the phloem sieve elements of  the host plant. To identify genes that affect host plant resistance to aphids, we  previously screened an Arabidopsis thaliana activation tag mutant collection. In  such mutants, tagged genes are overexpressed by a strong 35S enhancer adjacent to  the natural promoter, resulting in a dominant gain-of-function phenotype. We  previously identified several of these mutants on which the aphid Myzus persicae  showed a reduced population development compared with wild type. In the present  study we show that the gene responsible for the phenotype of one of the mutants  is At5g65040 and named this gene Increased Resistance to Myzus persicae 1 (IRM1).  Overexpression of the cloned IRM1 gene conferred a phenotype identical to that of  the original mutant. Conversely, an IRM1 knockout mutant promoted aphid  population development compared to the wild type. We performed Electrical  Penetration Graph analysis to investigate how probing and feeding behaviour of  aphids was affected on plants that either overexpressed IRM1 or contained a  knockout mutation in this gene. The EPG results indicated that the aphids  encounter resistance factors while reaching for the phloem on the overexpressing  line. This resistance mechanism also affected other aphid species and is  suggested to be of mechanical nature. Interestingly, genetic variation for IRM1  expression in response to aphid attack was observed. Upon aphid attack the  expression of IRM1 was initially (after 6 hours) induced in ecotype Wassilewskija  followed by suppression. In Columbia-0, IRM1 expression was already suppressed  six hours after the start of the infestation. The resistance conferred by the  overexpression of IRM1 in A. thaliana trades off with plant growth.', '2013', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0070914', 'Vosman']

Gene: !affects! Host plant resistance to aphids 
Gene: !overexpressed by! 35S enhancer 
Gene: !confers! Phenotype identical to original mutant 
Gene: !promotes! Aphid population development 
Gene: !encounters resistance factors! Probing and feeding behaviour of aphids 
Gene: !induces! Expression in ecotype Wassilewskija 
Gene: !suppresses! Expression in Columbia-0 
Gene: !trades off with! Plant growth