['23963677', 'Floral organ shedding is a cell separation event preceded by cell-wall loosening  and generally accompanied by cell expansion. Mutations in NEVERSHED (NEV) or  INFLORESCENCE DEFICIENT IN ABSCISSION (IDA) block floral organ abscission in  Arabidopsis thaliana. NEV encodes an ADP-ribosylation factor GTPase-activating  protein, and cells of nev mutant flowers display membrane-trafficking defects.  IDA encodes a secreted peptide that signals through the receptor-like kinases  HAESA (HAE) and HAESA-LIKE2 (HSL2). Analyses of single and double mutants  revealed unique features of the nev and ida phenotypes. Cell-wall loosening was  delayed in ida flowers. In contrast, nev and nev ida mutants displayed ectopic  enlargement of abscission zone (AZ) cells, indicating that cell expansion alone  is not sufficient to trigger organ loss. These results suggest that NEV initially  prevents precocious cell expansion but is later integral for cell separation. IDA  is involved primarily in the final cell separation step. A mutation in  KNOTTED-LIKE FROM ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA1 (KNAT1), a suppressor of the ida mutant,  could not rescue the abscission defects of nev mutant flowers, indicating that  NEV-dependent activity downstream of KNAT1 is required. Transcriptional profiling  of mutant AZs identified gene clusters regulated by IDA-HAE/HSL2. Several genes  were more strongly downregulated in nev-7 compared with ida and hae hsl2 mutants,  consistent with the rapid inhibition of organ loosening in nev mutants, and the  overlapping roles of NEV and IDA in cell separation. A model of the crosstalk  between the IDA signalling pathway and NEV-mediated membrane traffic during  floral organ abscission is presented.', '2013 Dec', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/ert232', 'Aalen']

NEV: !affects! Cell Expansion 
NEV: !prevents! Precocious Cell Expansion 
IDA: !signals through! HAESA/HSL2 
IDA: !involved in! Final Cell Separation Step 
KNAT1: !suppresses! IDA Mutant 
NEV: !downregulates! Gene Clusters