Environmental temperature change may induce modifications in membrane lipid properties and composition, which account for different physiological responses among plant species. Coffee plants, as many tropical species, are particularly sensitive to cold, but genotypes can present differences that can be exploited to improve crop management and breeding. This work intended to highlight the changes promoted by low non-freezing temperatures (chilling) in phospholipid (PL) composition of chloroplast membranes of genotypes from two Coffea species, Coffea arabica cv. Catuaí (moderately tolerant) and Coffea canephora cv. Conilon (Clone 153, more susceptible), and relate them with cold sensitivity differences. Such evaluation was performed considering a gradual temperature decrease, chilling (4 °C) exposure and a recovery period under rewarming conditions. Catuaí presented an earlier acclimation response than Clone 153 (CL 153). It displayed a higher metabolic activity during acclimation (total fatty acids and total PL increases) and chilling (phosphatidylglycerol increases), and an overall better recovery. Catuaí also showed the highest phosphatidylglycerol unsaturation (higher double bond index) after chilling, in contrast with CL 153 (gradual unsaturation decrease). Higher unsaturation degree in Catuaí than in CL 153 was also observed for phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylinositol, resulting, mainly, from raises in unsaturated C18:2 and C18:3. It is suggested that an enhanced PL synthesis and turnover induced by a gradual cold exposure, as well as unsaturation increases in major PL classes, is related to decreased Catuaí susceptibility to low temperatures and strongly contributes to sustain photosynthetic activity in this genotype under chilling conditions, as reported in previous work by this team.

Coffea arabica cv. Catuaí: !enhances! Metabolic activity
Coffea arabica cv. Catuaí: !increases! Phosphatidylglycerol unsaturation
Coffea canephora cv. Conilon (Clone 153): !decreases! Unsaturation degree
Coffea arabica cv. Catuaí: !synthesizes! PL
Coffea arabica cv. Catuaí: !maintains! Photosynthetic activity