In all eukaryotes, NADH:cytochrome b5 reductase provides electrons, via cytochrome b5, for a range of biochemical reactions in cellular metabolism, including for fatty acid desaturation in the endoplasmic reticulum. Studies in mammals, yeast, and in vitro plant systems have shown that cytochrome b5 can, at least in some circumstances, also accept electrons from NADPH:cytochrome P450 reductase, potentially allowing for redundancy in reductase function. Here, we report characterization of three T-DNA insertional mutants of the gene encoding cytochrome b5 reductase in Arabidopsis thaliana, CBR1. The progeny of plants heterozygous for the cbr1-2 allele segregated 6% homozygous mutants, while cbr1-3 and cbr1-4 heterozygotes segregated 1:1 heterozygous:wild type, indicating a gametophyte defect. Homozygous cbr1-2 seeds were deformed and required Suc for successful germination and seedling establishment. Vegetative growth of cbr1-2 plants was relatively normal, and they produced abundant flowers, but very few seeds. The pollen produced in cbr1-2 anthers was viable, but when germinated on cbr1-2 or wild-type stigmas, most of the resulting pollen tubes did not extend into the transmitting tract, resulting in a very low frequency of fertilization. These results indicate that cytochrome b5 reductase is not essential during vegetative growth but is required for correct pollen function and seed maturation.

NADH:cytochrome b5 reductase !provides electrons for! cellular metabolism 
cytochrome b5 !accepts electrons from! NADPH:cytochrome P450 reductase 
CBR1 !mutates in! Arabidopsis thaliana 
cbr1-2 !causes gametophyte defect in! progeny 
Suc !required for! cbr1-2 seed germination 
cbr1-2 plants !produce abundant flowers but few seeds in! vegetative growth 
pollen !viable but does not extend into transmitting tract in! cbr1-2 anthers 
cytochrome b5 reductase !not essential during vegetative growth but required for correct pollen function and seed maturation in! Arabidopsis thaliana