['24027245', 'Eukaryotic sugar transporters of the MFS and SWEET superfamilies consist of 12  and 7 alpha-helical transmembrane domains (TMs), respectively. Structural analyses  indicate that MFS transporters evolved from a series of tandem duplications of an  ancestral 3-TM unit. SWEETs are heptahelical proteins carrying a tandem repeat of  3-TM separated by a single TM. Here, we show that prokaryotes have ancestral  SWEET homologs with only 3-TM and that the Bradyrhizobium japonicum SemiSWEET1,  like Arabidopsis SWEET11, mediates sucrose transport. Eukaryotic SWEETs most  likely evolved by internal duplication of the 3-TM, suggesting that SemiSWEETs  form oligomers to create a functional pore. However, it remains elusive whether  the 7-TM SWEETs are the functional unit or require oligomerization to form a pore  sufficiently large to allow for sucrose passage. Split ubiquitin yeast two-hybrid  and split GFP assays indicate that Arabidopsis SWEETs homo- and  heterooligomerize. We examined mutant SWEET variants for negative dominance to  test if oligomerization is necessary for function. Mutation of the conserved Y57  or G58 in SWEET1 led to loss of activity. Coexpression of the defective mutants  with functional A. thaliana SWEET1 inhibited glucose transport, indicating that  homooligomerization is necessary for function. Collectively, these data imply  that the basic unit of SWEETs, similar to MFS sugar transporters, is a 3-TM unit  and that a functional transporter contains at least four such domains. We  hypothesize that the functional unit of the SWEET family of transporters  possesses a structure resembling the 12-TM MFS structure, however, with a  parallel orientation of the 3-TM unit.', '2013 Sep 24', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1311244110', 'Frommer']

MFS transporters: !evolved from! 3-TM unit
SWEETs: !carry! tandem repeat of 3-TM
SemiSWEET1: !mediates! sucrose transport
Eukaryotic SWEETs: !evolved by! internal duplication of 3-TM
SWEETs: !homo- and heterooligomerize! 
Mutant SWEET variants: !exhibit negative dominance!
Functional A. thaliana SWEET1: !inhibits! glucose transport
Basic unit of SWEETs: !similar to! MFS sugar transporters
Functional unit of SWEET family: !possesses structure resembling! 12-TM MFS structure