The process of gene duplication followed by sequence and functional divergence is important for the generation of new genes. Pack-MULEs, nonautonomous Mutator-like elements (MULEs) that carry genic sequence(s), are potentially involved in generating new open reading frames and regulating parental gene expression. These elements are identified in many plant genomes and are most abundant in rice (Oryza sativa). Despite the abundance of Pack-MULEs, the mechanism by which parental genes are captured by Pack-MULEs remains largely unknown. In this study, we identified all MULEs in rice and examined factors likely important for sequence acquisition. Terminal inverted repeat MULEs are the predominant MULE type and account for the majority of the Pack-MULEs. In addition to genic sequences, rice MULEs capture guanine-cytosine (GC)-rich intergenic sequences, albeit at a much lower frequency. MULEs carrying nontransposon sequences have longer terminal inverted repeats and higher GC content in terminal and subterminal regions. An overrepresentation of genes with known functions and genes with orthologs among parental genes of Pack-MULEs is observed in rice, maize (Zea mays), and Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), suggesting preferential acquisition for bona fide genes by these elements. Pack-MULEs selectively acquire/retain parental sequences through a combined effect of GC content and breadth of expression, with GC content playing a stronger role. Increased GC content and number of tissues with detectable expression result in higher chances of a gene being acquired by Pack-MULEs. Such selective acquisition/retention provides these elements greater chances of carrying functional sequences that may provide new genetic resources for the evolution of new genes or the modification of existing genes.

Pack-MULEs: !capture! genic sequences 
Pack-MULEs: !acquire/retain! parental sequences 
GC content: !influences! Pack-MULEs 
Expression breadth: !influences! Pack-MULEs 
Pack-MULEs: !carry! functional sequences 
Functional sequences: !provide! new genetic resources