['24028846', 'Here, we report that SUGARS WILL EVENTUALLY BE EXPORTED TRANSPORTER (SWEET16)  from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) is a vacuole-located carrier,  transporting glucose (Glc), fructose (Fru), and sucrose (Suc) after heterologous  expression in Xenopus laevis oocytes. The SWEET16 gene, similar to the homologs  gene SWEET17, is mainly expressed in vascular parenchyma cells. Application of  Glc, Fru, or Suc, as well as cold, osmotic stress, or low nitrogen, provoke the  down-regulation of SWEET16 messenger RNA accumulation. SWEET16 overexpressors  (35SPro:SWEET16) showed a number of peculiarities related to differences in sugar  accumulation, such as less Glc, Fru, and Suc at the end of the night. Under cold  stress, 35SPro:SWEET16 plants are unable to accumulate Fru, while under nitrogen  starvation, both Glc and Fru, but not Suc, were less abundant. These changes of  individual sugars indicate that the consequences of an increased SWEET16 activity  are dependent upon the type of external stimulus. Remarkably, 35SPro:SWEET16  lines showed improved germination and increased freezing tolerance. The latter  observation, in combination with the modified sugar levels, points to a superior  function of Glc and Suc for frost tolerance. 35SPro:SWEET16 plants exhibited  increased growth efficiency when cultivated on soil and showed improved nitrogen  use efficiency when nitrate was sufficiently available, while under conditions of  limiting nitrogen, wild-type biomasses were higher than those of 35SPro:SWEET16  plants. Our results identify SWEET16 as a vacuolar sugar facilitator, demonstrate  the substantial impact of SWEET16 overexpression on various critical plant  traits, and imply that SWEET16 activity must be tightly regulated to allow  optimal Arabidopsis development under nonfavorable conditions.', '2013 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.224972', 'Neuhaus']

SWEET16: !transports! Glc, Fru, Suc 
SWEET16: !down-regulates! mRNA accumulation 
35SPro:SWEET16: !improves! germination, freezing tolerance, growth efficiency, nitrogen use efficiency 
cold stress: !inhibits! Fru accumulation 
nitrogen starvation: !inhibits! Glc and Fru accumulation