Aluminium (Al) toxicity is considered to be one of the major constraints affecting crop productivity on acid soils. Being a trait governed by multiple genes, the identification and characterization of novel transcription factors (TFs) regulating the expression of entire response networks is a very promising approach. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to clone, localize, and characterize the TaSTOP1 gene, which belongs to the zinc finger family (Cys2His2 type) transcription factor, at molecular level in bread wheat. TaSTOP1 loci were cloned and localized on the long arm of homoeologous group 3 chromosomes [3AL (TaSTOP1-A), 3BL (TaSTOP1-B) and 3DL (TaSTOP1-D)] in bread wheat. TaSTOP1 showed four potential zinc finger domains and the homoeologue TaSTOP1-A exhibited transactivation activity in yeast. Expression profiling of TaSTOP1 transcripts identified the predominance of homoeologue TaSTOP1-A followed by TaSTOP1-D over TaSTOP1-B in root and only predominance of TaSTOP1-A in shoot tissues of two diverse bread wheat genotypes. Al and proton (H(+)) stress appeared to slightly modulate the transcript of TaSTOP1 homoeologues expression in both genotypes of bread wheat. Physical localization of TaSTOP1 results indicated the presence of a single copy of TaSTOP1 on homoeologous group 3 chromosomes in bread wheat. The three homoeologues of TaSTOP1 have similar genomic structures, but showed biased transcript expression and different response to Al and proton (H(+)) toxicity. These results indicate that TaSTOP1 homoeologues may differentially contribute under Al or proton (H(+)) toxicity in bread wheat. Moreover, it seems that TaSTOP1-A transactivation potential is constitutive and may not depend on the presence/absence of Al at least in yeast. Finally, the localization of TaSTOP1 on long arm of homoeologous group 3 chromosomes and the previously reported major loci associated with Al resistance at chromosome 3BL, through QTL and genome wide association mapping studies suggests that TaSTOP1 could be a potential candidate gene for genomic assisted breeding for Al tolerance in bread wheat.

TaSTOP1: !localizes to! Homoeologous group 3 chromosomes
TaSTOP1: !exhibits transactivation activity in! Yeast
TaSTOP1: !predominates in! Root and shoot tissues of two diverse bread wheat genotypes
Al and proton (H(+)): !modulate the transcript of! TaSTOP1 homoeologues expression
TaSTOP1: !has similar genomic structures but! Shows biased transcript expression and different response to Al and proton (H(+)) toxicity
TaSTOP1: !could be a potential candidate gene for! Genomic assisted breeding for Al tolerance in bread wheat