To better understand water uptake patterns in root systems of woody perennial crops, we detailed the developmental anatomy and hydraulic physiology along the length of grapevine (Vitis berlandieri × Vitis rupestris) fine roots from the tip to secondary growth zones. Our characterization included the localization of suberized structures and aquaporin gene expression and the determination of hydraulic conductivity (Lpr) and aquaporin protein activity (via chemical inhibition) in different root zones under both osmotic and hydrostatic pressure gradients. Tissue-specific messenger RNA levels of the plasma membrane aquaporin isogenes (VvPIPs) were quantified using laser-capture microdissection and quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Our results highlight dramatic changes in structure and function along the length of grapevine fine roots. Although the root tip lacked suberization altogether, a suberized exodermis and endodermis developed in the maturation zone, which gave way to the secondary growth zone containing a multilayer suberized periderm. Longitudinally, VvPIP isogenes exhibited strong peaks of expression in the root tip that decreased precipitously along the root length in a pattern similar to Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) roots. In the radial orientation, expression was always greatest in interior tissues (i.e. stele, endodermis, and/or vascular tissues) for all root zones. High Lpr and aquaporin protein activity were associated with peak VvPIP expression levels in the root tip. This suggests that aquaporins play a limited role in controlling water uptake in secondary growth zones, which contradicts existing theoretical predictions. Despite having significantly lower Lpr, woody roots can constitute the vast majority of the root system surface area in mature vines and thus provide for significant water uptake potential.

VvPIP: !localizes to! interior tissues 
VvPIP: !enhances! water uptake potential 
suberized structures: !develop in! maturation zone 
aquaporin protein activity: !associated with! peak VvPIP expression levels 
hydraulic conductivity: !highest in! root tip 
aquaporins: !play limited role in! controlling water uptake in secondary growth zones