['24053212', 'BACKGROUND: Plants that utilize the highly efficient C4 pathway of photosynthesis  typically possess kranz-type leaf anatomy that consists of two morphologically  and functionally distinct photosynthetic cell types, the bundle sheath (BS) and  mesophyll (M) cells. These two cell types differentially express many genes that  are required for C4 capability and function. In mature C4 leaves, the plastidic  rbcL gene, encoding the large subunit of the primary CO2 fixation enzyme Rubisco,  is expressed specifically within BS cells. Numerous studies have demonstrated  that BS-specific rbcL gene expression is regulated predominantly at  post-transcriptional levels, through the control of translation and mRNA  stability. The identification of regulatory factors associated with C4 patterns  of rbcL gene expression has been an elusive goal for many years. RESULTS: RLSB,  encoded by the nuclear RLSB gene, is an S1-domain RNA binding protein purified  from C4 chloroplasts based on its specific binding to plastid-encoded rbcL mRNA  in vitro. Co-localized with LSU to chloroplasts, RLSB is highly conserved across  many plant species. Most significantly, RLSB localizes specifically to leaf  bundle sheath (BS) cells in C4 plants. Comparative analysis using maize (C4) and  Arabidopsis (C3) reveals its tight association with rbcL gene expression in both  plants. Reduced RLSB expression (through insertion mutation or RNA silencing,  respectively) led to reductions in rbcL mRNA accumulation and LSU production.  Additional developmental effects, such as virescent/yellow leaves, were likely  associated with decreased photosynthetic function and disruption of associated  signaling networks. CONCLUSIONS: Reductions in RLSB expression, due to insertion  mutation or gene silencing, are strictly correlated with reductions in rbcL gene  expression in both maize and Arabidopsis. In both plants, accumulation of rbcL  mRNA as well as synthesis of LSU protein were affected. These findings suggest  that specific accumulation and binding of the RLSB binding protein to rbcL mRNA  within BS chloroplasts may be one determinant leading to the characteristic cell  type-specific localization of Rubisco in C4 plants. Evolutionary modification of  RLSB expression, from a C3 "default" state to BS cell-specificity, could  represent one mechanism by which rbcL expression has become restricted to only  one cell type in C4 plants.', '2013 Sep 22', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-13-138', 'Berry']

RLSB: !localizes to! BS cells 
RLSB: !binds to! rbcL mRNA 
rbcL gene: !enhanced by! RLSB 
rbcL gene: !repressed by! reduced RLSB expression