Reverse transcribed RNAs coding for YnKn, YnSKn, SKn, and KS dehydrin types in drought-stressed white clover (Trifolium repens) were identified and characterized. The nucleotide analyses revealed the complex nature of dehydrin-coding sequences, often featured with alternative start and stop codons within the open reading frames, which could be a prerequisite for high variability among the transcripts originating from a single gene. For some dehydrin sequences, the existence of natural antisense transcripts was predicted. The differential distribution of dehydrin homologues in roots and leaves from a single white clover stolon under normal and drought conditions was evaluated by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblots with antibodies against the conserved K-, Y- and S-segments. The data suggest that different dehydrin classes have distinct roles in the drought stress response and vegetative development, demonstrating some specific characteristic features. Substantial levels of YSK-type proteins with different molecular weights were immunodetected in the non-stressed developing leaves. The acidic SK2 and KS dehydrin transcripts exhibited some developmental gradient in leaves. A strong increase of YK transcripts was documented in the fully expanded leaves and roots of drought-stressed individuals. The immunodetected drought-induced signals imply that Y- and K-segment containing dehydrins could be the major inducible Late Embryogenesis Abundant class 2 proteins (LEA 2) that accumulate predominantly under drought.

YnKn: !codes for! Reverse transcribed RNAs 
YnSKn, SKn, KS dehydrin types: !identified in! drought-stressed white clover 
alternative start and stop codons: !exist within! open reading frames 
natural antisense transcripts: !predicted for! some dehydrin sequences 
differential distribution of dehydrin homologues: !evaluated by! semi-quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblots 
drought stress response and vegetative development: !distinct roles for! different dehydrin classes 
YSK-type proteins: !immunodetected in! non-stressed developing leaves 
SK2 and KS dehydrin transcripts: !exhibited developmental gradient in! leaves 
YK transcripts: !strong increase in! fully expanded leaves and roots of drought-stressed individuals 
Y- and K-segment containing dehydrins: !major inducible! Late Embryogenesis Abundant class 2 proteins