Although arsenic (As) is a common pollutant worldwide, many questions about As metabolism in nonhyperaccumulator plants remain. Concentration- and tissue-dependent speciation and distribution of As was analyzed in the aquatic plant Ceratophyllum demersum to understand As metabolism in nonhyperaccumulator plants. Speciation was analyzed chromatographically (high-performance liquid chromatography-[inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry]-[electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry]) in whole-plant extracts and by tissue-resolution confocal x-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy in intact shock-frozen hydrated leaves, which were also used for analyzing cellular element distribution through x-ray fluorescence. Chromatography revealed up to 20 As-containing species binding more than 60% of accumulated As. Of these, eight were identified as thiol-bound (phytochelatins [PCs], glutathione, and cysteine) species, including three newly identified complexes: Cys-As(III)-PC2, Cys-As-(GS)2, and GS-As(III)-desgly-PC2. Confocal x-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy showed arsenate, arsenite, As-(GS)3, and As-PCs with varying ratios in various tissues. The epidermis of mature leaves contained the highest proportion of thiol (mostly PC)-bound As, while in younger leaves, a lower proportion of As was thiol bound. At higher As concentrations, the percentage of unbound arsenite increased in the vein and mesophyll of young mature leaves. At the same time, x-ray fluorescence showed an increase of total As in the vein and mesophyll but not in the epidermis of young mature leaves, while this was reversed for zinc distribution. Thus, As toxicity was correlated with a change in As distribution pattern and As species rather than a general increase in many tissues.

As: !binds to! PCs
As: !binds to! glutathione
As: !binds to! cysteine
As: !binds to! Cys-As(III)-PC2
As: !binds to! Cys-As-(GS)2
As: !binds to! GS-As(III)-desgly-PC2
As: !varies in! various tissues
As: !increases in! vein and mesophyll
As: !correlated with! change in As distribution pattern