['24058165', 'This work contributes to unraveling the role of the phosphorylated pathway of  serine (Ser) biosynthesis in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) by functionally  characterizing genes coding for the first enzyme of this pathway,  3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PGDH). We identified two Arabidopsis  plastid-localized PGDH genes (3-PGDH and EMBRYO SAC DEVELOPMENT ARREST9 [EDA9])  with a high percentage of amino acid identity with a previously identified PGDH.  All three genes displayed a different expression pattern indicating that they are  not functionally redundant. pgdh and 3-pgdh mutants presented no drastic visual  phenotypes, but eda9 displayed delayed embryo development, leading to aborted  embryos that could be classified as early curled cotyledons. The embryo-lethal  phenotype of eda9 was complemented with an EDA9 complementary DNA under the  control of a 35S promoter (Pro-35S:EDA9). However, this construct, which is  poorly expressed in the anther tapetum, did not complement mutant fertility.  Microspore development in eda9.1eda9.1 Pro-35S:EDA9 was arrested at the polarized  stage. Pollen from these lines lacked tryphine in the interstices of the exine  layer, displayed shrunken and collapsed forms, and were unable to germinate when  cultured in vitro. A metabolomic analysis of PGDH mutant and overexpressing  plants revealed that all three PGDH family genes can regulate Ser homeostasis,  with PGDH being quantitatively the most important in the process of Ser  biosynthesis at the whole-plant level. By contrast, the essential role of EDA9  could be related to its expression in very specific cell types. We demonstrate  the crucial role of EDA9 in embryo and pollen development, suggesting that the  phosphorylated pathway of Ser biosynthesis is an important link connecting  primary metabolism with development.', '2013 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.226720', 'Ros']

PGDH: !regulates! Ser homeostasis
3-PGDH: !localizes to! plastid
EDA9: !expresses in! specific cell types
EDA9: !affects! embryo development
EDA9: !enhances! tryphine production
EDA9: !represses! pollen germination