Sulfur (S) is an essential macronutrient for plants, and deficiency in soil S availability limits plant growth. Adaptive strategies have been evolved by plants to respond to S deficiency by coordinating systemic regulatory mechanism. A split-root experiment using legume model plant Medicago truncatula Gaertn. was conducted to investigate the systemic response to S deficiency. Plant growth, root morphology and S contents under varying conditions of S supply were determined, and the expression of genes encoding sulfate transporter (MtSULTRs) and MtAPR1 encoding an enzyme involved in S assimilation was monitored. Our results demonstrated that there was an apparent systemic response of M. truncatula to heterogeneous S supply in terms of root length, S contents, and S uptake and assimilation at the transcriptional level. When exposed to heterogeneous S supply, M. truncatula plants showed proliferation of lateral roots in S-rich medium and reduction in investment to S-depleted roots. Growth was stimulated with half-part of roots exposed to S-deficient medium. There were different expression patterns of MtSULTRs and MtAPR1 in response to heterogeneous S supply both in roots and shoots of M. truncatula. Expression of MtSULTR1.1 and MtSULTR1.3 was systemically responsive to S deficiency, leading to an enhancement of S uptake in roots exposed to S-sufficient medium. In addition, the response of S-deprived seedlings to re-supply of sulfate and Cys was also analyzed. It was shown that sulfate, but not Cys, may serve as a systemic signal to regulate the expression of genes associated with S absorption and assimilation in M. truncatula. These findings provide a comprehensive picture of systemic responses to S deficiency in leguminous species.

MtSULTRs: !enhances! S uptake 
MtAPR1: !synthesizes! enzyme involved in S assimilation 
S-rich medium: !promotes! proliferation of lateral roots 
S-deficient medium: !reduces! investment to roots 
Sulfate: !serves as! systemic signal to regulate gene expression