['24068953', 'Cytosine DNA methylation is a stable epigenetic mark that is frequently  associated with the silencing of genes and transposable elements (TEs). In  Arabidopsis, the establishment of DNA methylation is through the RNA-directed DNA  methylation (RdDM) pathway. Here, we report the identification and  characterization of RDM16, a new factor in the RdDM pathway. Mutation of RDM16  reduced the DNA methylation levels and partially released the silencing of a  reporter gene as well as some endogenous genomic loci in the DNA demethylase  ros1-1 mutant background. The rdm16 mutant had morphological defects and was  hypersensitive to salt stress and abscisic acid (ABA). Map-based cloning and  complementation test led to the identification of RDM16, which encodes a  pre-mRNA-splicing factor 3, a component of the U4/U6 snRNP. RNA-seq analysis  showed that 308 intron retention events occurred in rdm16, confirming that RDM16  is involved in pre-mRNA splicing in planta. RNA-seq and mRNA expression analysis  also revealed that the RDM16 mutation did not affect the pre-mRNA splicing of  known RdDM genes, suggesting that RDM16 might be directly involved in RdDM. Small  RNA expression analysis on loci showing RDM16-dependent DNA methylation suggested  that unlike the previously reported putative splicing factor mutants, rdm16 did  not affect small RNA levels; instead, the rdm16 mutation caused a decrease in the  levels of Pol V transcripts. ChIP assays revealed that RDM16 was enriched at some  Pol V target loci. Our results suggest that RDM16 regulates DNA methylation  through influencing Pol V transcript levels. Finally, our genome-wide DNA  methylation analysis indicated that RDM16 regulates the overall methylation of  TEs and gene-surrounding regions, and preferentially targets Pol IV-dependent DNA  methylation loci and the ROS1 target loci. Our work thus contributes to the  understanding of RdDM and its interactions with active DNA demethylation.', '2013', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1003779', 'Zhu']

RDM16: !regulates! DNA methylation 
RDM16: !influences! Pol V transcript levels 
RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM): !associated with! silencing of genes and transposable elements (TEs) 
Mutation of RDM16: !reduces! DNA methylation levels 
Map-based cloning: !identifies! RDM16 
RDM16: !encodes! pre-mRNA-splicing factor 3 
RDM16: !involved in! pre-mRNA splicing 
RDM16 mutation: !causes decrease! in Pol V transcripts 
ChIP assays: !reveal! RDM16 enrichment at Pol V target loci 
RDM16: !regulates! overall methylation of TEs and gene-surrounding regions