Cultivated grapevines, Vitis vinifera subsp. sativa, evolved from their wild relative, V. vinifera subsp. sylvestris. They were domesticated in Central Asia in the absence of the powdery mildew fungus, Erysiphe necator, which is thought to have originated in North America. However, powdery mildew resistance has previously been discovered in two Central Asian cultivars and in Chinese Vitis species. A set of 380 unique genotypes were evaluated with data generated from 34 simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers. The set included 306 V. vinifera cultivars, 40 accessions of V. vinifera subsp. sylvestris, and 34 accessions of Vitis species from northern Pakistan, Afghanistan and China. Based on the presence of four SSR alleles previously identified as linked to the powdery mildew resistance locus, Ren1, 10 new mildew resistant genotypes were identified in the test set: eight were V. vinifera cultivars and two were V. vinifera subsp. sylvestris based on flower and seed morphology. Sequence comparison of a 620 bp region that includes the Ren1-linked allele (143 bp) of the co-segregating SSR marker SC8-0071-014, revealed that the ten newly identified genotypes have sequences that are essentially identical to the previously identified mildew resistant V. vinifera cultivars: 'Kishmish vatkana' and 'Karadzhandal'. Kinship analysis determined that three of the newly identified powdery mildew resistant accessions had a relationship with 'Kishmish vatkana' and 'Karadzhandal', and that six were not related to any other accession in this study set. Clustering procedures assigned accessions into three groups: 1) Chinese species; 2) a mixed group of cultivated and wild V. vinifera; and 3) table grape cultivars, including nine of the powdery mildew resistant accessions. Gene flow was detected among the groups. This study provides evidence that powdery mildew resistance is present in V. vinifera subsp. sylvestris, the dioecious wild progenitor of the cultivated grape. Four first-degree parent progeny relationships were discovered among the hermaphroditic powdery mildew resistant cultivars, supporting the existence of intentional grape breeding efforts. Although several Chinese grape species are resistant to powdery mildew, no direct genetic link to the resistance found in V. vinifera could be established.

Vitis vinifera subsp. sativa: !evolved from! V. vinifera subsp. sylvestris
Erysiphe necator: !originated in! North America
Ren1: !linked to! SSR allele
SC8-0071-014: !co-segregates with! Ren1-linked allele
Kishmish vatkana: !identical to! newly identified mildew resistant genotypes
Karadzhandal: !identical to! newly identified mildew resistant genotypes
Kinship analysis: !determined relationship of! three newly identified powdery mildew resistant accessions
Clustering procedures: !assigned accessions into! three groups
Gene flow: !detected among! three groups
Powdery mildew resistance: !present in! V. vinifera subsp. sylvestris
Four first-degree parent progeny relationships: !discovered among! hermaphroditic powdery mildew resistant cultivars
Chinese grape species: !resistant to! powdery mildew