['24096413', 'Lipid transfer proteins (LTPs) are small secretory proteins in plants with  defined lipid-binding structures for possible lipid exocytosis. Special groups of  LTPs unique to the anther tapetum are abundant, but their functions are unclear.  We studied a special group of LTPs, type III LTPs, in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana). Their transcripts were restricted to the anther tapetum, with levels  peaking at the developmental stage of maximal pollen-wall exine synthesis. We  constructed an LTP-Green Fluorescent Protein (LTP-GFP) plasmid, transformed it  into wild-type plants, and monitored LTP-GFP in developing anthers with confocal  laser scanning microscopy. LTP-GFP appeared in the tapetum and was secreted via  the endoplasmic reticulum-trans-Golgi network machinery into the locule. It then  moved to the microspore surface and remained as a component of exine.  Immuno-transmission electron microscopy of native LTP in anthers confirmed the  LTP-GFP observations. The in vivo association of LTP-GFP and exine in anthers was  not observed with non-type III or structurally modified type III LTPs or in  transformed exine-defective mutant plants. RNA interference knockdown of  individual type III LTPs produced no observable mutant phenotypes. RNA  interference knockdown of two type III LTPs produced microscopy-observable  morphologic changes in the intine underneath the exine (presumably as a  consequence of changes in the exine not observed by transmission electron  microscopy) and pollen susceptible to dehydration damage. Overall, we reveal a  novel transfer pathway of LTPs in which LTPs bound or nonbound to exine  precursors are secreted from the tapetum to become microspore exine constituents;  this pathway explains the need for plentiful LTPs to incorporate into the  abundant exine.', '2013 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.225706', 'Huang']

LTPs: !localize to! anther tapetum 
LTPs: !secrete via! endoplasmic reticulum-trans-Golgi network 
LTPs: !move to! microspore surface 
LTPs: !remain as! component of exine 
LTPs: !bind or nonbind to! exine precursors 
LTPs: !incorporate into! abundant exine