Immunofluorescence labeling and shotgun proteomics were used to establish the cell type-specific localization of morphine biosynthesis in opium poppy (Papaver somniferum). Polyclonal antibodies for each of six enzymes involved in converting (R)-reticuline to morphine detected corresponding antigens in sieve elements of the phloem, as described previously for all upstream enzymes transforming (S)-norcoclaurine to (S)-reticuline. Validated shotgun proteomics performed on whole-stem and latex total protein extracts generated 2031 and 830 distinct protein families, respectively. Proteins corresponding to nine morphine biosynthetic enzymes were represented in the whole stem, whereas only four of the final five pathway enzymes were detected in the latex. Salutaridine synthase was detected in the whole stem, but not in the latex subproteome. The final three enzymes converting thebaine to morphine were among the most abundant active latex proteins despite a limited occurrence in laticifers suggested by immunofluorescence labeling. Multiple charge isoforms of two key O-demethylases in the latex were revealed by two-dimensional immunoblot analysis. Salutaridine biosynthesis appears to occur only in sieve elements, whereas conversion of thebaine to morphine is predominant in adjacent laticifers, which contain morphine-rich latex. Complementary use of immunofluorescence labeling and shotgun proteomics has substantially resolved the cellular localization of morphine biosynthesis in opium poppy.

Immunofluorescence labeling: !localizes to! sieve elements 
Shotgun proteomics: !reveals! 2031 distinct protein families 
Polyclonal antibodies: !detects! corresponding antigens 
Nine morphine biosynthetic enzymes: !represented in! whole stem 
Four of the final five pathway enzymes: !detected in! latex 
Salutaridine synthase: !not detected in! latex 
Thebaine to morphine conversion: !predominant in! laticifers 
Two key O-demethylases: !revealed by! two-dimensional immunoblot analysis 
Salutaridine biosynthesis: !occurs only in! sieve elements