['24124981', 'Arabidopsis contains 16 putative chloroplast lumen-targeted immunophilins (IMMs).  Proteomic analysis has enabled the subcellular localization of IMMs  experimentally, but the exact biological and physiological roles of most luminal  IMMs remain to be discovered. FK506-binding protein (FKBP) 16-1, one of the  lumenal IMMs containing poorly conserved amino acid residues for peptidyl-prolyl  isomerase (PPIase) activity, was shown to play a possible role in chloroplast  biogenesis in Arabidopsis, and was also found to interact with PsaL in wheat. In  this study, further evidence is provided for the notion that Arabidopsis FKBP16-1  (AtFKBP16-1) is transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally regulated by  environmental stresses including high light (HL) intensity, and that  overexpression of AtFKBP16-1 plants exhibited increased photosynthetic stress  tolerance. A blue native-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis/two-dimensional  (BN-PAGE/2-D) analysis revealed that the increase of AtFKBP16-1 affected the  levels of photosystem I (PSI)-light harvesting complex I (LHCI) and  PSI-LHCI-light harvesting complex II (LHCII) supercomplex, and consequently  enhanced tolerance under conditions of HL stress. In addition, plants  overexpressing AtFKBP16-1 showed increased accumulation of PsaL protein and  enhanced drought tolerance. Using a protease protection assay, AtFKBP16-1 protein  was found to have a role in PsaL stability. The AtPsaL levels also responded to  abiotic stresses derived from drought, and from methyl viologen stresses in  wild-type plants. Taken together, these results suggest that AtFKBP16-1 plays a  role in the acclimation of plants under photosynthetic stress conditions,  probably by regulating PsaL stability.', '2014 Apr', 'Physiol Plant', '10.1111/ppl.12116', 'Cho']

AtFKBP16-1: !affects! PSI-LHCI-LHCII supercomplex
AtFKBP16-1: !enhances! Photosynthetic stress tolerance
AtFKBP16-1: !interacts with! PsaL
AtFKBP16-1: !regulates! PsaL stability
AtPsaL: !responds to! Abiotic stresses