['24134884', 'Plant microtubules (MTs) play essential roles in cell division, anisotropic cell  expansion, and overall organ morphology. Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs)  bind to MTs and regulate their dynamics, stability, and organization. Identifying  the full set of MAPs in plants would greatly enhance our understanding of how  diverse MT arrays are formed and function; however, few proteomics studies have  characterized plant MAPs. Using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry,  we identified hundreds of proteins from MAP-enriched preparations derived from  cell suspension cultures of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Previously  reported MAPs, MT regulators, kinesins, dynamins, peroxisome-resident enzymes,  and proteins implicated in replication, transcription, and translation were  highly enriched. Dozens of proteins of unknown function were identified, among  which 12 were tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP) and examined for their  ability to colocalize with MTs when transiently expressed in plant cells. Six  proteins did indeed colocalize with cortical MTs in planta. We further  characterized one of these MAPs, designated as BASIC PROLINE-RICH PROTEIN1  (BPP1), which belongs to a seven-member family in Arabidopsis. BPP1-GFP decorated  interphase and mitotic MT arrays in transgenic Arabidopsis plants. A highly  basic, conserved region was responsible for the in vivo MT association.  Overexpression of BPP1-GFP stabilized MTs, caused right-handed helical growth in  rapidly elongating tissues, promoted the formation of transverse MT arrays, and  resulted in the outgrowth of epidermal cells in light-grown hypocotyls. Our  high-quality proteome database of Arabidopsis MAP-enriched preparations is a  useful resource for identifying novel MT regulators and evaluating potential MT  associations of proteins known to have other cellular functions.', '2013 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.225607', 'Hashimoto']

MAPs: !bind to! MTs 
MTs: !regulate! dynamics, stability, and organization 
Proteins: !colocalize with! MTs 
BPP1: !belongs to! seven-member family 
BPP1-GFP: !decorates! interphase and mitotic MT arrays 
BPP1-GFP: !stabilizes! MTs 
BPP1-GFP: !causes! right-handed helical growth 
BPP1-GFP: !promotes! formation of transverse MT arrays 
BPP1-GFP: !results in! outgrowth of epidermal cells