['24130194', 'Plant peroxisomes are highly dynamic organelles that mediate a suite of metabolic  processes crucial to development. Peroxisomes in seeds/dark-grown seedlings and  in photosynthetic tissues constitute two major subtypes of plant peroxisomes,  which had been postulated to contain distinct primary biochemical properties.  Multiple in-depth proteomic analyses had been performed on leaf peroxisomes, yet  the major makeup of peroxisomes in seeds or dark-grown seedlings remained  unclear. To compare the metabolic pathways of the two dominant plant peroxisomal  subtypes and discover new peroxisomal proteins that function specifically during  seed germination, we performed proteomic analysis of peroxisomes from etiolated  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings. The detection of 77 peroxisomal  proteins allowed us to perform comparative analysis with the peroxisomal proteome  of green leaves, which revealed a large overlap between these two primary  peroxisomal variants. Subcellular targeting analysis by fluorescence microscopy  validated around 10 new peroxisomal proteins in Arabidopsis. Mutant analysis  suggested the role of the cysteine protease RESPONSE TO DROUGHT21A-LIKE1 in  beta-oxidation, seed germination, and growth. This work provides a much-needed road  map of a major type of plant peroxisome and has established a basis for future  investigations of peroxisomal proteolytic processes to understand their roles in  development and in plant interaction with the environment.', '2013 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.223453', 'Hu']

peroxisomes: !mediate! metabolic processes 
seedlings/photosynthetic tissues: !constitute! two major subtypes of plant peroxisomes 
leaf peroxisomes: !compared with! peroxisomes from etiolated Arabidopsis seedlings 
77 peroxisomal proteins: !detected! to perform comparative analysis 
fluorescence microscopy: !validated! around 10 new peroxisomal proteins 
RESPONSE TO DROUGHT21A-LIKE1: !suggested role in! beta-oxidation, seed germination, and growth