The plant root system is crucial for anchorage and nutrition, and has a major role in plant adaptation, as well as in interactions with soil micro-organisms. Despite the agronomical and ecological importance of legume plants, whose roots can interact symbiotically with soil bacteria called rhizobia that fix atmospheric dinitrogen, and the evidence that lateral root (LR) development programmes are intercepted and influenced by symbiotic organisms, very little is known concerning the cellular and molecular events governing LR development in legumes. To better understand the interconnections between LR formation and symbiotic processes triggered by rhizobia or symbiotic molecules such as lipo-chitooligosaccharides (LCOs), we first need a detailed description of LR development mechanisms in legumes. Using thin sections, we have described the cellular events leading to the formation of a new LR primordium (LRP) in Medicago truncatula, and divided them into seven stages prior to LR emergence. To monitor auxin accumulation we generated transgenic DR5:GUS and DR5:VENUS-N7 reporter lines of M. truncatula, and used them to analyze early stages of LR development. Interesting differences were observed for LR ontogeny compared to Arabidopsis thaliana. Notably, we observed endodermal and cortical contributions to LRP formation, and the associated DR5:GUS expression profile indicated that endodermal and cortical cell divisions were correlated with auxin accumulation. As described for A. thaliana, we observed a preferential zone for LR initiation at 4.45 mm from the root tip. Finally, we studied LR emergence and showed that a significant proportion of new LRP do not emerge straight away and could thus be an additional source of root plasticity. Our results shed new light on the patterning and early development of LRs in M. truncatula.

root system: !crucial for! anchorage and nutrition
legume plants: !interact symbiotically with! soil bacteria 
LRs: !intercepted and influenced by! symbiotic organisms
cellular events: !govern! LR development in legumes
thin sections: !describe! cellular events leading to LRP formation
DR5:GUS reporter lines: !analyze! early stages of LR development
endodermal and cortical cells: !contribute to! LRP formation
auxin accumulation: !correlated with! endodermal and cortical cell divisions
preferential zone: !observed for! LR initiation
LR emergence: !significant proportion of! new LRP do not emerge straight away