The tapetum, the nursing tissue inside anthers, undergoes cellular degradation by programmed cell death (PCD) during late stages of microspore-early pollen development. Despite the key function of tapetum, little is known about the molecular mechanisms regulating this cell death process in which profound nuclear and chromatin changes occur. Epigenetic features (DNA methylation and histone modifications) have been revealed as hallmarks that establish the functional status of chromatin domains, but no evidence on the epigenetic regulation of PCD has been reported. DNA methylation is accomplished by DNA methyltransferases, among which DNA methyl transferase 1 (MET1) constitutes one of the CG maintenance methyltransferase in plants, also showing de novo methyltransferase activity. In this work, the changes in epigenetic marks during the PCD of tapetal cells have been investigated by a multidisciplinary approach to reveal the dynamics of DNA methylation and the pattern of expression of MET1 in relation to the main cellular changes of this PCD process which have also been characterized in two species, Brassica napus and Nicotiana tabacum. The results showed that tapetum PCD progresses with the increase in global DNA methylation and MET1 expression, epigenetic changes that accompanied the reorganization of the nuclear architecture and a high chromatin condensation, activity of caspase 3-like proteases and Cyt c release. The reported data indicate a relationship between the PCD process and the DNA methylation dynamics and MET1 expression in tapetal cells, suggesting a possible new role for the epigenetic marks in the nuclear events occurring during this cell death process and providing new insights into the epigenetic control of plant PCD.

DNA methylation: !increases with! tapetum PCD
MET1 expression: !increases with! tapetum PCD
DNA methylation: !accompanies! nuclear reorganization
MET1 expression: !accompanies! chromatin condensation
DNA methylation: !suggests role in! nuclear events of PCD
MET1 expression: !suggests role in! plant PCD