['24156403', 'MMPs (matrix metalloproteases) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases  widely distributed throughout all kingdoms of life. In mammals, MMPs play key  roles in many physiological and pathological processes, including remodelling of  the extracellular matrix. In the genome of the annual plant Arabidopsis thaliana,  five MMP-like proteins (At-MMPs) are encoded, but their function is unknown.  Previous work on these enzymes was limited to gene expression analysis, and so  far proteolytic activity has been shown only for At1-MMP. We expressed and  purified the catalytic domains of all five At-MMPs as His-tagged proteins in  Escherichia coli cells to delineate the biochemical differences and similarities  among the Arabidopsis MMP family members. We demonstrate that all five  recombinant At-MMPs are active proteases with distinct preferences for different  protease substrates. Furthermore, we performed a family-wide characterization of  their biochemical properties and highlight similarities and differences in their  cleavage site specificities as well as pH- and temperature-dependent activities.  Detailed analysis of their sequence specificity using PICS (proteomic  identification of protease cleavage sites) revealed profiles similar to human  MMPs with the exception of At5-MMP; homology models of the At-MMP catalytic  domains supported these results. Our results suggest that each At-MMP may be  involved in different proteolytic processes during plant growth and development.', '2014 Jan 15', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BJ20130196', 'Funk']

MMPs: !play key roles in! physiological and pathological processes 
At-MMPs: !encode! five proteins 
At1-MMP: !show proteolytic activity! 
At-MMPs: !express and purify! catalytic domains 
At-MMPs: !have distinct preferences for! different protease substrates 
At-MMPs: !have pH- and temperature-dependent activities! 
At-MMPs: !have sequence specificity similar to! human MMPs 
At5-MMP: !differs from! other At-MMPs 
At-MMPs: !may be involved in! different proteolytic processes