Chloroplastic m-type thioredoxins (TRX m) are essential redox regulators in the light regulation of photosynthetic metabolism. However, recent genetic studies have revealed novel functions for TRX m in meristem development, chloroplast morphology, cyclic electron flow, and tetrapyrrole synthesis. The focus of this study is on the putative role of TRX m1, TRX m2, and TRX m4 in the biogenesis of the photosynthetic apparatus in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). To that end, we investigated the impact of single, double, and triple TRX m deficiency on chloroplast development and the accumulation of thylakoid protein complexes. Intriguingly, only inactivation of three TRX m genes led to pale-green leaves and specifically reduced stability of the photosystem II (PSII) complex, implying functional redundancy between three TRX m isoforms. In addition, plants silenced for three TRX m genes displayed elevated levels of reactive oxygen species, which in turn interrupted the transcription of photosynthesis-related nuclear genes but not the expression of chloroplast-encoded PSII core proteins. To dissect the function of TRX m in PSII biogenesis, we showed that TRX m1, TRX m2, and TRX m4 interact physically with minor PSII assembly intermediates as well as with PSII core subunits D1, D2, and CP47. Furthermore, silencing three TRX m genes disrupted the redox status of intermolecular disulfide bonds in PSII core proteins, most notably resulting in elevated accumulation of oxidized CP47 oligomers. Taken together, our results suggest an important role for TRX m1, TRX m2, and TRX m4 proteins in the biogenesis of PSII, and they appear to assist the assembly of CP47 into PSII.

TRX m1: !interacts with! PSII assembly intermediates
TRX m2: !interacts with! PSII assembly intermediates
TRX m4: !interacts with! PSII assembly intermediates
TRX m1: !interacts with! D1
TRX m2: !interacts with! D2
TRX m4: !interacts with! CP47
TRX m1: !enhances! CP47 assembly into PSII
TRX m2: !enhances! CP47 assembly into PSII
TRX m4: !enhances! CP47 assembly into PSII
TRX m1: !affects! Redox status of intermolecular disulfide bonds in PSII core proteins
TRX m2: !affects! Redox status of intermolecular disulfide bonds in PSII core proteins
TRX m4: !affects! Redox status of intermolecular disulfide bonds in PSII core proteins