Asian soybean rust (ASR) caused by the fungus Phakopsora pachyrhizi is one of the most devastating foliar diseases affecting soybean production worldwide. Even though several resistance sources have been identified in soybean, they do not show resistance to all races of P. pachyrhizi. Identification of genes that confer nonhost resistance (NHR) against P. pachyrhizi in another legume species will provide an avenue to engineer soybean to have durable and broad spectrum resistance against P. pachyrhizi strains. Recently, we identified a Medicago truncatula gene, IRG1 (INHIBITOR OF RUST GERM-TUBE DIFFERENTIATION1), that when mutated inhibits the growth of P. pachyrhizi. IRG1 encodes a Cys(2)His(2) zinc finger transcription factor that controls wax-biosynthesis-related genes. The irg1 mutant shows a complete loss of abaxial epicuticular wax crystals and surface hydrophobicity, resulting in the inhibition of pre-penetration structure formation. In order to confirm the role of surface hydrophobicity in the formation of pre-penetration structures, we examined the expression profiles of P. pachyrhizi putative pre-penetration structure-development-related genes on a solid surface or a M. truncatula abaxial leaf surface. Interestingly, the expression of kinase family genes was upregulated on the hydrophobic surface and M. truncatula wild-type leaf surface, but not on the M. truncatula irg1 mutant leaf surface, suggesting that these genes play a role in P. pachyrhizi pre-penetration structure development. In addition, our results suggest that hydrophobicity on the M. truncatula leaf surface may function as a key signal to induce the P. pachyrhizi genes involved in pre-penetration structure development.

IRG1: !encodes! Cys(2)His(2) zinc finger transcription factor
IRG1: !controls! wax-biosynthesis-related genes
irg1 mutant: !lacks! abaxial epicuticular wax crystals
irg1 mutant: !inhibits! pre-penetration structure formation
P. pachyrhizi putative pre-penetration structure-development-related genes: !upregulated on! hydrophobic surface
P. pachyrhizi putative pre-penetration structure-development-related genes: !downregulated on! irg1 mutant leaf surface
hydrophobicity: !induces! P. pachyrhizi genes involved in pre-penetration structure development