White wine quality, especially in warm climates, is affected by sunlight and heat stress. These factors increase the probability that ambering processes will occur and reduce the potential flavour compounds. This study aimed to investigate the effect of sunlight reduction on the accumulation of polyphenolic and aromatic compounds. This study was conducted in a commercial vineyard containing V. vinifera L. cv Grillo. Opaque polypropylene boxes (100% shading) and high-density polyethylene (HDPE) net bags (50% shading) were applied at fruit set. The effect of the shaded treatments was compared to the exposed fruit treatment. The shaded treatments resulted in heavier berries and lower must sugar contents than the exposed treatments. Proanthocyanidins and total polyphenol levels were similar in the exposed and bagged grapes; however, the levels were always lower in the boxed fruit. At harvest, the highest aroma level was measured in the boxed fruits. The boxed fruit had less sugar, fewer proanthocyanidins and more flavours than the exposed grapes.The reduction in flavanols reactive to p-dimethylamino-cinnamaldehyde as (+)-catechin equivalents and total skin proanthocyanidins is an important result for the white winemaking process. In addition, the higher level of aromatic compounds in shaded grapes at harvest is an important contribution to the development of different wine styles.

Sunlight: !affects! White wine quality 
Heat stress: !increases! Probability of ambering processes 
Opaque polypropylene boxes: !reduces! Sunlight 
High-density polyethylene (HDPE) net bags: !reduces! Sunlight 
Shaded treatments: !result in! Heavier berries 
Shaded treatments: !result in! Lower must sugar contents 
Exposed fruit treatment: !compared to! Shaded treatments 
Proanthocyanidins: !similar in! Exposed and bagged grapes 
Total polyphenol levels: !lower in! Boxed fruit 
Aroma level: !highest in! Boxed fruits 
Boxed fruit: !less sugar, fewer proanthocyanidins and more flavours than! Exposed grapes 
Flavanols reactive to p-dimethylamino-cinnamaldehyde: !reduction in! Shaded grapes 
Total skin proanthocyanidins: !reduction in! Shaded grapes 
Aromatic compounds: !higher level of! Shaded grapes