['24201137', 'BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The Mob1 family includes a group of kinase regulators  conserved throughout eukaryotes. In multicellular organisms, Mob1 is involved in  cell proliferation and apoptosis, thus controlling appropriate cell number and  organ size. These functions are also of great importance for plants, which employ  co-ordinated growth processes to explore the surrounding environment and respond  to changing external conditions. Therefore, this study set out to investigate the  role of two Arabidopsis thaliana Mob1-like genes, namely Mob1A and Mob1B, in  plant development. METHODS: A detailed spatio-temporal analysis of Mob1A and  Mob1B gene expression was performed by means of bioinformatic tools, the  generation of expression reporter lines and in situ hybridization of  gene-specific probes. To explore the function of the two genes in plant  development, knock-out and knock-down mutants were isolated and their phenotype  quantitatively characterized. KEY RESULTS: Transcripts of the two genes were  detected in specific sets of cells in all plant organs. Mob1A was upregulated by  several stress conditions as well as by abscisic acid and salicylic acid. A  knock-out mutation in Mob1B did not cause any visible defect in plant  development, whereas suppression of Mob1A expression affected organ growth and  reproduction. In the primary root, reduced levels of Mob1A expression brought  about severe defects in tissue patterning of the stem cell niche and columella  and led to a decrease in meristem size. Moreover, loss of Mob1A function resulted  in a higher sensitivity of root growth to abscisic acid. CONCLUSIONS: Taken  together, the results indicate that arabidopsis Mob1A is involved in the  co-ordination of tissue patterning and organ growth, similarly to its orthologues  in other multicellular eukaryotes. In addition, Mob1A serves a plant-specific  function by contributing to growth adjustments in response to stress conditions.', '2013 Dec', 'Ann Bot', '10.1093/aob/mct235', 'Palme']

Mob1A: !affects! Organ growth
Mob1A: !upregulated by! Stress conditions
Mob1A: !contributes to! Growth adjustments
Mob1B: !localizes to! Specific sets of cells
Mob1B: !knock-out mutation does not cause! Visible defect