['24214398', 'Plants detoxify toxic metals through a GSH-dependent pathway. GSH homeostasis is  maintained by the gamma-glutamyl cycle, which involves GSH synthesis and degradation  and the recycling of component amino acids. The enzyme gamma-glutamyl  cyclotransferase (GGCT) is involved in Glu recycling, but the gene(s) encoding  GGCT has not been identified in plants. Here, we report that an Arabidopsis  thaliana protein with a cation transport regulator-like domain, hereafter  referred to as GGCT2;1, functions as gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase. Heterologous  expression of GGCT2;1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae produced phenotypes that were  consistent with decreased GSH content attributable to either GSH degradation or  the diversion of gamma-glutamyl peptides to produce 5-oxoproline (5-OP). 5-OP levels  were further increased by the addition of arsenite and GSH to the medium,  indicating that GGCT2;1 participates in the cellular response to arsenic (As) via  GSH degradation. Recombinant GGCT2;1 converted both GSH and gamma-glutamyl Ala to  5-OP in vitro. GGCT2;1 transcripts were upregulated in As-treated Arabidopsis,  and ggct2;1 knockout mutants were more tolerant to As and cadmium than the wild  type. Overexpression of GGCT2;1 in Arabidopsis resulted in the accumulation of  5-OP. Under As toxicity, the overexpression lines showed minimal changes in de  novo Glu synthesis, while the ggct2;1 mutant increased nitrogen assimilation by  severalfold, resulting in a very low As/N ratio in tissue. Thus, our results  suggest that GGCT2;1 ensures sufficient GSH turnover during abiotic stress by  recycling Glu.', '2013 Nov', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.113.111815', 'Dhankher']

GGCT2;1: !functions as! gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase 
GGCT2;1: !converts! GSH and gamma-glutamyl Ala to 5-OP 
GGCT2;1: !upregulated in! As-treated Arabidopsis 
ggct2;1: !knockout mutants! more tolerant to As and cadmium 
Overexpression of GGCT2;1: !accumulates! 5-OP 
ggct2;1 mutant: !increases! nitrogen assimilation 
GGCT2;1: !ensures sufficient! GSH turnover during abiotic stress