['24218491', 'Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) exhibits natural genetic variation in drought  response, including varying levels of proline (Pro) accumulation under low water  potential. As Pro accumulation is potentially important for stress tolerance and  cellular redox control, we conducted a genome-wide association (GWAS) study of  low water potential-induced Pro accumulation using a panel of natural accessions  and publicly available single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data sets. Candidate  genomic regions were prioritized for subsequent study using metrics considering  both the strength and spatial clustering of the association signal. These  analyses found many candidate regions likely containing gene(s) influencing Pro  accumulation. Reverse genetic analysis of several candidates identified new Pro  effector genes, including thioredoxins and several genes encoding Universal  Stress Protein A domain proteins. These new Pro effector genes further link Pro  accumulation to cellular redox and energy status. Additional new Pro effector  genes found include the mitochondrial protease LON1, ribosomal protein RPL24A,  protein phosphatase 2A subunit A3, a MADS box protein, and a nucleoside  triphosphate hydrolase. Several of these new Pro effector genes were from regions  with multiple SNPs, each having moderate association with Pro accumulation. This  pattern supports the use of summary approaches that incorporate clusters of SNP  associations in addition to consideration of individual SNP probability values.  Further GWAS-guided reverse genetics promises to find additional effectors of Pro  accumulation. The combination of GWAS and reverse genetics to efficiently  identify new effector genes may be especially applicable for traits difficult to  analyze by other genetic screening methods.', '2014 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.224014', 'Kumar']

Pro: !accumulates in! low water potential
GWAS: !identifies! candidate genomic regions
Reverse genetics: !identifies! new Pro effector genes
Thioredoxins: !influences! Pro accumulation
LON1: !influences! Pro accumulation
RPL24A: !influences! Pro accumulation
Protein phosphatase 2A subunit A3: !influences! Pro accumulation
MADS box protein: !influences! Pro accumulation
Nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase: !influences! Pro accumulation
GWAS: !guides! reverse genetics