['24214063', 'Hydrolysis of fatty acyl thioester bonds by thioesterases to produce free fatty  acids is important for dictating the diversity of lipid metabolites produced in  plants. We have characterized a four-member family of fatty acyl thioesterases  from Arabidopsis thaliana, which we have called acyl-lipid thioesterase1 (ALT1),  ALT2, ALT3, and ALT4. The ALTs belong to the Hotdog fold superfamily of  thioesterases. ALT-like genes are present in diverse plant taxa, including  dicots, monocots, lycophytes, and microalgae. The four Arabidopsis ALT genes were  found to have distinct gene expression profiles with respect to each other. ALT1  was expressed specifically in stem epidermal cells and flower petals. ALT2 was  expressed specifically in root endodermal and peridermal cells as well as in stem  lateral organ boundary cells. ALT3 was ubiquitously expressed in aerial and root  tissues and at much higher levels than the other ALTs. ALT4 expression was  restricted to anthers. All four proteins were localized in plastids via an  N-terminal targeting sequence of about 48 amino acids. When expressed in  Escherichia coli, the ALT proteins used endogenous fatty acyl-acyl carrier  protein substrates to generate fatty acids that varied in chain length (C6-C18),  degree of saturation (saturated and monounsaturated), and oxidation state (fully  reduced and beta-ketofatty acids). Despite their high amino acid sequence  identities, each enzyme produced a different profile of lipids in E. coli. The  biological roles of these proteins are unknown, but they potentially generate  volatile lipid metabolites that have previously not been reported in Arabidopsis.', '2014 Mar', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-013-0151-z', 'Rowland']

ALT1: !localizes to! stem epidermal cells and flower petals
ALT2: !localizes to! root endodermal and peridermal cells, stem lateral organ boundary cells
ALT3: !localizes to! aerial and root tissues
ALT4: !localizes to! anthers
ALTs: !synthesize! fatty acids of varying chain length, degree of saturation, and oxidation state
ALTs: !produce! volatile lipid metabolites