['24248378', 'A family of 17 putative preprotein and amino acid transporters designated PRAT  has been identified in Arabidopsis thaliana, comprising PRAT proteins in  mitochondria and chloroplasts. Although some PRAT proteins, such as the  translocon of the mitochondrial inner membrane (TIM) proteins TIM22 and TIM23,  play decisive roles for the translocation and import of mitochondrial inner  membrane proteins, little is known about the role of the different PRAT members  in chloroplasts. Here we report the identification of three distinct PRAT  proteins as part of a unique protein import site. One of the identified PRAT  proteins is identical with a previously characterized hypothetical protein (HP)  of 20 kDa designated HP20 of the outer plastid envelope membrane. The second PRAT  component is represented by HP30, and the third is identical to HP30-2, a close  relative of HP30. Both HP30 and HP30-2 are inner plastid envelope membrane  proteins of chloroplasts. Using biochemical, cell biological, and genetic  approaches we demonstrate that all three PRAT proteins cooperate during import of  transit sequence-less proteins, such as the quinone oxidoreductase homolog ceQORH  used as model, into the inner chloroplast envelope membrane. Our data are  reminiscent of findings reported for the TIM22 translocase, which is involved in  the import of carrier proteins and other, hydrophobic membrane proteins lacking  cleavable transit sequences into the inner mitochondrial membrane. Together our  results establish the PRAT family as a widely used system of protein translocases  in different membranes of endosymbiotic origin.', '2013 Dec 3', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1319648110', 'Reinbothe']

PRAT: !cooperates with! transit sequence-less proteins
TIM22: !involved in! import of carrier proteins
HP20: !identical to! PRAT protein
HP30: !represented by! PRAT component
HP30-2: !identical to! PRAT component
ceQORH: !used as model for! import into inner chloroplast envelope membrane