The negative charge at the root surface is mainly derived from the phosphate group of phospholipids in plasma membranes (PMs) and the carboxyl group of pectins in cell walls, which are usually neutralized by calcium (Ca) ions contributing to maintain the root integrity. The major toxic effect of aluminum (Al) in plants is the inhibition of root elongation due to Al binding tightly to these negative sites in exchange for Ca. Because phospholipid and pectin concentrations decrease in roots of some plant species under phosphorus (P)-limiting conditions, we hypothesized that rice (Oryza sativa L.) seedlings grown under P-limiting conditions would demonstrate enhanced Al tolerance because of their fewer sites on their roots. For pretreatment, rice seedlings were grown in a culture solution with (+P) or without (-P) P. Thereafter, the seedlings were transferred to a solution with or without Al, and the lipid, pectin, hemicellulose, and mineral concentrations as well as Al tolerance were then determined. Furthermore, the low-Ca tolerance of P-pretreated seedlings was investigated under different pH conditions. The concentrations of phospholipids and pectins in the roots of rice receiving -P pretreatment were lower than those receiving +P pretreatment. As expected, seedlings receiving the -P pretreatment showed enhanced Al tolerance, accompanied by the decrease in Al accumulation in their roots and shoots. This low P-induced enhanced Al tolerance was not explained by enhanced antioxidant activities or organic acid secretion from roots but by the decrease in phospholipid and pectin concentrations in the roots. In addition, low-Ca tolerance of the roots was enhanced by the -P pretreatment under low pH conditions. This low P-induced enhancement of low-Ca tolerance may be related to the lower Ca requirement to maintain PM and cell wall structures in roots of rice with fewer phospholipids and pectins.

Phospholipids: !neutralize! Negative charge 
Pectins: !neutralize! Negative charge 
Calcium ions: !bind to! Negative sites 
Aluminum: !inhibits! Root elongation 
Phosphorus: !decreases! Phospholipid and pectin concentrations 
Rice seedlings: !show enhanced! Al tolerance 
Antioxidant activities: !do not explain! Enhanced Al tolerance 
Organic acid secretion: !do not explain! Enhanced Al tolerance 
Low pH conditions: !enhance! Low-Ca tolerance