['24350984', 'Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor (TRAF) proteins play crucial  roles in plant development and response to abiotic stress. Here, we present  genetic evidence that SEVEN IN ABSENTIA 2 (SINA2), a TRAF-like family protein, is  involved in abscisic acid (ABA)-related drought stress signaling in Arabidopsis.  Gene expression, protein subcellular localization, protein-protein interaction,  and a transient transcription dual-luciferase assay were performed. The drought  tolerance of SINA2 loss-of-function mutants and SINA2-overexpressing plants was  investigated. In Arabidopsis, SINA2 was significantly induced by ABA and drought  treatment. The SINA2-YFP fusion protein was predominately localized in the nuclei  and cytoplasm. Loss of function of SINA2 (sina2) reduced drought tolerance,  whereas overexpression of SINA2 increased stomatal closure, decreased water loss,  and therefore improved drought resistance in transgenic plants. Upon ABA  treatment, expression of some key ABA- and stress-responsive genes decreased in  the sina2 mutant, but increased in SINA2-overexpressing plants. Furthermore,  SINA2 was induced in the ABA-deficient mutant by ABA, but not by drought stress.  Thus, the drought response of SINA2 was ABA-dependent. ProSINA2::LUC expression  in Arabidopsis protoplasts further revealed that ABA-responsive element (ABRE)  binding (AREB) protein 1 (AREB1) AREB2 and ABRE-binding factor 3 (ABF3) might  regulate SINA2 expression at the transcriptional level. Our results indicate that  SINA2 functions as a positive molecular link between drought tolerance and ABA  signaling in Arabidopsis.', '2014 Apr', 'New Phytol', '10.1111/nph.12644', 'Zhang']

SINA2: !localizes to! nuclei and cytoplasm 
SINA2: !induced by! ABA and drought treatment 
SINA2: !enhances! stomatal closure 
SINA2: !improves! drought resistance 
SINA2: !represses! key ABA- and stress-responsive genes 
SINA2: !ABA-dependent! in drought response 
AREB1/AREB2/ABF3: !regulate! SINA2 expression