['24368335', 'Agrobacterium tumefaciens-derived crown galls of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) contain elevated levels of unsaturated fatty acids and strongly express  two fatty acid desaturase genes, omega3 FATTY ACID DESATURASE3 (FAD3) and  STEAROYL-ACYL CARRIER PROTEIN Delta9-DESATURASE6 (SAD6). The fad3-2 mutant with  impaired alpha-linolenic acid synthesis developed significantly smaller crown galls  under normal, but not under high, relative humidity. This strongly suggests that  FAD3 plays a role in increasing drought stress tolerance of crown galls. SAD6 is  a member of the SAD family of as yet unknown function. Expression of the SAD6  gene is limited to hypoxia, a physiological condition found in crown galls. As no  sad6 mutant exists and to link the function of SAD6 with fatty acid desaturation  in crown galls, the lipid pattern was analyzed of plants with constitutive SAD6  overexpression (SAD6-OE). SAD6-OE plants contained lower stearic acid and higher  oleic acid levels, which upon reduction of SAD6 overexpression by RNA  interference (SAD6-OE-RNAi) regained wild-type-like levels. The development of  crown galls was not affected either in SAD6-OE or SAD6-OE-RNAi or by RNA  interference in crown galls. Since biochemical analysis of SAD6 in yeast  (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and Escherichia coli failed, SAD6 was ectopically  expressed in the background of the well-known suppressor of salicylic  acid-insensitive2 (ssi2-2) mutant to confirm the desaturase function of SAD6. All  known ssi2-2 phenotypes were rescued, including the high stearic acid level.  Thus, our findings suggest that SAD6 functions as a Delta9-desaturase, and together  with FAD3 it increases the levels of unsaturated fatty acids in crown galls under  hypoxia and drought stress conditions.', '2014 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.230326', 'Deeken']

FAD3: !affects! drought stress tolerance 
SAD6: !localizes to! hypoxia 
FAD3/SAD6: !enhance! unsaturated fatty acid levels 
SAD6: !synthesizes! Delta9-desaturase 
ssi2-2 mutant: !rescued by! SAD6