['24367018', 'Pectins, major components of dicot cell walls, are synthesized in a heavily  methylesterified form in the Golgi and are partially deesterified by pectin  methylesterases (PMEs) upon export to the cell wall. PME activity is important  for the virulence of the necrotrophic fungal pathogen Botrytis cinerea. Here, the  roles of Arabidopsis PMEs in pattern-triggered immunity and immune responses to  the necrotrophic fungus Alternaria brassicicola and the bacterial hemibiotroph  Pseudomonas syringae pv maculicola ES4326 (Pma ES4326) were studied. Plant PME  activity increased during pattern-triggered immunity and after inoculation with  either pathogen. The increase of PME activity in response to pathogen treatment  was concomitant with a decrease in pectin methylesterification. The  pathogen-induced PME activity did not require salicylic acid or ethylene  signaling, but was dependent on jasmonic acid signaling. In the case of induction  by A. brassicicola, the ethylene response factor, but not the MYC2 branch of  jasmonic acid signaling, contributed to induction of PME activity, whereas in the  case of induction by Pma ES4326, both branches contributed. There are 66 PME  genes in Arabidopsis, suggesting extensive genetic redundancy. Nevertheless,  selected pme single, double, triple and quadruple mutants allowed significantly  more growth of Pma ES4326 than wild-type plants, indicating a role of PMEs in  resistance to this pathogen. No decreases in total PME activity were detected in  these pme mutants, suggesting that the determinant of immunity is not total PME  activity; rather, it is some specific effect of PMEs such as changes in the  pattern of pectin methylesterification.', '2014 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.227637', 'Glazebrook']

PME: !synthesizes! Pectins 
PME: !affects! Virulence of Botrytis cinerea 
PME: !increases in response to! Pattern-triggered immunity and pathogen treatment 
PME: !depends on! Salicylic acid, ethylene, jasmonic acid signaling 
PME: !contributes to! Resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv maculicola ES4326 
PME: !determinant of immunity is not! Total PME activity