['24369434', 'Correct positioning of membrane proteins is an essential process in eukaryotic  organisms. The plant hormone auxin is distributed through intercellular transport  and triggers various cellular responses. Auxin transporters of the PIN-FORMED  (PIN) family localize asymmetrically at the plasma membrane (PM) and mediate the  directional transport of auxin between cells. A fungal toxin, brefeldin A (BFA),  inhibits a subset of guanine nucleotide exchange factors for ADP-ribosylation  factor small GTPases (ARF GEFs) including GNOM, which plays a major role in  localization of PIN1 predominantly to the basal side of the PM. The Arabidopsis  genome encodes 19 ARF-related putative GTPases. However, ARF components involved  in PIN1 localization have been genetically poorly defined. Using a fluorescence  imaging-based forward genetic approach, we identified an Arabidopsis mutant,  bfa-visualized exocytic trafficking defective1 (bex1), in which PM localization  of PIN1-green fluorescent protein (GFP) as well as development is hypersensitive  to BFA. We found that in bex1 a member of the ARF1 gene family, ARF1A1C, was  mutated. ARF1A1C localizes to the trans-Golgi network/early endosome and Golgi  apparatus, acts synergistically to BEN1/MIN7 ARF GEF and is important for PIN  recycling to the PM. Consistent with the developmental importance of PIN  proteins, functional interference with ARF1 resulted in an impaired auxin  response gradient and various developmental defects including embryonic  patterning defects and growth arrest. Our results show that ARF1A1C is essential  for recycling of PIN auxin transporters and for various auxin-dependent  developmental processes.', '2014 Apr', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pct196', 'Friml']

Auxin: !triggers! Cellular Responses 
PIN-FORMED: !localizes asymmetrically to! PM 
BFA: !inhibits! ARF GEFs 
GNOM: !plays major role in! PIN1 Localization 
ARF1A1C: !localizes to! Trans-Golgi Network/Early Endosome 
ARF1A1C: !acts synergistically with! BEN1/MIN7 ARF GEF 
ARF1A1C: !important for! PIN Recycling 
ARF1A1C: !essential for! PIN Auxin Transporters 
ARF1A1C: !impaired auxin response gradient and! Developmental Defects