['24399300', 'Whereas our knowledge about the diverse pathways aiding DNA repair upon genome  damage is steadily increasing, little is known about the molecular players that  adjust the plant cell cycle in response to DNA stress. By a meta-analysis of DNA  stress microarray data sets, three family members of the SIAMESE/SIAMESE-RELATED  (SIM/SMR) class of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors were discovered that react  strongly to genotoxicity. Transcriptional reporter constructs corroborated  specific and strong activation of the three SIM/SMR genes in the meristems upon  DNA stress, whereas overexpression analysis confirmed their cell cycle inhibitory  potential. In agreement with being checkpoint regulators, SMR5 and SMR7 knockout  plants displayed an impaired checkpoint in leaf cells upon treatment with the  replication inhibitory drug hydroxyurea (HU). Surprisingly, HU-induced SMR5/SMR7  expression depends on ATAXIA TELANGIECTASIA MUTATED (ATM) and SUPPRESSOR OF GAMMA  RESPONSE1, rather than on the anticipated replication stress-activated ATM AND  RAD3-RELATED kinase. This apparent discrepancy was explained by demonstrating  that, in addition to its effect on replication, HU triggers the formation of  reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS-dependent transcriptional activation of the  SMR genes was confirmed by different ROS-inducing conditions, including  high-light treatment. We conclude that the identified SMR genes are part of a  signaling cascade that induces a cell cycle checkpoint in response to ROS-induced  DNA damage.', '2014 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.113.118943', 'De']

SIM/SMR: !react to! DNA stress 
Transcriptional reporter constructs: !corroborate! specific and strong activation of SIM/SMR genes 
SMR5/SMR7 knockout plants: !display! impaired checkpoint in leaf cells upon HU treatment 
HU-induced SMR5/SMR7 expression: !depends on! ATM and SUPPRESSOR OF GAMMA RESPONSE1 
HU: !triggers! formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
ROS: !induce! transcriptional activation of SMR genes 
SMR genes: !part of! signaling cascade that induces cell cycle checkpoint in response to ROS-induced DNA damage