['24424322', 'The posttranslational regulation of proteins by lysine (Lys) acetylation has  recently emerged to occur not only on histones, but also on organellar proteins  in plants and animals. In particular, the catalytic activities of metabolic  enzymes have been shown to be regulated by Lys acetylation. The Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome encodes two predicted sirtuin-type Lys  deacetylases, of which only Silent Information Regulator2 homolog (SRT2) contains  a predicted presequence for mitochondrial targeting. Here, we have investigated  the function of SRT2 in Arabidopsis. We demonstrate that SRT2 functions as a Lys  deacetylase in vitro and in vivo. We show that SRT2 resides predominantly at the  inner mitochondrial membrane and interacts with a small number of protein  complexes mainly involved in energy metabolism and metabolite transport. Several  of these protein complexes, such as the ATP synthase and the ATP/ADP carriers,  show an increase in Lys acetylation in srt2 loss-of-function mutants. The srt2  plants display no growth phenotype but rather a metabolic phenotype with altered  levels in sugars, amino acids, and ADP contents. Furthermore, coupling of  respiration to ATP synthesis is decreased in these lines, while the ADP uptake  into mitochondria is significantly increased. Our results indicate that SRT2 is  important in fine-tuning mitochondrial energy metabolism.', '2014 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.232496', 'Finkemeier']

SRT2: !resides in! inner mitochondrial membrane 
SRT2: !interacts with! protein complexes 
SRT2: !functions as! Lys deacetylase 
Lys acetylation: !affects! metabolic enzymes 
srt2 loss-of-function mutants: !show increase in! Lys acetylation 
srt2 plants: !display! metabolic phenotype 
ATP synthase: !increases Lys acetylation in! srt2 loss-of-function mutants 
ATP/ADP carriers: !increases Lys acetylation in! srt2 loss-of-function mutants 
srt2 plants: !have decreased! coupling of respiration to ATP synthesis 
srt2 plants: !have increased! ADP uptake into mitochondria