The plant hormone ethylene is involved in the regulation of a multitude of plant processes, ranging from seed germination to organ senescence. Ethylene induces fruit ripening in climacteric fruits, such as coffee, being directly involved in fruit ripening time and synchronization. Coffee early cultivars usually show a more uniform ripening process although little is known about the genetic factors that promote the earliness of ripening. Thus, this work aimed to characterize the putative members of the coffee (Coffea arabica) ethylene biosynthesis and signaling pathways, as well as to analyze the expression patterns of these members during fruit ripening of early (Catucaí 785-15) and late (Acauã) coffee cultivars. Reverse Transcription-qPCR analysis of the four biosynthesis genes (CaACS1-like; CaACO1-like; CaACO4-like e CaACO5-like) analyzed in this study showed that CaACO1-like and CaACO4-like displayed an expression pattern typically observed in climacteric fruits, being up-regulated during ripening. CaACS1-like gene expression was also up-regulated during fruit ripening of both cultivars, although in a much lesser extent when compared to the changes in CaACO1-like and CaACO4-like gene expression. CaACO5-like was only induced in raisin fruit and may be related to senescence processes. On the other hand, members of the ethylene signaling pathway (CaETR1-like, CaETR4-like, CaCTR2-like, CaEIN2-like, CaEIN3-like, CaERF1) showed slightly higher expression levels during the initial stages of development (green and yellow-green fruits), except for the ethylene receptors CaETR1-like and CaETR4-like, which were constitutively expressed and induced in cherry fruits, respectively. The higher ethylene production levels in Catucaí 785-15 fruits, indicated by the expression analysis of CaACO1-like and CaACO4-like, suggest that it promotes an enhanced CaETR4-like degradation, leading to an increase in ethylene sensitivity and consequently to an earliness in the ripening process of this cultivar. Ethylene production in Acauã fruits may not be sufficient to inactivate the CaETR4-like levels and thus ripening changes occur in a slower pace. Thus, the expression analysis of the ethylene biosynthesis and signaling genes suggests that ethylene is directly involved in the determination of the ripening time of coffee fruits, and CaACO1-like, CaACO4-like and CaETR4-like may display essential roles during coffee fruit ripening.

CaACO1-like: !induces! Fruit ripening 
CaACO4-like: !induces! Fruit ripening 
CaACS1-like: !up-regulates! Fruit ripening 
CaACO5-like: !induced in! Raisin fruit 
CaETR1-like: !constitutively expressed! 
CaETR4-like: !induced in! Cherry fruits 
CaCTR2-like: !higher expression levels! Initial stages of development 
CaEIN2-like: !higher expression levels! Initial stages of development 
CaEIN3-like: !higher expression levels! Initial stages of development 
CaERF1: !higher expression levels! Initial stages of development 
Catucaí 785-15: !enhanced! CaETR4-like degradation 
Acauã: !slower pace! Ripening changes