Physaria fendleri (syn. Lesquerella) is a Brassicaceae producing lesquerolic acid, a highly valued hydroxy fatty acid that could be used for several industrial applications, such as cosmetics, lubricating greases, paints, plastics and biofuels. Free of toxins, Physaria oil is an attractive alternative to imported castor (Ricinus communis) oil, and is hence on the verge of commercialization. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of fatty acid methyl esters revealed that lesquerolic acid was synthesized and accumulated in the embryos, reaching 60% (w/w) of the total fatty acids. The sequential extraction and characterization of biomass compounds revealed that Physaria embryo metabolism switched from protein to fatty acid biosynthesis between 18 and 24 days post-anthesis (DPA). In order to unravel the metabolic pathways involved in fatty acid synthesis, a targeted metabolomics study was conducted on Physaria embryos at different stages of development. For this purpose, two novel high-throughput liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry methods were developed and validated to quantify sugars, sugar alcohols and amino acids. Specificity was achieved using multiple reaction monitoring, and the limits of quantification were in the pmole-fmole range. The comparative metabolomic study underlined that: (i) the majority of the metabolites accumulate in Physaria embryos between 18 and 27 DPA; (ii) the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway, glycolysis, the tricarboxilic acid cycle and the anaplerotic pathway drain a substantial amount of carbon; and (iii) ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate is present, which specifically indicates that the Calvin cycle is occurring. The importance and the relevance of these findings regarding fatty acid synthesis were discussed.

Physaria fendleri: !synthesizes! lesquerolic acid 
Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry: !reveals! fatty acid methyl esters 
Biomass compounds: !characterize! Physaria embryo metabolism 
Targeted metabolomics study: !conducted on! Physaria embryos 
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry: !developed to! quantify sugars, sugar alcohols and amino acids 
Oxidative pentose phosphate pathway: !drains! carbon 
Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate: !indicates! Calvin cycle is occurring