['24443525', 'Plants need to finely balance resources allocated to growth and immunity to  achieve optimal fitness. A tradeoff between pathogen-associated molecular pattern  (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI) and brassinosteroid (BR)-mediated growth was  recently reported, but more information about the underlying mechanisms is  needed. Here, we identify the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor  homolog of brassinosteroid enhanced expression2 interacting with IBH1 (HBI1) as a  negative regulator of PTI signaling in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). HBI1  expression is down-regulated in response to different PAMPs. HBI1 overexpression  leads to reduced PAMP-triggered responses. This inhibition correlates with  reduced steady-state expression of immune marker genes, leading to increased  susceptibility to the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae. Overexpression of the  HBI1-related bHLHs brassinosteroid enhanced expression2 (BEE2) and  cryptochrome-interacting bHLH (CIB1) partially inhibits immunity, indicating that  BEE2 and CIB1 may act redundantly with HBI1. In contrast to its expression  pattern upon PAMP treatment, HBI1 expression is enhanced by BR treatment. Also,  HBI1-overexpressing plants are hyperresponsive to BR and more resistant to the BR  biosynthetic inhibitor brassinazole. HBI1 is nucleus localized, and a mutation in  a conserved leucine residue within the first helix of the protein interaction  domain impairs its function in BR signaling. Interestingly, HBI1 interacts with  several inhibitory atypical bHLHs, which likely keep HBI1 under negative control.  Hence, HBI1 is a positive regulator of BR-triggered responses, and the negative  effect of PTI is likely due to the antagonism between BR and PTI signaling. This  study identifies a novel component involved in the complex tradeoff between  innate immunity and BR-regulated growth.', '2014 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.113.234625', 'Zipfel']

HBI1: !down-regulates! PAMP-triggered responses 
BEE2/CIB1: !redundantly inhibit! immunity 
HBI1: !enhanced by! BR treatment 
HBI1: !interacts with! inhibitory atypical bHLHs