Hybridization in plants leads to transinteractions between the parental genomes and epigenomes that can result in changes to both 24 nt siRNA and cytosine methylation ((m)C) levels in the hybrid. In Arabidopsis the principle processes altering the hybrid methylome are Trans Chromosomal Methylation (TCM) and Trans Chromosomal deMethylation (TCdM) in which the (m)C pattern of a genomic segment attains the same (m)C pattern of the corresponding segment on the other parental chromosome. We examined two loci that undergo TCM/TCdM in the Arabidopsis C24/Landsberg erecta (Ler) F1 hybrids, which show patterns of inheritance dependent on the properties of the particular donor and recipient chromosomal segments. At At1g64790 the TCM- and TCdM-derived (m)C patterns are maintained in the F2 generation but are transmitted in outcrosses or backcrosses only by the C24 genomic segment. At a region between and adjacent to At3g43340 and At3g43350, the originally unmethylated Ler genomic segment receives the C24 (m)C pattern in the F1, which is then maintained in backcross plants independent of the presence of the parental C24 segment. In backcrosses to an unmethylated Ler allele, the newly methylated F1 Ler segment may act as a TCM source in a process comparable to paramutation in maize. TCM-derived (m)C patterns are associated with reduced expression of both At3g43340 and At3g43350 in F1 and F2 plants, providing support for such events influencing the transcriptome. The inheritance of the F1 (m)C patterns and the segregation of other genetic and epigenetic determinants may contribute to the reduced hybrid vigor in the F2 and subsequent generations.

Hybridization: !leads to! transinteractions 
transinteractions: !alter! (m)C levels 
TCM/TCdM: !maintain! (m)C patterns 
At1g64790: !transmitted by! C24 genomic segment 
At3g43340/50: !receives! C24 (m)C pattern 
F1 Ler segment: !acts as! TCM source 
TCM-derived (m)C patterns: !associated with! reduced expression 
reduced hybrid vigor: !caused by! inheritance of F1 (m)C patterns