Previously we identified a major quantitative trait locus (QTL) qTaLRO-B1 for primary root length (PRL) in wheat. Here we compare proteomics in the roots of the qTaLRO-B1 QTL isolines 178A, with short PRL and small meristem size, and 178B, with long PRL and large meristem size. A total of 16 differentially expressed proteins were identified: one, transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta receptor-interacting protein-1 (TaTRIP1), was enriched in 178A, while various peroxidases (PODs) were more abundantly expressed in 178B. The 178A roots showed higher TaTRIP1 expression and lower levels of the unphosphorylated form of the brassinosteroid (BR) signaling component BZR1, lower expression of POD genes and reduced POD activity and accumulation of the superoxide anion O2(-) in the root elongation zone compared with the 178B roots. Low levels of 24-epibrassinolide increased POD gene expression and root meristem size, and rescued the short PRL phenotype of 178A. TaTRIP1 directly interacted with the BR receptor TaBRI1 of wheat. Moreover, overexpressing TaTRIP1 in Arabidopsis reduced the abundance of unphosphorylated BZR1 protein, altered the expression of BR-responsive genes, inhibited POD activity and accumulation of the O2(-) in the root tip and inhibited root meristem size. Our data suggested that TaTRIP1 is involved in BR signaling and inhibited root meristem size, possibly by reducing POD activity and accumulation of O2(-) in the root tip. We further demonstrated a negative correlation between the level of TaTRIP1 mRNA and PRL of landraces and modern wheat varieties, providing a valuable insight for better understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying the genotypic differences in root morphology of wheat in the future.

TaTRIP1: !interacts with! TaBRI1 
TaTRIP1: !represses! BZR1 
TaTRIP1: !inhibits! POD activity 
TaTRIP1: !inhibits! O2(-) accumulation 
TaTRIP1: !inhibits! root meristem size 
24-epibrassinolide: !enhances! POD gene expression 
24-epibrassinolide: !enhances! root meristem size