BEL1-type proteins are ubiquitous plant transcription factors in the three-amino-acid-loop-extension superfamily. They interact with KNOTTED1-like proteins, and function as heterodimers in both floral and vegetative development. Using the yeast two-hybrid system with POTATO HOMEOBOX1 (POTH1) as the bait, seven BEL1-type proteins were originally identified. One of these genes, designated StBEL5, has transcripts that move long distances in the plant and enhance tuberization and root growth. Using the potato genome database, 13 active BEL1-like genes were identified that contain the conserved homeobox domain and the BELL domain, both of which are essential for the function of BEL1-type proteins. Phylogenetic analysis of the StBEL family demonstrated a degree of orthology with the 13 BEL1-like genes of Arabidopsis. A profile of the gene structure of the family revealed conservation of the length and splicing patterns of internal exons that encode key functional domains. Yeast two-hybrid experiments with KNOTTED1-like proteins and the new StBELs confirmed the interactive network between these two families. Analyses of RNA abundance patterns clearly showed that three StBEL genes, BEL5, -11, and -29, make up approximately two-thirds of the total transcript values for the entire family. Among the 10 organs evaluated here, these three genes exhibited the 12 greatest transcript abundance values. Using a phloem-transport induction system and gel-shift assays, transcriptional cross-regulation within the StBEL family was confirmed. Making use of the potato genome and current experimental data, a comprehensive profile of the StBEL family is presented in this study.

BEL1-type proteins: !interact with! KNOTTED1-like proteins
POTH1: !identifies! seven BEL1-type proteins
StBEL5: !enhances! tuberization and root growth
BEL1-like genes: !contain! conserved homeobox domain and BELL domain
StBEL family: !orthologous to! 13 BEL1-like genes of Arabidopsis
StBELs: !interact with! KNOTTED1-like proteins
StBEL5, -11, -29: !make up! two-thirds of total transcript values
StBEL family: !confirmed by! phloem-transport induction system and gel-shift assays