Redox homeostasis is important for plants to be able to maintain cellular metabolism, and disrupting cellular redox homeostasis will cause oxidative damage to cells and adversely affect plant growth. In this study, a cotton CCCH-type tandem zinc finger gene defined as GhTZF1, which was isolated from a cotton cell wall regeneration SSH library in our previous research, was characterized. GhTZF1 was predominantly expressed during early cell wall regeneration, and it was expressed in various vegetative and reproductive tissues. The expression of GhTZF1 was substantially up-regulated by a variety of abiotic stresses, such as PEG and salt. GhTZF1 also responds to methyl jasmonate (MeJA) and H2O2 treatment. Overexpression of GhTZF1 enhanced drought tolerance and delayed drought-induced leaf senescence in transgenic Arabidopsis. Subsequent experiments indicated that dark- and MeJA-induced leaf senescence was also attenuated in transgenic plants. The amount of H2O2 in transgenic plants was attenuated under both drought conditions and with MeJA-treatment. The activity of superoxide dismutase and peroxidase was higher in transgenic plants than in wild type plants under drought conditions. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed that overexpression of GhTZF1 reduced the expression of oxidative-related senescence-associated genes (SAGs) under drought conditions. Overexpression of GhTZF1 also enhanced oxidative stress tolerance, which was determined by measuring the expression of a set of antioxidant genes and SAGs that were altered in transgenic plants during H2O2 treatment. Hence, we conclude that GhTZF1 may serve as a regulator in mediating drought stress tolerance and subsequent leaf senescence by modulating the reactive oxygen species homeostasis.

GhTZF1: !enhances! drought tolerance 
GhTZF1: !attenuates! dark- and MeJA-induced leaf senescence 
GhTZF1: !reduces! H2O2 levels 
GhTZF1: !increases! superoxide dismutase and peroxidase activity 
GhTZF1: !decreases! expression of oxidative-related SAGs 
GhTZF1: !enhances! oxidative stress tolerance