Small auxin-up RNAs (SAURs) are the early auxin-responsive genes represented by a large multigene family in plants. Here, we identified 79 SAUR gene family members from maize (Zea mays subsp. mays) by a reiterative database search and manual annotation. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the SAUR proteins from Arabidopsis, rice, sorghum, and maize had divided into 16 groups. These genes were non-randomly distributed across the maize chromosomes, and segmental duplication and tandem duplication contributed to the expansion of the maize SAUR gene family. Synteny analysis established orthology relationships and functional linkages between SAUR genes in maize and sorghum genomes. We also found that the auxin-responsive elements were conserved in the upstream sequences of maize SAUR members. Selection analyses identified some significant site-specific constraints acted on most SAUR paralogs. Expression profiles based on microarray data have provided insights into the possible functional divergence among members of the SAUR gene family. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis indicated that some of the 10 randomly selected ZmSAUR genes could be induced at least in maize shoot or root tissue tested. The results reveal a comprehensive overview of the maize SAUR gene family and may pave the way for deciphering their function during plant development.

Small auxin-up RNAs (SAURs): !divide into! 16 groups 
SAUR proteins: !non-randomly distributed across! maize chromosomes 
segmental duplication: !contributes to! expansion of maize SAUR gene family 
Synteny analysis: !establishes orthology relationships between! SAUR genes in maize and sorghum 
auxin-responsive elements: !conserved in! upstream sequences of maize SAUR members 
selection analyses: !identify site-specific constraints on! most SAUR paralogs 
expression profiles: !provide insights into! functional divergence among SAUR gene family 
Quantitative real-time PCR: !indicates that! some ZmSAUR genes can be induced in maize shoot/root tissue