Adaptation to salinity of a semi-arid inhabitant plant, henna, is studied. The salt tolerance mechanisms are evaluated in the belief that gas exchange (water vapor and CO2) should play a key role on its adaptation to salt stress because of the strong evaporation conditions and soil water deficit in its natural area of distribution. We grow henna plants hydroponically under controlled climate conditions and expose them to control (0mM NaCl), and two levels of salinity; medium (75mM NaCl) and high (150mM NaCl). Relative growth rate (RGR), biomass production, whole plant and leaf structure and ultrastructure adaptation, gas exchange, chlorophyll fluorescence, nutrients location in leaf tissue and its balance in the plant are studied. RGR and total biomass decreased as NaCl concentration increased in the nutrient solution. At 75mM NaCl root biomass was not affected by salinity and RGR reached similar values to control plants at the end of the experiment. At this salinity level henna plant responded to salinity decreasing shoot to root ratio, increasing leaf specific mass (LSM) and intrinsic water use efficiency (iWUE), and accumulating high concentrations of Na(+) and Cl(-) in leaves and root. At 150mM NaCl growth was severely reduced but plants reached the reproductive phase. At this salinity level, no further decrease in shoot to root ratio or increase in LSM was observed, but plants increased iWUE, maintaining water status and leaf and root Na(+) and Cl(-) concentrations were lower than expected. Moreover, plants at 150mM NaCl reallocated carbon to the root at the expense of the shoot. The effective PSII quantum yield [Y(II)] and the quantum yield of non-regulated energy dissipation [Y(NO)] were recovered over time of exposure to salinity. Overall, iWUE seems to be determinant in the adaptation of henna plant to high salinity level, when morphological adaptation fails.

NaCl: !increases! RGR 
NaCl: !decreases! Total biomass 
NaCl: !decreases! Shoot to root ratio 
NaCl: !increases! Leaf specific mass 
NaCl: !increases! Intrinsic water use efficiency 
NaCl: !increases! Na+ and Cl- concentrations in leaves and roots 
NaCl: !redirects! Carbon to the root 
NaCl: !recovers! PSII quantum yield 
NaCl: !recovers! Quantum yield of non-regulated energy dissipation 
iWUE: !determines! Adaptation of henna plant to high salinity level