Arabidopsis nudix hydrolase 7 (Atnudt7) mutants exhibit reduced seed germination phenotype following after-ripening. The role of AtNUDT7 in seeds and during early stages of imbibition was examined. Seeds of Atnudt7-1 and Col-0 following 3 days of imbibition were used to profile changes in NADH- and ADP-ribose pyrophosphohydrolase enzyme activities, expression of nudix family genes closely related to AtNudt7, and AtNUDT7 protein levels. Changes in pyridine nucleotides, phytohormones, reactive oxygen species and poly(ADP-ribose) levels in after-ripened seeds and 1 day after imbibition were also analyzed. Changes in AtNUDT7 gene expression, protein levels and enzyme activities in WT seeds and during early stages of imbibition were correlated. Atnudt7-1 seeds lacked NADH pyrophosphohydrolase activity that led to very high catabolic redox charge. Abscisic acid (ABA) levels were higher in Atnudt7-1 mutant while salicylic acid, gibberellic acid, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels were higher in WT seeds. In Atnudt7-1, there was excess ROS accumulation 1 day after imbibition. PAR levels were significantly higher in Atnudt7-1 mutant when compared to WT during imbibition. Based on these observations, we conclude NADH pyrophosphohydrolase activity conferred by AtNUDT7 is important for NAD:NADH homeostasis in seeds. Perturbations to this key redox couple alter ABA and ROS levels in the seeds that in turn lowers germination.

AtNUDT7: !affects! NADH- and ADP-ribose pyrophosphohydrolase enzyme activities
AtNUDT7: !affects! pyridine nucleotides, phytohormones, reactive oxygen species and poly(ADP-ribose) levels
AtNUDT7: !affects! Abscisic acid (ABA) levels
AtNUDT7: !affects! salicylic acid, gibberellic acid, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels
AtNUDT7: !affects! PAR levels
AtNUDT7: !conferred by! NADH pyrophosphohydrolase activity 
NADH pyrophosphohydrolase activity: !important for! NAD:NADH homeostasis in seeds
Perturbations: !alter! ABA and ROS levels in the seeds
ABA and ROS levels: !lowers! germination