Iron (Fe) is an essential element for plant pathogens as well as for their host plants. As Fe plays a central role in pathogen virulence, most plants have evolved Fe-withholding strategies to reduce Fe availability to pathogens. On the other hand, plants need Fe for an oxidative burst in their basal defense response against pathogens. To investigate how the plant Fe nutritional status affects plant tolerance to a hemibiotrophic fungal pathogen, we employed the maize-Colletotrichum graminicola pathosystem. Fungal infection progressed rapidly via biotrophic to necrotrophic growth in Fe-deficient leaves, while an adequate Fe nutritional status suppressed the formation of infection structures of C. graminicola already during the early biotrophic growth phase. As indicated by Prussian blue and 3,3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining, the retarding effect of an adequate Fe nutritional status on fungal development coincided temporally and spatially with the recruitment of Fe to infection sites and a local production of H2 O2 . A similar coincidence between local Fe and H2 O2 accumulation was found in a parallel approach employing C. graminicola mutants affected in Fe acquisition and differing in virulence. These results indicate that an adequate Fe nutritional status delays and partially suppresses the fungal infection process and the biotrophic growth phase of C. graminicola, most likely via the recruitment of free Fe to the fungal infection site for a timely oxidative burst.

Fe: !affects! Pathogen virulence 
Plants: !withhold! Fe from pathogens 
Plants: !need! Fe for oxidative burst 
Fe-deficient leaves: !allow! rapid fungal infection 
Adequate Fe nutritional status: !suppresses! formation of infection structures 
Prussian blue/DAB staining: !indicates! recruitment of Fe to infection sites 
Recruitment of Fe: !coincides with! local production of H2 O2 
C. graminicola mutants: !differ in! virulence 
Adequate Fe nutritional status: !delays and partially suppresses! fungal infection process 
Recruitment of free Fe: !timingly produces! oxidative burst