Abiotic stress and light induce anthocyanin accumulation in Arabidopsis. Here, we demonstrate that mesophyll-localized phytochromes regulate nitrogen-, phosphate- and cold-induced anthocyanin accumulation in shoots of Arabidopsis. Whereas ecotype-dependent differences result in distinct total levels of anthocyanin accumulation in response to light, cold, or nutrient-deficient treatments, phytochromes generally gate light- and/or stress-induced anthocyanin accumulation in shoots, as plants depleted of mesophyll-localized phytochromes lack or have highly attenuated induction of anthocyanins. Observed interactions between light and stress were found to be wavelength dependent, with red and far-red light stimulating higher total levels of anthocyanin accumulation under cold temperatures, especially in response to nitrogen limitation, whereas blue light did not. The roots of plants depleted of mesophyll-localized phytochromes still respond to nutrient deficiency as determined by elongation of primary roots and root hair elongation when plants are grown under nitrogen- or phosphate-limited conditions. Plants which are constitutively deficient in photoreceptors in both shoots and roots, i.e., phy or cry mutants, exhibit defects in light- and stress-induced anthocyanin accumulation and defects in root development. Taken together, these results suggest that the response to nutrient limitation in roots and shoots is under distinct control by spatial-specific pools of phytochromes in Arabidopsis.

phytochrome: !regulates! anthocyanin accumulation
light: !stimulates! anthocyanin accumulation
cold: !induces! anthocyanin accumulation
nitrogen limitation: !induces! anthocyanin accumulation
phosphate limitation: !induces! anthocyanin accumulation
red/far-red light: !stimulates! higher total levels of anthocyanin accumulation
blue light: !does not stimulate! anthocyanin accumulation
phytochrome: !gates! light- and/or stress-induced anthocyanin accumulation
phytochrome: !controls! response to nutrient limitation in roots and shoots
phy/cry mutants: !exhibit defects in! light- and stress-induced anthocyanin accumulation and root development