NRT2.7 is a seed-specific high-affinity nitrate transporter controlling nitrate content in Arabidopsis mature seeds. The objective of this work was to analyse further the consequences of the nrt2.7 mutation for the seed metabolism. This work describes a new phenotype for the nrt2.7-2 mutant allele in the Wassilewskija accession, which exhibited a distinctive pale-brown seed coat that is usually associated with a defect in flavonoid oxidation. Indeed, this phenotype resembled those of tt10 mutant seeds defective in the laccase-like enzyme TT10/LAC15, which is involved in the oxidative polymerization of flavonoids such as the proantocyanidins (PAs) (i.e. epicatechin monomers and PA oligomers) and flavonol glycosides. nrt2.7-2 and tt10-2 mutant seeds displayed the same higher accumulation of PAs, but were partially distinct, since flavonol glycoside accumulation was not affected in the nrt2.7-2 seeds. Moreover, measurement of in situ laccase activity excluded a possibility of the nrt2.7-2 mutation affecting the TT10 enzymic activity at the early stage of seed development. Functional complementation of the nrt2.7-2 mutant by overexpression of a full-length NRT2.7 cDNA clearly demonstrated the link between the nrt2.7 mutation and the PA phenotype. However, the PA-related phenotype of nrt2.7-2 seeds was not strictly correlated to the nitrate content of seeds. No correlation was observed when nitrate was lowered in seeds due to limited nitrate nutrition of plants or to lower nitrate storage capacity in leaves of clca mutants deficient in the vacuolar anionic channel CLCa. All together, the results highlight a hitherto-unknown function of NRT2.7 in PA accumulation/oxidation.

NRT2.7: !affects! nitrate content 
nrt2.7-2 mutant: !exhibits! pale-brown seed coat 
tt10-2 mutant: !exhibits! pale-brown seed coat 
nrt2.7-2 mutant: !accumulates! PAs 
tt10-2 mutant: !accumulates! PAs 
nrt2.7-2 mutant: !different from! tt10-2 mutant 
in situ laccase activity: !excludes! possibility of nrt2.7-2 mutation affecting TT10 enzymic activity 
NRT2.7 cDNA: !complements! nrt2.7-2 mutant 
NRT2.7: !links to! PA phenotype 
nitrate content: !not correlated to! PA-related phenotype of nrt2.7-2 seeds