['24531799', 'Different members of the HD-Zip I family of transcription factors exhibit  differential AHA-like activation motifs, able to interact with proteins of the  basal transcriptional machinery. Homeodomain-leucine zipper proteins are  transcription factors unique to plants, classified in four subfamilies. Subfamily  I members have been mainly associated to abiotic stress responses. Several ones  have been characterized using knockout or overexpressors plants, indicating that  they take part in different signal transduction pathways even when their  expression patterns are similar and they bind the same DNA sequence. A  bioinformatic analysis has revealed the existence of conserved motifs outside the  HD-Zip domain, including transactivation AHA motifs. Here, we demonstrate that  these putative activation motifs are functional. Four members of the Arabidopsis  family were chosen: AtHB1, AtHB7, AtHB12 and AtHB13. All of them exhibited  activation activity in yeast and in plants but with different degrees. The  protein segment necessary for such activation was different for these four  transcription factors as well as the role of the tryptophans they present. When  interaction with components of the basal transcription machinery was tested,  AtHB1 was able to interact with TBP, AtHB12 interacted with TFIIB, AtHB7  interacted with both, TBP and TFIIB while AtHB13 showed weak interactions with  any of them, in yeast two-hybrid as well as in pull-down assays. Transient  transformation of Arabidopsis seedlings confirmed the activation capacity and  specificity of these transcription factors and showed some differences with the  results obtained in yeast. In conclusion, the differential activation  functionality of these transcription factors adds an important level of  functional divergence of these proteins, and together with their expression  patterns, these differences could explain, at least in part, their functional  divergence.', '2014 Jun', 'Plant Cell Rep', '10.1007/s00299-014-1576-9', 'Chan']

AtHB1: !interacts with! TBP 
AtHB12: !interacts with! TFIIB 
AtHB7: !interacts with! TBP 
AtHB7: !interacts with! TFIIB 
AtHB13: !interacts weakly with! TBP 
AtHB13: !interacts weakly with! TFIIB