['24558350', 'Pathogenicity of Pseudomonas syringae is dependent on a type III secretion  system, which secretes a suite of virulence effector proteins into the host  cytoplasm, and the production of a number of toxins such as coronatine (COR),  which is a mimic of the plant hormone jasmonate-isoleuce (JA-Ile). Inside the  plant cell, effectors target host molecules to subvert the host cell physiology  and disrupt defenses. However, despite the fact that elucidating effector action  is essential to understanding bacterial pathogenesis, the molecular function and  host targets of the vast majority of effectors remain largely unknown. Here, we  found that effector HopX1 from Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci (Pta) 11528, a  strain that does not produce COR, interacts with and promotes the degradation of  JAZ proteins, a key family of JA-repressors. We show that hopX1 encodes a  cysteine protease, activity that is required for degradation of JAZs by HopX1.  HopX1 associates with JAZ proteins through its central ZIM domain and degradation  occurs in a COI1-independent manner. Moreover, ectopic expression of HopX1 in  Arabidopsis induces the expression of JA-dependent genes, represses salicylic  acid (SA)-induced markers, and complements the growth of a COR-deficient P.  syringae pv. tomato (Pto) DC3000 strain during natural bacterial infections.  Furthermore, HopX1 promoted susceptibility when delivered by the natural type III  secretion system, to a similar extent as the addition of COR, and this effect was  dependent on its catalytic activity. Altogether, our results indicate that JAZ  proteins are direct targets of bacterial effectors to promote activation of  JA-induced defenses and susceptibility in Arabidopsis. HopX1 illustrates a  paradigm of an alternative evolutionary solution to COR with similar  physiological outcome.', '2014 Feb', 'PLoS Biol', '10.1371/journal.pbio.1001792', 'Solano']

Pathogenicity: !dependent on! type III secretion system 
Effector: !targets! host molecules 
HopX1: !interacts with! JAZ proteins 
HopX1: !promotes degradation of! JAZ proteins 
HopX1: !induces expression of! JA-dependent genes 
HopX1: !represses! SA-induced markers 
HopX1: !complements growth of! COR-deficient P. syringae pv. tomato 
HopX1: !promotes susceptibility! during natural bacterial infections 
HopX1: !dependent on! catalytic activity