Apple (Malus × domestica) trees naturally produce an excess of fruitlets that negatively affect the commercial value of fruits brought to maturity and impact their capacity to develop flower buds the following season. Therefore, chemical thinning has become an important cultural practice, allowing the selective removal of unwanted fruitlets. As the public pressure to limit the use of chemical agents increases, the control of thinning becomes a major issue. Here, we characterized the self-thinning capacity of an apple hybrid genotype from the tree scale to the molecular level. Additional amphivasal vascular bundles were identified in the pith of pedicels supporting the fruitlets with the lowest abscission potential (central fruitlet), indicating that these bundles might have a role in the acquisition of dominance over lateral fruitlets. Sugar content analysis revealed that central fruitlets were better supplied in sorbitol than lateral fruitlets. Transcriptomic profiles allowed us to identify genes potentially involved in the overproduction of vascular tissues in central pedicels. In addition, histological and transcriptomic data permitted a detailed characterization of abscission zone development and the identification of key genes involved in this process. Our data confirm the major role of ethylene, auxin, and cell wall-remodeling enzymes in abscission zone formation. The shedding process in this hybrid appears to be triggered by a naturally exacerbated dominance of central fruitlets over lateral ones, brought about by an increased supply of sugars, possibly through additional amphivasal vascular bundles. The characterization of this genotype opens new perspectives for the selection of elite apple cultivars.

Apple tree: !produces excess of! fruitlets 
fruitlets: !negatively affect! commercial value 
chemical thinning: !allows selective removal of! unwanted fruitlets 
apple hybrid genotype: !characterized for! self-thinning capacity 
additional amphivasal vascular bundles: !identified in! pith of pedicels 
central fruitlets: !better supplied in! sorbitol 
transcriptomic profiles: !allowed identification of! genes involved in overproduction of vascular tissues 
histological and transcriptomic data: !permitted characterization of! abscission zone development 
ethylene, auxin, cell wall-remodeling enzymes: !involved in! abscission zone formation 
shedding process: !triggered by! dominance of central fruitlets