['24569843', 'Mannans are hemicellulosic polysaccharides that are considered to have both  structural and storage functions in the plant cell wall. However, it is not yet  known how mannans function in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seed mucilage.  In this study, CELLULOSE SYNTHASE-LIKE A2 (CSLA2; At5g22740) expression was  observed in several seed tissues, including the epidermal cells of developing  seed coats. Disruption of CSLA2 resulted in thinner adherent mucilage halos,  although the total amount of the adherent mucilage did not change compared with  the wild type. This suggested that the adherent mucilage in the mutant was more  compact compared with that of the wild type. In accordance with the role of CSLA2  in glucomannan synthesis, csla2-1 mucilage contained 30% less mannosyl and  glucosyl content than did the wild type. No appreciable changes in the  composition, structure, or macromolecular properties were observed for nonmannan  polysaccharides in mutant mucilage. Biochemical analysis revealed that cellulose  crystallinity was substantially reduced in csla2-1 mucilage; this was supported  by the removal of most mucilage cellulose through treatment of csla2-1 seeds with  endo-beta-glucanase. Mutation in CSLA2 also resulted in altered spatial distribution  of cellulose and an absence of birefringent cellulose microfibrils within the  adherent mucilage. As with the observed changes in crystalline cellulose, the  spatial distribution of pectin was also modified in csla2-1 mucilage. Taken  together, our results demonstrate that glucomannans synthesized by CSLA2 are  involved in modulating the structure of adherent mucilage, potentially through  altering cellulose organization and crystallization.', '2014 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.236596', 'Zhou']

CSLA2: !synthesizes! Glucomannans 
Glucomannans: !modulate! Structure of adherent mucilage 
CSLA2: !disrupts! Thinner adherent mucilage halos 
Mutation in CSLA2: !alters! Spatial distribution of cellulose 
Mutation in CSLA2: !alters! Spatial distribution of pectin 
Cellulose crystallinity: !reduced! In csla2-1 mucilage