['24567189', 'Despite a strict conservation of the vascular tissues in vascular plants  (tracheophytes), our understanding of the genetic basis underlying the  differentiation of secondary cell wall-containing cells in the xylem of  tracheophytes is still far from complete. Using coexpression analysis and  phylogenetic conservation across sequenced tracheophyte genomes, we identified a  number of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genes of unknown function whose  expression is correlated with secondary cell wall deposition. Among these, the  Arabidopsis VASCULAR-RELATED UNKNOWN PROTEIN1 (VUP1) gene encodes a predicted  protein of 24 kD with no annotated functional domains but containing domains that  are highly conserved in tracheophytes. Here, we show that the VUP1 expression  pattern, determined by promoter-beta-glucuronidase reporter gene expression, is  associated with vascular tissues, while vup1 loss-of-function mutants exhibit  collapsed morphology of xylem vessel cells. Constitutive overexpression of VUP1  caused dramatic and pleiotropic developmental defects, including severe dwarfism,  dark green leaves, reduced apical dominance, and altered photomorphogenesis,  resembling brassinosteroid-deficient mutants. Constitutive overexpression of VUP  homologs from multiple tracheophyte species induced similar defects. Whole-genome  transcriptome analysis revealed that overexpression of VUP1 represses the  expression of many brassinosteroid- and auxin-responsive genes. Additionally,  deletion constructs and site-directed mutagenesis were used to identify critical  domains and amino acids required for VUP1 function. Altogether, our data suggest  a conserved role for VUP1 in regulating secondary wall formation during vascular  development by tissue- or cell-specific modulation of hormone signaling pathways.', '2014 Apr', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.236406', 'Douglas']

VUP1: !localizes to! vascular tissues 
VUP1: !enhances! secondary cell wall deposition 
VUP1: !represses! brassinosteroid- and auxin-responsive genes 
VUP1: !interacts with! multiple tracheophyte species 
VUP1: !synthesizes! 24 kD protein