Whereas most of the research on phloem loading is performed on herbaceous plants, less is known about phloem loading strategies in trees. In this study, the phloem loading mechanisms of Quercus robur and Fraxinus excelsior were analysed. The following features were examined: the minor vein structure, the sugar concentrations in phloem sap by the laser-aphid-stylet technique, the distribution of photoassimilates in the mesophyll cells by non-aqueous fractionation, gradients of sugar concentrations and osmotic pressure, and the expression of sucrose transporters. The minor vein configurations of Q. robur and F. excelsior belong to the open type. Quercus robur contained companion cells in the minor veins whereas F. excelsior showed intermediary cells in addition to ordinary companion cells. The main carbon transport form in Q. robur was sucrose (~1M). In F. excelsior high amounts of raffinose and stachyose were also transported. However, in both tree species, the osmolality of phloem sap was higher than the osmolality of the mesophyll cells. The concentration gradients between phloem sap and the cytoplasm of mesophyll cells for sucrose were 16-fold and 14-fold for Q. robur and F. excelsior, respectively. Independent of the type of translocated sugars, sucrose transporter cDNAs were cloned from both species. The results indicate that phloem loading of sucrose and other metabolites must involve active loading steps in both tree species. Quercus robur seems to be an apoplastic phloem loader while F. excelsior shows indications of being a symplastic or mixed symplastic-apoplastic phloem loader.

Q. robur: !contains! companion cells 
F. excelsior: !contains! intermediary cells 
Q. robur: !transports! sucrose 
F. excelsior: !transports! raffinose & stachyose 
phloem sap: !has higher osmolality than! mesophyll cells 
sucrose: !has 16-fold & 14-fold concentration gradients between phloem sap & cytoplasm of mesophyll cells for! Q. robur & F. excelsior 
sucrose transporters: !cloned from! both species 
Q. robur: !indicates apoplastic phloem loading! 
F. excelsior: !indicates symplastic or mixed symplastic-apoplastic phloem loading!