['24599492', "NADH and NADPH undergo spontaneous and enzymatic reactions that produce R and S  forms of NAD(P)H hydrates [NAD(P)HX], which are not electron donors and inhibit  various dehydrogenases. In bacteria, yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), and  mammals, these hydrates are repaired by the tandem action of an ADP- or  ATP-dependent dehydratase that converts (S)-NAD(P)HX to NAD(P)H and an epimerase  that facilitates interconversion of the R and S forms. Plants have homologs of  both enzymes, the epimerase homolog being fused to the vitamin B6 salvage enzyme  pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase. Recombinant maize (Zea mays) and Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) NAD(P)HX dehydratases (GRMZM5G840928, At5g19150) were able  to reconvert (S)-NAD(P)HX to NAD(P)H in an ATP-dependent manner. Recombinant  maize and Arabidopsis epimerases (GRMZM2G061988, At5g49970) rapidly  interconverted (R)- and (S)-NAD(P)HX, as did a truncated form of the Arabidopsis  epimerase lacking the pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase domain. All plant NAD(P)HX  dehydratase and epimerase sequences examined had predicted organellar targeting  peptides with a potential second start codon whose use would eliminate the  targeting peptide. In vitro transcription/translation assays confirmed that both  start sites were used. Dual import assays with purified pea (Pisum sativum)  chloroplasts and mitochondria, and subcellular localization of GFP fusion  constructs in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) suspension cells, indicated  mitochondrial, plastidial, and cytosolic localization of the Arabidopsis  epimerase and dehydratase. Ablation of the Arabidopsis dehydratase gene raised  seedling levels of all NADHX forms by 20- to 40-fold, and levels of one NADPHX  form by 10- to 30-fold. We conclude that plants have a canonical two-enzyme  NAD(P)HX repair system that is directed to three subcellular compartments via the  use of alternative translation start sites.", '2014 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.236539', 'Hanson']

NADH: !undergoes! spontaneous and enzymatic reactions 
NADPH: !undergoes! spontaneous and enzymatic reactions 
bacteria, yeast, mammals: !have! NAD(P)HX dehydratases and epimerases 
maize, Arabidopsis: !have! NAD(P)HX dehydratases and epimerases 
Arabidopsis epimerase: !has! pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase domain 
pea chloroplasts, mitochondria: !import! NAD(P)HX dehydratase and epimerase 
tobacco suspension cells: !localize! GFP fusion constructs 
Arabidopsis dehydratase gene: !raises! seedling levels of NADHX forms