['24600465', 'In plants, SNF1-related kinase (SnRK1) responds to the availability of  carbohydrates as well as to environmental stresses by down-regulating ATP  consuming biosynthetic processes, while stimulating energy-generating catabolic  reactions through gene expression and post-transcriptional regulation. The  functional SnRK1 complex is a heterotrimer where the catalytic alpha subunit  associates with a regulatory beta subunit and an activating gamma subunit. Several  different metabolites as well as the hormone abscisic acid (ABA) have been shown  to modulate SnRK1 activity in a cell- and stimulus-type specific manner. It has  been proposed that tissue- or stimulus-specific expression of adapter proteins  mediating SnRK1 regulation can at least partly explain the differences observed  in SnRK1 signaling. By using yeast two-hybrid and in planta bi-molecular  fluorescence complementation assays we were able to demonstrate that proteins  containing the domain of unknown function (DUF) 581 could interact with both  isoforms of the SnRK1alpha subunit (AKIN10/11) of Arabidopsis. A structure/function  analysis suggests that the DUF581 is a generic SnRK1 interaction module and  co-expression with DUF581 proteins in plant cells leads to reallocation of the  kinase to specific regions within the nucleus. Yeast two-hybrid analyses suggest  that SnRK1 and DUF581 proteins share common interaction partners inside the  nucleus. The analysis of available microarray data implies that expression of the  19 members of the DUF581 encoding gene family in Arabidopsis is differentially  regulated by hormones and environmental cues, indicating specialized functions of  individual family members. We hypothesize that DUF581 proteins could act as  mediators conferring tissue- and stimulus-type specific differences in SnRK1  regulation.', '2014', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2014.00054', 'Bornke']

SnRK1: !responds to! carbohydrates/environmental stresses 
SnRK1: !associates with! regulatory beta subunit/activating gamma subunit 
metabolites/ABA: !modulate! SnRK1 activity 
adapter proteins: !mediate! SnRK1 regulation 
DUF581: !interacts with! SnRK1alpha subunit 
SnRK1/DUF581: !share! common interaction partners 
DUF581: !differentially regulated by! hormones/environmental cues