['24608865', 'In Arabidopsis thaliana the evolutionary and functional relationship between Leu  biosynthesis and the Met chain elongation pathway, the first part of  glucosinolate formation, is well documented. Nevertheless the exact functions of  some pathway components are still unclear. Isopropylmalate isomerase (IPMI), an  enzyme usually involved in Leu biosynthesis, is a heterodimer consisting of a  large and a small subunit. While the large protein is encoded by a single gene  (isopropylmalate isomerase large subunit1), three genes encode small subunits  (isopropylmalate isomerase small subunit1 to 3). We have now analyzed small  subunit 1 (isopropylmalate isomerase small subunit1) employing artificial  microRNA for a targeted knockdown of the encoding gene. Strong reduction of  corresponding mRNA levels to less than 5% of wild-type levels resulted in a  severe phenotype with stunted growth, narrow pale leaf blades with green  vasculature and abnormal adaxial-abaxial patterning as well as anomalous flower  morphology. Supplementation of the knockdown plants with leucine could only  partially compensate for the morphological and developmental abnormalities.  Detailed metabolite profiling of the knockdown plants revealed changes in the  steady state levels of isopropylmalate and glucosinolates as well as their  intermediates demonstrating a function of IPMI SSU1 in both leucine biosynthesis  and the first cycle of Met chain elongation. Surprisingly the levels of free  leucine slightly increased suggesting an imbalanced distribution of leucine  within cells and/or within plant tissues.', '2014', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0091071', 'Binder']

IPMI: !consists of! large & small subunits 
large subunit: !encoded by! single gene 
small subunit: !encoded by! 3 genes 
IPMI SSU1: !knockdown of! encoding gene 
knockdown: !results in! stunted growth, narrow pale leaf blades, abnormal flower morphology 
knockdown: !reveals changes in! isopropylmalate & glucosinolates levels 
knockdown: !increases! free leucine levels