Gene transformation is an important method for improvement of plants into elite varieties. However, the possibility of gene flow between genetically modified (GM) crops and similar species is a serious public issue that may potentially endanger ecological stability. Cleistogamy is expected to be an ideal genetic tool for preventing transgene propagation from GM crops. A rice mutant, cl7(t), was created by ethyl methanesulfonate mutagenesis. The mutant exhibited cleistogamy, and had closed spikelets, reduced plant height, and altered morphology of the leaves, panicle, and seeds. Anatomical investigations revealed that the cl7(t) mutant contained more vascular bundles and thicker stems than the wild type, which increased the mechanical strength of its internodes, and anti-lodging ability. Further studies demonstrated that the force required to open the lemma and palea was higher in the cl7(t) mutant, and there was weak swelling ability in the lodicules, which leads to cleistogamy. Allelic analyses and complementation tests indicated that cl7(t) was a novel allele of dep2, a mutant that was previously reported to have similar panicle morphology. Sequence analysis showed that cl7(t) had a single nucleotide substitution (C to A) in the third exon that leads to a Ser substitution with a stop codon, giving a truncated DEP2 protein. Quantitative RT-PCR and in situ hybridization tests demonstrated that there was lower CL7(t) expression level in the spikelets and weaker CL7(t) signals in the lodicules of the cl7(t) mutant compared with wild type, which implies that CL7(t) might participate in the development of lodicules. To improve the agronomic traits of cl7(t) to fit the needs of field production, the cl7(t) mutant was crossed with an intermediate-type rice variety named Guanghui102, which bears some important agronomic traits, including increased grain numbers and high rate of seed setting. Through multi-generational pedigree selection, cleistogamy lines with improved economic traits were obtained, which can be used for the selection of ecologically safe GM rice varieties.

Gene: !affects! Process 
cl7(t): !exhibits! Cleistogamy 
cl7(t): !contains! More vascular bundles 
cl7(t): !has higher! Force to open lemma and palea 
cl7(t): !has weaker! Swelling ability in lodicules 
dep2: !is a novel allele of! cl7(t) 
DEP2 protein: !is truncated by! Single nucleotide substitution 
CL7(t): !has lower expression level in! Spikelets 
CL7(t): !has weaker signals in! Lodicules 
Guanghui102: !was crossed with! cl7(t) 
Cleistogamy lines: !were obtained through! Multi-generational pedigree selection