['24617758', 'Salt stress is a widespread phenomenon, limiting plant performance in large areas  around the world. Although various types of plant sodium/proton antiporters have  been characterized, the physiological function of NHD1 from Arabidopsis thaliana  has not been elucidated in detail so far. Here we report that the NHD1-GFP fusion  protein localizes to the chloroplast envelope. Heterologous expression of AtNHD1  was sufficient to complement a salt-sensitive Escherichia coli mutant lacking its  endogenous sodium/proton exchangers. Transport competence of NHD1 was confirmed  using recombinant, highly purified carrier protein reconstituted into  proteoliposomes, proving Na(+) /H(+) antiport. In planta NHD1 expression was  found to be highest in mature and senescent leaves but was not induced by sodium  chloride application. When compared to wild-type controls, nhd1 T-DNA insertion  mutants showed decreased biomasses and lower chlorophyll levels after sodium  feeding. Interestingly, if grown on sand and supplemented with high sodium  chloride, nhd1 mutants exhibited leaf tissue Na(+) levels similar to those of  wild-type plants, but the Na(+) content of chloroplasts increased significantly.  These high sodium levels in mutant chloroplasts resulted in markedly impaired  photosynthetic performance as revealed by a lower quantum yield of photosystem II  and increased non-photochemical quenching. Moreover, high Na(+) levels might  hamper activity of the plastidic bile acid/sodium symporter family protein 2  (BASS2). The resulting pyruvate deficiency might cause the observed decreased  phenylalanine levels in the nhd1 mutants due to lack of precursors.', '2014 May', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12501', 'Neuhaus']

NHD1: !localizes to! chloroplast envelope 
AtNHD1: !complements! salt-sensitive E. coli mutant 
NHD1: !transports! Na(+)/H(+) antiport 
NHD1: !highest in! mature/senescent leaves 
nhd1 mutants: !decreased biomass! and !lower chlorophyll levels! 
nhd1 mutants: !similar leaf tissue Na(+) levels! to wild-type plants 
nhd1 mutants: !higher Na(+) levels! in chloroplasts 
nhd1 mutants: !impaired photosynthetic performance! 
high Na(+): !hamper activity! of BASS2 
BASS2: !causes pyruvate deficiency! 
pyruvate deficiency: !decreases phenylalanine levels! in nhd1 mutants