Lupinus albus serves as model plant for root-induced mobilization of sparingly soluble soil phosphates via the formation of cluster-roots (CRs) that mediate secretion of protons, citrate, phenolics and acid phosphatases (APases). This study employed next-generation sequencing to investigate the molecular mechanisms behind these complex adaptive responses at the transcriptome level. We compared different stages of CR development, including pre-emergent (PE), juvenile (JU) and the mature (MA) stages. The results confirmed that the primary metabolism underwent significant modifications during CR maturation, promoting the biosynthesis of organic acids, as had been deduced from physiological studies. Citrate catabolism was downregulated, associated with citrate accumulation in MA clusters. Upregulation of the phenylpropanoid pathway reflected the accumulation of phenolics. Specific transcript expression of ALMT and MATE transporter genes correlated with the exudation of citrate and flavonoids. The expression of transcripts related to nucleotide degradation and APases in MA clusters coincided with the re-mobilization and hydrolysis of organic phosphate resources. Most interestingly, hormone-related gene expression suggested a central role of ethylene during CR maturation. This was associated with the upregulation of the iron (Fe)-deficiency regulated network that mediates ethylene-induced expression of Fe-deficiency responses in other species. Finally, transcripts related to abscisic acid and jasmonic acid were upregulated in MA clusters, while auxin- and brassinosteroid-related genes and cytokinin receptors were most strongly expressed during CR initiation. Key regulations proposed by the RNA-seq data were confirmed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and some physiological analyses. A model for the gene network regulating CR development and function is presented.

Lupinus albus: !undergoes! Primary Metabolism Modifications 
Citrate Catabolism: !downregulated! MA Clusters 
Phenylpropanoid Pathway: !upregulated! MA Clusters 
ALMT/MATE Transporter Genes: !expressed! Exudation of Citrate/Flavonoids 
Nucleotide Degradation/APases: !expressed! Re-mobilization/Hydrolysis of Organic Phosphate Resources 
Ethylene: !central role! CR Maturation 
Fe-Deficiency Regulated Network: !mediates! Ethylene-induced Expression 
Abscisic Acid/Jasmonic Acid: !upregulated! MA Clusters 
Auxin/Brassinosteroid-related Genes/Cytokinin Receptors: !strongly expressed! CR Initiation