Sulphur, as a constituent of amino acids (cysteine and methionine), iron-sulphur clusters, proteins, membrane sulpholipids, glutathione, glucosinolates, coenzymes, and auxin precursors, is essential for plant growth and development. Absence or low sulphur concentration in the soil results in severe growth retardation. Arabidopsis thaliana plants grown hydroponically for nine weeks on Knop nutrient medium without sulphur showed morphological symptoms of sulphur deficiency. The purpose of our study was to investigate changes that mitochondria undergo and the role of the highly branched respiratory chain in survival during sulphur deficiency stress. Ultrastructure analysis of leaf mesophyll cells of sulphur-deficient Arabidopsis showed heterogeneity of mitochondria; some of them were not altered, but the majority had swollen morphology. Dilated mitochondria displayed a lower matrix density and fewer cristae compared to control mitochondria. Disintegration of the inner and outer membranes of some mitochondria from the leaves of sulphur-deficient plants was observed. On the contrary, chloroplast ultrastructure was not affected. Sulphur deficiency changed the respiratory activity of tissues and isolated mitochondria; Complex I and IV capacities and phosphorylation rates were lower, but external NAD(P)H dehydrogenase activity increased. Higher external NAD(P)H dehydrogenase activity corresponded to increased cell redox level with doubled NADH/NAD ratio in the leaf and root tissues. Sulphur deficiency modified energy status in the tissues of Arabidopsis plants. The total concentration of adenylates (expressed as ATP+ADP), measured in the light, was lower in the leaves and roots of sulphur-deficient plants than in the controls, which was mainly due to the severely decreased ATP levels. We show that the changes in mitochondrial ultrastructure are compensated by the modifications in respiratory chain activity. Although mitochondria of Arabidopsis tissues are affected by sulphur deficiency, their metabolic and structural features, which readily reach new homeostasis, make these organelles crucial for adaptation of plants to survive sulphur deficiency.

Sulphur: !essential for! Plant growth and development 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !shows! Morphological symptoms of sulphur deficiency 
Mitochondria: !undergo changes! During sulphur deficiency stress 
Mitochondria: !display! Swollen morphology 
Complex I and IV: !lower capacities and phosphorylation rates! In sulphur-deficient plants 
External NAD(P)H dehydrogenase: !increased activity! Corresponding to increased cell redox level 
ATP+ADP: !lower concentration! In leaves and roots of sulphur-deficient plants 
Changes in mitochondrial ultrastructure: !compensated by! Modifications in respiratory chain activity