Abiotic stresses affect plant growth, metabolism and sustainability in a significant way and hinder plant productivity. Plants combat these stresses in myriad ways. The analysis of the mechanisms underlying abiotic stress tolerance has led to the identification of a highly complex, yet tightly regulated signal transduction pathway consisting of phosphatases, kinases, transcription factors and other regulatory elements. It is becoming increasingly clear that also epigenetic processes cooperate in a concerted manner with ABA-mediated gene expression in combating stress conditions. Dynamic stress-induced mechanisms, involving changes in the apoplastic pool of ABA, are transmitted by a chain of phosphatases and kinases, resulting in the expression of stress inducible genes. Processes involving DNA methylation and chromatin modification as well as post transcriptional, post translational and epigenetic control mechanisms, forming multiple tiers of regulation, regulate this gene expression. With recent advances in transgenic technology, it has now become possible to engineer plants expressing stress-inducible genes under the control of an inducible promoter, enhancing their ability to withstand adverse conditions. This review briefly discusses the synthesis of ABA, components of the ABA signal transduction pathway and the plants' responses at the genetic and epigenetic levels. It further focuses on the role of RNAs in regulating stress responses and various approaches to develop stress-tolerant transgenic plants.

ABA: !synthesizes! Plants 
Phosphatases: !transmits! ABA 
Kinases: !transmits! ABA 
Transcription Factors: !regulates! Signal Transduction Pathway 
DNA Methylation: !regulates! Gene Expression 
Chromatin Modification: !regulates! Gene Expression 
Post-Transcriptional Control: !regulates! Gene Expression 
Post-Translational Control: !regulates! Gene Expression 
Epigenetic Control: !regulates! Gene Expression 
Inducible Promoter: !enhances! Stress Tolerance 
RNAs: !regulates! Stress Responses