Osmotic stress responses of water content, photosynthetic parameters and biomass production were investigated in wheat-Aegilops biuncialis amphiploids and in wheat genotypes to clarify whether they can use to improve the drought tolerance of bread wheat. A decrease in the osmotic pressure of the medium resulted in considerable water loss, stomatal closure and a decreased CO2 assimilation rate for the wheat genotypes, while the changes in these parameters were moderate for the amphiploids. Maximal assimilation rate was maintained at high level even under severe osmotic stress in the amphiploids, while it decreased substantially in the wheat genotypes. Nevertheless, the effective quantum yield of PS II was higher and the quantum yield of non-photochemical quenching of PS II and PS I was lower for the amphiploids than for the wheat cultivars. Parallel with this, higher cyclic electron flow was detected in wheat than in the amphiploids. The elevated photosynthetic activity of amphiploids under osmotic stress conditions was manifested in higher biomass production by roots and shoots as compared to wheat genotypes. These results indicate that the drought-tolerant traits of Ae. biuncialis can be manifested in the wheat genetic background and these amphiploids are suitable genetic materials for improving drought tolerance of wheat.

Osmotic stress: !affects! Wheat genotypes
Osmotic stress: !affects! Amphiploids
Amphiploids: !maintain! Maximal assimilation rate
Wheat genotypes: !decrease! Maximal assimilation rate
Amphiploids: !have higher! Effective quantum yield of PS II
Wheat genotypes: !have lower! Effective quantum yield of PS II
Amphiploids: !have lower! Quantum yield of non-photochemical quenching of PS II and PS I
Wheat genotypes: !have higher! Quantum yield of non-photochemical quenching of PS II and PS I
Amphiploids: !have higher! Cyclic electron flow
Wheat genotypes: !have lower! Cyclic electron flow
Amphiploids: !produce more! Biomass
Wheat genotypes: !produce less! Biomass