['24667545', 'Plant type II arabinogalactan (AG) polysaccharides are attached to  arabinogalactan proteins (AGPs) at hydroxyproline residues, and they are very  diverse and heterogeneous structures. The AG consists of a beta-(1 --> 3)-linked  galactan backbone with beta-(1 --> 6)-galactan side chains that are modified mainly  with arabinose, but they may also contain glucuronic acid, rhamnose or other  sugars. Here, we studied the positions of fucose substitutions in AGPs, and we  investigated the functions of this fucosylation. Monosaccharide analysis of  Arabidopsis leaf AGP extracts revealed a significant reduction in L-Fucose  content in the fut4 mutant, but not in the fut6 mutant. In addition, Fucose was  reduced in the fut4 mutant in root AGP extracts and was absent in the fut4/fut6  mutant. Curiously, in all cases reduction of fucose was accompanied with a  reduction in xylose levels. The fucosylated AGP structures in leaves and roots in  wild type and fut mutant plants were characterised by sequential digestion with  AG specific enzymes, analysis by Polysaccharide Analysis using Carbohydrate gel  Electrophoresis, and Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionisation (MALDI)-Time of  Flight Mass spectrometry (MS). We found that FUT4 is solely responsible for the  fucosylation of AGPs in leaves. The Arabidopsis thaliana FUT4 and FUT6 genes have  been previously proposed to be non-redundant AG-specific fucosyltransferases.  Unexpectedly, FUT4 and FUT6 enzymes both fucosylate the same AGP structures in  roots, suggesting partial redundancy to each other. Detailed structural  characterisation of root AGPs with high energy MALDI-Collision Induced  Dissociation MS and NMR revealed an abundant unique AG oligosaccharide structure  consisting of terminal xylose attached to fucose. The loss of this structure in  fut4/fut6 mutants explains the reduction of both fucose and xylose in AGP  extracts. Under salt-stress growth conditions the fut4/fut6 mutant lacking AGP  fucosylation exhibited a shorter root phenotype than wild type plants,  implicating fucosylation of AGPs in maintaining proper cell expansion under these  conditions.', '2014', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0093291', 'Dupree']

FUT4: !fucosylates! AGPs in leaves 
FUT4/FUT6: !fucosylates! AGPs in roots 
AGP fucosylation: !maintains! proper cell expansion under salt-stress growth conditions