['24685714', 'BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Arabinogalactan protein 31 (AGP31) is a remarkable plant  cell-wall protein displaying a multi-domain organization unique in Arabidopsis  thaliana: it comprises a predicted signal peptide (SP), a short AGP domain of  seven amino acids, a His-stretch, a Pro-rich domain and a PAC (PRP-AGP containing  Cys) domain. AGP31 displays different O-glycosylation patterns with  arabinogalactans on the AGP domain and Hyp-O-Gal/Ara-rich motifs on the Pro-rich  domain. AGP31 has been identified as an abundant protein in cell walls of  etiolated hypocotyls, but its function has not been investigated thus far.  Literature data suggest that AGP31 may interact with cell-wall components. The  purpose of the present study was to identify AGP31 partners to gain new insight  into its function in cell walls. METHODS: Nitrocellulose membranes were prepared  by spotting different polysaccharides, which were either obtained commercially or  extracted from cell walls of Arabidopsis thaliana and Brachypodium distachyon.  After validation of the arrays, in vitro interaction assays were carried out by  probing the membranes with purified native AGP31 or recombinant PAC-V5-6xHis. In  addition, dynamic light scattering (DLS) analyses were carried out on an AGP31  purified fraction. KEY RESULTS: It was demonstrated that AGP31 interacts through  its PAC domain with galactans that are branches of rhamnogalacturonan I. This is  the first experimental evidence that a PAC domain, also found as an entire  protein or a domain of AGP31 homologues, can bind carbohydrates. AGP31 was also  found to bind methylesterified polygalacturonic acid, possibly through its  His-stretch. Finally, AGP31 was able to interact with itself in vitro through its  PAC domain. DLS data showed that AGP31 forms aggregates in solution,  corroborating the hypothesis of an auto-assembly. CONCLUSIONS: These results  allow the proposal of a model of interactions of AGP31 with different cell-wall  components, in which AGP31 participates in complex supra-molecular scaffolds.  Such scaffolds could contribute to the strengthening of cell walls of quickly  growing organs such as etiolated hypocotyls.', '2014 Oct', 'Ann Bot', '10.1093/aob/mcu038', 'Albenne']

AGP31: !interacts with! galactans 
AGP31: !interacts with! polygalacturonic acid 
AGP31: !interacts with! itself 
AGP31: !contributes to! strengthening of cell walls