Potassium is the most abundant macronutrient, which is involved in a multitude of physiological processes. Potassium uptake in roots is crucial for plants; however, K(+) efflux can also occur and has important functions. Potassium efflux from roots is mainly induced by stresses, such as pathogens, salinity, freezing, oxidants and heavy metals. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and exogenous purines also cause this reaction. The depolarisation and activation of cation channels are required for K(+) efflux from plant roots. Potassium channels and nonselective cation channels (NSCCs) are involved in this process. Some of them are 'constitutive', while the others require a chemical agent for activation. In Arabidopsis, there are 77 genes that can potentially encode K(+)-permeable channels. Potassium-selective channel genes include 9 Shaker and 6 Tandem-Pore K(+) channels. Genes of NSCCs are more abundant and present by 20 cyclic nucleotide gated channels, 20 ionotropic glutamate receptors, 1 two-pore channel, 10 mechanosensitive-like channels, 2 mechanosensitive 'Mid1-Complementing Activity' channels, 1 mechanosensitive Piezo channel, and 8 annexins. Two Shakers (SKOR and GORK) and several NSCCs are expressed in root cell plasma membranes. SKOR mediates K(+) efflux from xylem parenchyma cells to xylem vessels while GORK is expressed in the epidermis and functions in K(+) release. Both these channels are activated by ROS. The GORK channel activity is stimulated by hydroxyl radicals that are generated in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner in stress conditions, such as salinity or pathogen attack, resulting in dramatic K(+) efflux from root cells. Potassium loss simulates cytosolic proteases and endonucleases, leading to programmed cell death. Other physiological functions of K(+) efflux channels include repolarisation of the plasma membrane during action potentials and the 'hypothetical' function of a metabolic switch, which provides inhibition of energy-consuming biosyntheses and releasing energy for defence and reparation needs.

Potassium: !involved in! physiological processes
K+ channels: !mediate! K+ efflux
NSCCs: !mediate! K+ efflux
SKOR: !localizes to! xylem parenchyma cells
GORK: !localizes to! epidermis
ROS: !activate! SKOR and GORK
Ca2+: !generates! hydroxyl radicals
K+ efflux: !stimulates! proteases and endonucleases
K+ efflux: !inhibits! energy-consuming biosyntheses