Identifying CO(2) responsive genotypes is a major target for enhancing crop productivity under future global elevated atmospheric CO(2) concentration ([CO(2)]). However, [CO(2)]-fumigation facilities are extremely expensive and are not easily accessible, and are limited in space for large-scale screening. Hence, reliable donors for initiating [CO(2)]-responsive breeding programs are not in place for crops, including rice. We propose a simple and novel phenotyping method for identifying [CO(2)]-responsive genotypes, and quantify the responsiveness to low planting density over 4-year trials across both temperate and tropical conditions. Panicle number per plant is the key determinant of grain yield and hence was the focus trait across all our trials. In temperate climate, a 3-season field screening using 127 diverse rice genotypes and employing two planting densities (normal and low density) was conducted. Two japonica genotypes were selected based on their higher responsiveness to low planting density as candidates for validating the proposed phenotyping protocol as a pre-screen for [CO(2)]-responsiveness. The approach using the two selected candidates and three standard genotypes was confirmed using a free-air CO(2) enrichment facility and temperature gradient chambers under elevated [CO(2)]. In tropical climate, we grew three rice cultivars, previously identified for their [CO(2)]-responsiveness, at two planting densities. The experiments provided confirmation that responsiveness to low planting density was correlated with that of [CO(2)]-responsiveness across both the temperate and tropical conditions. The planting density would be useful pre-screening method for testing large panels of diverse germplasm at low cost complemented by available CO(2) -control facilities for final validation of candidates from the pre-screens.

planting density: !correlated with! CO2-responsiveness 
genotypes: !selected based on! responsiveness to low planting density 
temperate climate: !used for! 3-season field screening 
tropical climate: !used for! growing three rice cultivars 
CO2-fumigation facilities: !limited in! space and accessibility 
rice genotypes: !screened using! two planting densities 
japonica genotypes: !selected as! candidates for validating protocol 
free-air CO2 enrichment facility: !used to! confirm approach 
temperature gradient chambers: !used to! validate under elevated CO2