['24692420', 'The aerial parts of plants are protected from desiccation and other stress by  surface cuticular waxes. The total cuticular wax loads and the expression of wax  biosynthetic genes are significantly downregulated in Arabidopsis thaliana under  dark conditions. We isolated Decrease Wax Biosynthesis (DEWAX), which encodes an  AP2/ERF-type transcription factor that is preferentially expressed in the  epidermis and induced by darkness. Disruption of DEWAX leads to an increase in  total leaf and stem wax loads, and the excess wax phenotype of dewax was restored  to wild type levels in complementation lines. Moreover, overexpression of DEWAX  resulted in a reduction in total wax loads in leaves and stems compared with the  wild type and altered the ultrastructure of cuticular layers. DEWAX negatively  regulates the expression of alkane-forming enzyme, long-chain acyl-CoA  synthetase, ATP citrate lyase A subunit, enoyl-CoA reductase, and fatty acyl-CoA  reductase, and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis suggested that DEWAX  directly interacts with the promoters of wax biosynthesis genes. Cuticular wax  biosynthesis is negatively regulated twice a day by the expression of DEWAX,  throughout the night and at stomata closing. Significantly higher levels (10- to  100-fold) of DEWAX transcripts were found in leaves than in stems, suggesting  that DEWAX-mediated transcriptional repression may be an additional mechanism  contributing to the different total wax loads in leaves and stems.', '2014 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.114.123307', 'Suh']

DEWAX: !regulates! Cuticular wax biosynthesis 
DEWAX: !induces! Darkness 
DEWAX: !represses! Alkane-forming enzyme 
DEWAX: !represses! Long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase 
DEWAX: !represses! ATP citrate lyase A subunit 
DEWAX: !represses! Enoyl-CoA reductase 
DEWAX: !represses! Fatty acyl-CoA reductase 
DEWAX: !interacts with! Promoters of wax biosynthesis genes 
DEWAX: !localizes to! Epidermis 
Leaves: !have higher levels of! DEWAX transcripts