['24707813', 'Mitochondria are essential organelles with dynamic morphology and function.  Post-translational modifications (PTMs), which include protein ubiquitination,  are critically involved in animal and yeast mitochondrial dynamics. How PTMs  contribute to plant mitochondrial dynamics is just beginning to be elucidated,  and mitochondrial enzymes involved in ubiquitination have not been reported from  plants. In this study, we identified an Arabidopsis mitochondrial localized  ubiquitin protease, UBP27, through a screen that combined bioinformatics and  fluorescent fusion protein targeting analysis. We characterized UBP27 with  respect to its membrane topology and enzymatic activities, and analysed the  mitochondrial morphological changes in UBP27T-DNA insertion mutants and  overexpression lines. We have shown that UBP27 is embedded in the mitochondrial  outer membrane with an Nin -Cout orientation and possesses ubiquitin protease  activities in vitro. UBP27 demonstrates similar sub-cellular localization, domain  structure, membrane topology and enzymatic activities with two mitochondrial  deubiquitinases, yeast ScUBP16 and human HsUSP30, which indicated that these  proteins are functional orthologues in eukaryotes. Although loss-of-function  mutants of UBP27 do not show obvious phenotypes in plant growth and mitochondrial  morphology, UBP27 overexpression can change mitochondrial morphology from rod to  spherical shape and reduce the mitochondrial association of dynamin-related  protein 3 (DRP3) proteins, large GTPases that serve as the main mitochondrial  fission factors. Thus, our study has uncovered a plant ubiquitin protease that  plays a role in mitochondrial morphogenesis possibly through modulation of the  function of organelle division proteins.', '2014 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12532', 'Hu']

UBP27: !localizes to! mitochondria 
UBP27: !possesses! ubiquitin protease activities 
UBP27: !interacts with! DRP3 proteins 
UBP27: !enhances! mitochondrial morphogenesis 
UBP27: !represses! mitochondrial association of DRP3 proteins