['24714165', 'Pathogens that rely upon multiple hosts to complete their life cycles often  modify behavior and development of these hosts to coerce them into improving  pathogen fitness. However, few studies describe mechanisms underlying host  coercion. In this study, we elucidate the mechanism by which an  insect-transmitted pathogen of plants alters floral development to convert  flowers into vegetative tissues. We find that phytoplasma produce a novel  effector protein (SAP54) that interacts with members of the MADS-domain  transcription factor (MTF) family, including key regulators SEPALLATA3 and  APETALA1, that occupy central positions in the regulation of floral development.  SAP54 mediates degradation of MTFs by interacting with proteins of the RADIATION  SENSITIVE23 (RAD23) family, eukaryotic proteins that shuttle substrates to the  proteasome. Arabidopsis rad23 mutants do not show conversion of flowers into  leaf-like tissues in the presence of SAP54 and during phytoplasma infection,  emphasizing the importance of RAD23 to the activity of SAP54. Remarkably, plants  with SAP54-induced leaf-like flowers are more attractive for colonization by  phytoplasma leafhopper vectors and this colonization preference is dependent on  RAD23. An effector that targets and suppresses flowering while simultaneously  promoting insect herbivore colonization is unprecedented. Moreover, RAD23  proteins have, to our knowledge, no known roles in flower development, nor plant  defence mechanisms against insects. Thus SAP54 generates a short circuit between  two key pathways of the host to alter development, resulting in sterile plants,  and promotes attractiveness of these plants to leafhopper vectors helping the  obligate phytoplasmas reproduce and propagate (zombie plants).', '2014 Apr', 'PLoS Biol', '10.1371/journal.pbio.1001835', 'Hogenhout']

SAP54: !interacts with! MTFs 
SAP54: !interacts with! RAD23 
RAD23: !mediates degradation of! MTFs 
RAD23: !promotes attractiveness of! leafhopper vectors 
MTFs: !occupy central positions in! floral development 
SEPALLATA3: !regulates! floral development 
APETALA1: !regulates! floral development