In northern forests, belowground sequestration of nitrogen (N) in complex organic pools restricts nutrient availability to plants. Oxidative extracellular enzymes produced by ectomycorrhizal fungi may aid plant N acquisition by providing access to N in macromolecular complexes. We test the hypotheses that ectomycorrhizal Cortinarius species produce Mn-dependent peroxidases, and that the activity of these enzymes declines at elevated concentrations of inorganic N. In a boreal pine forest and a sub-arctic birch forest, Cortinarius DNA was assessed by 454-sequencing of ITS amplicons and related to Mn-peroxidase activity in humus samples with- and without previous N amendment. Transcription of Cortinarius Mn-peroxidase genes was investigated in field samples. Phylogenetic analyses of Cortinarius peroxidase amplicons and genome sequences were performed. We found a significant co-localization of high peroxidase activity and DNA from Cortinarius species. Peroxidase activity was reduced by high ammonium concentrations. Amplification of mRNA sequences indicated transcription of Cortinarius Mn-peroxidase genes under field conditions. The Cortinarius glaucopus genome encodes 11 peroxidases - a number comparable to many white-rot wood decomposers. These results support the hypothesis that some ectomycorrhizal fungi--Cortinarius species in particular--may play an important role in decomposition of complex organic matter, linked to their mobilization of organically bound N.

Cortinarius species: !produce! Mn-dependent peroxidases 
Cortinarius species: !co-localize with! high peroxidase activity 
Mn-dependent peroxidases: !decline at! elevated concentrations of inorganic N 
Cortinarius DNA: !amplified by! 454-sequencing 
Cortinarius mRNA sequences: !transcribed under! field conditions 
Cortinarius glaucopus genome: !encodes! 11 peroxidases 
Ectomycorrhizal fungi: !play important role in! decomposition of complex organic matter 
Ectomycorrhizal fungi: !mobilize! organically bound N