In delphiniums (Delphinium grandiflorum), blue flowers are produced by the presence of 7-polyacylated anthocyanins. The polyacyl moiety is composed of glucose and p-hydroxybenzoic acid (pHBA). The 7-polyacylation of anthocyanin has been shown to be catalysed by two different enzymes, a glucosyltransferase and an acyltransferase; both enzymes utilize p-hydroxybenzoyl-glucose (pHBG) as a bi-functional (Zwitter) donor. To date, however, the enzyme that synthesizes pHBG and the gene that encodes it have not been elucidated. Here, five delphinium cultivars were investigated and found to show reduced or undetectable 7-polyacylation activity; these cultivars synthesized delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside (Dp3R) to produce mauve sepals. One cultivar showed a deficiency for the acyl-glucose-dependent anthocyanin 7-O-glucosyltransferase (AA7GT) necessary for mediating the first step of 7-polyacylation. The other four cultivars showed both AA7GT activity and DgAA7GT expression; nevertheless, pHBG accumulation was significantly reduced compared with wild-type cultivars, whereas p-glucosyl-oxybenzoic acid (pGBA) was accumulated. Three candidate cDNAs encoding a UDP-glucose-dependent pHBA glucosyltransferase (pHBAGT) were identified. A phylogenetic analysis of DgpHBAGT amino acid sequences showed a close relationship with UGTs that act in acyl-glucose synthesis in other plant species. Recombinant DgpHBAGT protein synthesized pHBG and had a high preference for pHBA in vitro. Mutant cultivars accumulating pGBA had very low expression of DgpHBAGT, whereas expression during the development of sepals and tissues in a wild cultivar showed a close correlation to the level of accumulation of pHBG. These results support the conclusion that DgpHBAGT is responsible for in vivo synthesis of pHBG in delphiniums.

7-polyacylated anthocyanins: !produce! blue flowers 
glucosyltransferase/acyltransferase: !utilize! p-hydroxybenzoyl-glucose 
enzyme/gene: !synthesizes/encodes! p-hydroxybenzoyl-glucose 
delphinidin 3-O-rutinoside: !produces! mauve sepals 
acyl-glucose-dependent anthocyanin 7-O-glucosyltransferase: !deficient in! some cultivars 
UDP-glucose-dependent pHBA glucosyltransferase: !identified! as candidate cDNAs 
DgpHBAGT: !synthesizes! pHBG 
DgpHBAGT: !correlates with! pHBG accumulation