There are no earlier reports with successful isolation of plasma membranes from lignin-forming tissues of conifers. A method to isolate cellular membranes from extracellular lignin-producing tissue-cultured cells and developing xylem of Norway spruce was optimized. Modifications to the homogenization buffer were needed to obtain membranes from these phenolics-rich tissues. Membranes were separated by aqueous polymer two-phase partitioning. Chlorophyll a determination, marker enzyme assays and western blot analyses using antibodies for each membrane type showed that mitochondrial, chloroplastic and to a certain extent also ER and Golgi membranes were efficiently diminished from the upper phase, but tonoplast and plasma membranes distributed evenly between the upper and lower phases. Redox enzymes present in the partially purified membrane fractions were assayed in order to reveal the origin of H(2)O(2) needed for lignification. The membranes of spruce contained enzymes able to generate superoxide in the presence of NAD(P)H. Besides members of the flavodoxin and flavodoxin-like family proteins, cytochrome b5, cytochrome P450 and several stress responsive proteins were identified by nitroblue tetrazolium staining of isoelectric focusing gels and by mass spectrometry. Naphthoquinones juglone and menadione increased superoxide production in activity-stained gels. Some juglone-activated enzymes were preferentially using NADH. With NADH, menadione activated only some of the enzymes that juglone did, whereas with NADPH the activation patterns were identical. Duroquinone, a benzoquinone, did not affect superoxide production. Superoxide dismutase, ascorbate peroxidase, catalase and an acidic class III peroxidase isoenzyme were detected in partially purified spruce membranes. The possible locations and functions of these enzymes are discussed.

Gene: !affects! Superoxide production 
Gene: !synthesizes! H2O2 
Gene: !activates! Juglone 
Gene: !activates! Menadione 
Gene: !localizes to! Mitochondrial membranes 
Gene: !localizes to! Chloroplastic membranes 
Gene: !localizes to! ER and Golgi membranes 
Gene: !localizes to! Tonoplast and plasma membranes 
Gene: !enhances! Lignification 
Gene: !represses! Duroquinone