The nematode Pratylenchus neglectus has a wide host range and is able to feed on the root systems of cereals, oilseeds, grain and pasture legumes. Under the Mediterranean low rainfall environments of Australia, annual Medicago pasture legumes are used in rotation with cereals to fix atmospheric nitrogen and improve soil parameters. Considerable efforts are being made in breeding programs to improve resistance and tolerance to Pratylenchus neglectus in the major crops wheat and barley, which makes it vital to develop appropriate selection tools in medics. A strong source of tolerance to root damage by the root lesion nematode (RLN) Pratylenchus neglectus had previously been identified in line RH-1 (strand medic, M. littoralis). Using RH-1, we have developed a single seed descent (SSD) population of 138 lines by crossing it to the intolerant cultivar Herald. After inoculation, RLN-associated root damage clearly segregated in the population. Genetic analysis was performed by constructing a genetic map using simple sequence repeat (SSR) and gene-based SNP markers. A highly significant quantitative trait locus (QTL), QPnTolMl.1, was identified explaining 49% of the phenotypic variation in the SSD population. All SSRs and gene-based markers in the QTL region were derived from chromosome 1 of the sequenced genome of the closely related species M. truncatula. Gene-based markers were validated in advanced breeding lines derived from the RH-1 parent and also a second RLN tolerance source, RH-2 (M. truncatula ssp. tricycla). Comparative analysis to sequenced legume genomes showed that the physical QTL interval exists as a synteny block in Lotus japonicus, common bean, soybean and chickpea. Furthermore, using the sequenced genome information of M. truncatula, the QTL interval contains 55 genes out of which five are discussed as potential candidate genes responsible for the mapped tolerance. The closely linked set of SNP-based PCR markers is directly applicable to select for two different sources of RLN tolerance in breeding programs. Moreover, genome sequence information has allowed proposing candidate genes for further functional analysis and nominates QPnTolMl.1 as a target locus for RLN tolerance in economically important grain legumes, e.g. chickpea.

QTL: !explains! 49% phenotypic variation 
SSR/SNP markers: !derived from! chromosome 1 
SNP-based PCR markers: !select for! 2 RLN tolerance sources 
55 genes: !contained in! QTL interval 
5 genes: !potential candidates for! RLN tolerance