Although phosphatidic acid (PA) is structurally the simplest membrane phospholipid, it has been implicated in the regulation of many cellular events, including cytoskeletal dynamics, membrane trafficking and stress responses. Plant PA shows rapid turnover but the information about its spatio-temporal distribution in plant cells is missing. Here we demonstrate the use of a lipid biosensor that enables us to monitor PA dynamics in plant cells. The biosensor consists of a PA-binding domain of yeast SNARE Spo20p fused to fluorescent proteins. Live-cell imaging of PA dynamics in transiently transformed tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) pollen tubes was performed using confocal laser scanning microscopy. In growing pollen tubes, PA shows distinct annulus-like fluorescence pattern in the plasma membrane behind the extreme tip. Coexpression studies with markers for other plasmalemma signaling lipids phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and diacylglycerol revealed limited colocalization at the shoulders of the apex. PA distribution and concentrations show distinct responses to various lipid signaling inhibitors. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) analysis suggests high PA turnover in the plasma membrane. Our data show that a biosensor based on the Spo20p-PA binding domain is suitable for live-cell imaging of PA also in plant cells. In tobacco pollen tubes, distinct subapical PA maximum corroborates its involvement in the regulation of endocytosis and actin dynamics.

Phosphatidic acid: !shows rapid turnover in! Plant cells 
Biosensor: !consists of! Yeast SNARE Spo20p fused to fluorescent proteins 
Live-cell imaging: !reveals! Annulus-like fluorescence pattern in the plasma membrane 
Coexpression studies: !show limited colocalization with! Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and diacylglycerol 
Lipid signaling inhibitors: !affect! PA distribution and concentrations 
Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP): !suggests! High PA turnover in the plasma membrane 
Tobacco pollen tubes: !corroborate involvement of! PA in regulation of endocytosis and actin dynamics