['24774365', 'BACKGROUND: A large number of post-transcriptional modifications of transfer RNAs  (tRNAs) have been described in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. They are known to  influence their stability, turnover, and chemical/physical properties. A specific  subset of tRNAs contains a thiolated uridine residue at the wobble position to  improve the codon-anticodon interaction and translational accuracy. The proteins  involved in tRNA thiolation are reminiscent of prokaryotic sulfur transfer  reactions and of the ubiquitylation process in eukaryotes. In plants, some of the  proteins involved in this process have been identified and show a high degree of  homology to their non-plant equivalents. For other proteins, the identification  of the plant homologs is much less clear, due to the low conservation in protein  sequence. RESULTS: This manuscript describes the identification of CTU2, the  second CYTOPLASMIC THIOURIDYLASE protein of Arabidopsis thaliana. CTU2 is  essential for tRNA thiolation and interacts with ROL5, the previously identified  CTU1 homolog of Arabidopsis. CTU2 is ubiquitously expressed, yet its activity  seems to be particularly important in root tissue. A ctu2 knock-out mutant shows  an alteration in root development. CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of CTU2 adds a new  component to the so far characterized protein network involved in tRNA thiolation  in Arabidopsis. CTU2 is essential for tRNA thiolation as a ctu2 mutant fails to  perform this tRNA modification. The identified Arabidopsis CTU2 is the first  CTU2-type protein from plants to be experimentally verified, which is important  considering the limited conservation of these proteins between plant and  non-plant species. Based on the Arabidopsis protein sequence, CTU2-type proteins  of other plant species can now be readily identified.', '2014 Apr 28', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/1471-2229-14-109', 'Ringli']

CTU2: !essential for! tRNA thiolation 
CTU2: !interacts with! ROL5 
CTU2: !ubiquitously expressed in! root tissue 
ctu2 mutant: !alters! root development