Large-scale modeling of plant metabolism provides the possibility to compare and contrast different cellular and environmental scenarios with the ultimate aim of identifying the components underlying the respective plant behavior. The existing models of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) are top-down assembled, whereby the starting point is the annotated genome, in particular, the metabolic genes. Hence, dead-end metabolites and blocked reactions can arise that are subsequently addressed by using gap-filling algorithms in combination with species-unspecific genes. Here, we present a bottom-up-assembled, large-scale model that relies solely on Arabidopsis-specific annotations and results in the inclusion of only manually curated reactions. While the existing models are largely condition unspecific by employing a single biomass reaction, we provide three biomass compositions that pertain to realistic and frequently examined scenarios: carbon-limiting, nitrogen-limiting, and optimal growth conditions. The comparative analysis indicates that the proposed Arabidopsis core model exhibits comparable efficiency in carbon utilization and flexibility to the existing network alternatives. Moreover, the model is utilized to quantify the energy demand of amino acid and enzyme de novo synthesis in photoautotrophic growth conditions. Illustrated by the case of the most abundant protein in the world, Rubisco, we determine its synthesis cost in terms of ATP requirements. This, in turn, allows us to explore the tradeoff between protein synthesis and growth in Arabidopsis. Altogether, the model provides a solid basis for completely species-specific integration of high-throughput data, such as gene expression levels, and for condition-specific investigations of in silico metabolic engineering strategies.

Genome: !annotates! Metabolic genes
Gap-filling algorithms: !combine with! Species-unspecific genes
Model: !relies on! Arabidopsis-specific annotations
Biomass compositions: !pertain to! Carbon-limiting, nitrogen-limiting, and optimal growth conditions
Model: !exhibits! Comparable efficiency in carbon utilization
Model: !utilized to! Quantify energy demand of amino acid and enzyme de novo synthesis
Rubisco: !determines its synthesis cost in terms of! ATP requirements
Model: !provides basis for! Integration of high-throughput data