Autophagy is a fundamental process in the plant life story, playing a key role in immunity, senescence, nutrient recycling, and adaptation to the environment. Transcriptomics and metabolomics of the rosette leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana autophagy mutants (atg) show that autophagy is essential for cell homeostasis and stress responses and that several metabolic pathways are affected. Depletion of hexoses, quercetins, and anthocyanins parallel the overaccumulation of several amino acids and related compounds, such as glutamate, methionine, glutathione, pipecolate, and 2-aminoadipate. Transcriptomic data show that the pathways for glutathione, methionine, raffinose, galacturonate, and anthocyanin are perturbed. Anthocyanin depletion in atg mutants, which was previously reported as a possible defect in flavonoid trafficking to the vacuole, appears due to the downregulation of the master genes encoding the enzymes and regulatory proteins involved in flavonoid biosynthesis. Overexpression of the PRODUCTION OF ANTHOCYANIN PIGMENT1 transcription factor restores anthocyanin accumulation in vacuoles of atg mutants. Transcriptome analyses reveal connections between autophagy and (1) salicylic acid biosynthesis and response, (2) cytokinin perception, (3) oxidative stress and plant defense, and possible interactions between autophagy and the COP9 signalosome machinery. The metabolic and transcriptomic signatures identified for the autophagy mutants are discussed and show consistencies with the observed phenotypes.

Gene: !affects! Autophagy 
Gene: !synthesizes! Hexoses 
Gene: !synthesizes! Quercetins 
Gene: !synthesizes! Anthocyanins 
Gene: !enhances! Glutamate 
Gene: !enhances! Methionine 
Gene: !enhances! Glutathione 
Gene: !enhances! Pipecolate 
Gene: !enhances! 2-Aminoadipate 
Gene: !represses! Raffinose 
Gene: !represses! Galacturonate 
Gene: !regulates! Salicylic Acid Biosynthesis 
Gene: !regulates! Cytokinin Perception 
Gene: !regulates! Oxidative Stress 
Gene: !interacts with! COP9 Signalosome Machinery