A lack of understanding of host-by-pathogen relations can hinder the success of breeding for resistance to a major disease. Fungal strain pathogenicity has to be understood from the virulence it can cause on susceptible genotypes and host resistance indicates which genotypes have resistance genes. Where the two worlds meet lies the place where researchers match the prevalent pathogen in the area of production with resistant varieties. This paper uses ergosterol concentration analysis as a measure of fungal biomass accumulation to assess levels of resistance in host genotypes. 11 sorghum genotypes were inoculated with 5 strains of fungi that are known to be associated with grain mold disease of sorghum. The resulting interaction was analyzed using GGE Biplot analysis and Cluster analysis which showed that none of the genotypes were resistant to Phoma sorghina and Curvularia lunata. Three genotypes were resistant to Fusarium thapsinum. One fungal strain (Alternaria alternata) does not contribute any significant damage in the grain mold disease. Fusarium graminearum causes very little grain mold disease. There was no correlation between the fungal strains. Visual scoring did not correlate with ergosterol accumulation. Resistance to grain mold in sorghum is shown to be due to vertical or specific resistance genes. Sorghum breeders should, therefore, identify predominant fungal strains in their localities and then locate and tag these resistance genes in their germplasm and pyramid them in commercial varieties.

Fungal strain: !causes! Virulence 
Host genotype: !indicates! Resistance genes 
GGE Biplot analysis: !shows! No resistance to Phoma sorghina and Curvularia lunata 
GGE Biplot analysis: !shows! Resistance to Fusarium thapsinum 
Alternaria alternata: !does not contribute! Significant damage 
Fusarium graminearum: !causes! Little grain mold disease 
Fungal strains: !no correlation! Between them 
Visual scoring: !does not correlate with! Ergosterol accumulation 
Resistance to grain mold: !due to! Vertical or specific resistance genes