Rice plants employ two strategies to cope with Cr toxicity: immobilizing Cr ions into cell walls to reduce its translocation and activating antioxidant defense to mitigate Cr-induced oxidative stress. The investigation aimed at understanding the physiological and proteomic responses of rice seedlings to hexavalent chromium (Cr(6+)) stress was conducted using two rice genotypes, which differ in Cr tolerance and accumulation. Cr toxicity (200 µM) heavily increased the accumulation of H2O2 and [Formula: see text], enhanced lipid peroxidation, decreased cell viability and consequently inhibited rice plant growth. Proteomic analyses suggest that the response of rice proteome to Cr stress is genotype- and Cr dosage-dependent and tissue specific. Sixty-four proteins, which show more than fourfold difference under either two Cr levels, have been successfully identified. They are involved in a range of cellular processes, including cell wall synthesis, energy production, primary metabolism, electron transport and detoxification. Two proteins related to cell wall structure, NAD-dependent epimerase/dehydratase and reversibly glycosylated polypeptide were greatly up-regulated by Cr stress. Their enhancements coupled with callose accumulation by Cr suggest that cell wall is an important barrier for rice plants to resist Cr stress. Some enzymes involved in antioxidant defense, such as ferredoxin-NADP reductase, NADP-isocitrate dehydrogenase, glyoxalase I (Gly I) and glutamine synthetase 1 (GS1) have also been identified in response to Cr stress. However, they were only detected in Cr-tolerant genotype, indicating the genotypic difference in the capacity of activating the defense system to fight against Cr-induced oxidative stress. Overall, two strategies in coping with Cr stress in rice plants can be hypothesized: (i) immobilizing Cr ions into cell walls to reduce its translocation and (ii) activating antioxidant defense to mitigate Cr-induced oxidative stress.

Cr: !induces! oxidative stress
rice plants: !employ two strategies to cope with! Cr toxicity 
cell wall: !serves as barrier to! Cr
NAD-dependent epimerase/dehydratase: !greatly up-regulated by! Cr
Ferredoxin-NADP reductase: !involved in! antioxidant defense
NADP-isocitrate dehydrogenase: !involved in! antioxidant defense
Glyoxalase I (Gly I): !involved in! antioxidant defense
Glutamine synthetase 1 (GS1): !involved in! antioxidant defense