Over 200 imprinted genes in rice endosperm are known, but the mechanisms modulating their parental allele-specific expression are poorly understood. Here we use three imprinted genes, OsYUCCA11, yellow2-like and ubiquitin hydrolase, to show that differential DNA methylation and tri-methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3 ) in the promoter and/or gene body influences allele-specific expression or the site of transcript initiation. Paternal expression of OsYUCCA11 required DNA methylation in the gene body whereas the gene body of the silenced maternal allele was hypomethylated and marked with H3K27me3 . These differential markings mirror those proposed to modulate paternal expression of two Arabidopsis genes, PHERES1 and a YUCCA homolog, indicating conservation of imprinting mechanisms. At yellow2-like, DNA hypomethylation in the upstream flanking region resulted in maternal transcripts that were longer than paternal transcripts; the maternal transcript initiation site was marked by DNA methylation in the paternal allele, and transcription initiated ~700 bp downstream. The paternal allele of an ubiquitin hydrolase gene exhibited gene body DNA methylation and produced full-length transcripts, while the maternal allele was hypomethylated in the 5' gene body and transcripts initiated from a downstream promoter. Inhibition of DNA methylation by 5-azacytidine or zebularine activated the long transcripts from yellow2-like and enhanced expression of the short transcripts from the ubiquitin hydrolase in seedlings, indicating that DNA methylation prevents transcript initiation from cryptic promoters. These observations suggest a paradigm whereby maternal genome hypomethylation is associated with the production of distinct transcripts, potentially diversifying the gene products from the two alleles.

OsYUCCA11: !requires! DNA methylation 
yellow2-like: !initiates from! downstream promoter 
ubiquitin hydrolase: !inhibited by! DNA methylation 
DNA methylation: !prevents! transcript initiation 
maternal genome: !hypomethylated! associated with distinct transcripts