['24821957', 'The gain-of-function mutant edt1 shows significantly enhanced drought tolerance  and a well-developed root system including deeper primary roots and more lateral  roots. To explore the molecular mechanisms underlying the improved root system of  edt1, we performed transcriptome comparison between the wild-type and edt1 roots.  One of the interesting findings from the analysis was that several gene families  of cell-wall-loosening proteins were upregulated in the mutant roots, including  expansins, extensins, xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolases (XTHs),  pectin-related enzymes, and cellulases. Most of these genes contain HD-binding  cis-elements in their promoters predominantly with the TTTAATTT sequence, which  can be bound by HDG11 in vitro and in vivo. The coordinated expression of these  gene families overlaps fast root elongation. Furthermore, overexpression of  AtEXPA5, which was dramatically upregulated in edt1, resulted in longer primary  roots because cells were more extended longitudinally. When combined by crossing  the AtEXPA5-overexpression lines with one pectin methylesterase inhibitor family  protein (PMEI) gene (At5g62360)- or one cellulase (CEL) gene  (At2g32990)-overexpression lines, the primary roots of the progeny even exceeded  both parents in length. Our results demonstrate that HDG11 directly upregulates  cell-wall-loosening protein genes, which is correlated with altered root system  architecture, and confirm that cell-wall-loosening proteins play important roles  in coordinating cell-wall extensibility with root development. The results of  transgene experiments showed that expansin works together with PMEI and CEL to  generate synergistic effects on primary root elongation, suggesting that  different cell-wall-loosening protein families may function in combination to  generate optimal effects on root extensibility.', '2014 Aug', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/eru202', 'Xiang']

HDG11: !upregulates! cell-wall-loosening protein genes
cell-wall-loosening proteins: !coordinate with! root development
expansin: !works together with! PMEI and CEL
PMEI and CEL: !generate synergistic effects on! primary root elongation