Plant growth is continuous and modular, a combination that allows morphogenesis by cell division and elongation and serves to facilitate adaptation to changing environments. The pleiotropic phenotypes of the harlequin (hlq) mutant, isolated on the basis of ectopic expression of the abscisic acid (ABA)- and auxin-inducible proDc3:GUS reporter gene, were previously characterized. Mutants are skotomorphogenic, have deformed and collapsed epidermal cells which accumulate callose and starch, cell walls abundant in pectins and cell wall proteins, and abnormal and reduced root hairs and leaf trichomes. hlq and two additional alleles that vary in their phenotypic severity of starch accumulation in the light and dark have been isolated, and it is shown that they are alleles of bin3/hyp6/rhl3/Topoisomerase6B. Mutants and inhibitors affecting the cell wall phenocopy several of the traits displayed in hlq. A microarray analysis was performed, and coordinated expression of physically adjacent pairs/sets of genes was observed in hlq, suggesting a direct effect on chromatin. Histones, WRKY and IAA/AUX transcription factors, aquaporins, and components of ubiquitin-E3-ligase-mediated proteolysis, and ABA or biotic stress response markers as well as proteins involved in cellular processes affecting carbon partitioning into secondary metabolites were also identified. A comparative analysis was performed of the hlq transcriptome with other previously published TopoVI mutant transcriptomes, namely bin3, bin5, and caa39 mutants, and limited concordance between data sets was found, suggesting indirect or genotype-specific effects. The results shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying the det/cop/fus-like pleiotropic phenotypes of hlq and support a broader role for TopoVI regulation of chromatin remodelling to mediate development in response to environmental and hormonal signals.

hlq: !displays! pleiotropic phenotypes 
bin3/hyp6/rhl3/Topoisomerase6B: !is allele of! hlq 
cell wall: !phenocopies! traits displayed in hlq 
microarray analysis: !reveals! coordinated expression of physically adjacent pairs/sets of genes 
WRKY and IAA/AUX transcription factors: !are identified! in hlq transcriptome 
aquaporins, ubiquitin-E3-ligase-mediated proteolysis, ABA or biotic stress response markers: !are identified! in hlq transcriptome 
proteins involved in cellular processes affecting carbon partitioning into secondary metabolites: !are identified! in hlq transcriptome 
hlq transcriptome: !compared to! bin3, bin5, caa39 mutants 
TopoVI: !regulates! chromatin remodelling