Callus cultures of rubber tree may serve as an efficient model to screen and study environmental factors and phytohormones that stimulate laticifer cell differentiation and improve latex yield. The number of laticifer cells in bark is one of the most important factors determining the biosynthesis and economic value of rubber trees (Hevea brasiliensis). The differentiation of laticifer cells in planta has been characterized, whereas laticifer-cell differentiation in callus cultures in vitro is largely unknown. In this study, we present molecular and physiological evidences for laticifer-cell differentiation in calli derived from rubber tree anthers. RT-PCR analysis showed that three key genes rubber elongation factor (REF), small rubber particle protein (SRPP), and cis-prenyl transferase (CPT) that are essential in latex biosynthesis in rubber tree bark also were transcribed in anther calli. Laticifer cell development in callus cultures was age-dependent; the cells began to appear at 58 days after initiation of culture, and the percentage of laticifer cells increased steadily with increasing callus age. Addition of 0-2 mg/L jasmonic acid (JA) to the media significantly promoted the differentiation of laticifer cells in callus cultures. However, JA concentrations higher than 3 mg/L were not optimum for laticifer cells differentiation; this result was not observed in previous in planta studies. Laticifer cells differentiated on media with pH 5.8-7.0, with an optimum of pH 6.2, whereas a higher pH inhibited differentiation. These results indicate that the anther-derived rubber tree callus may serve as a new and more efficient model to study environmental factors that influence laticifer cell differentiation, and may be useful for research on new technologies to improve latex yield, and to screen for commercially useful phytohormones.

REF: !synthesizes! latex
SRPP: !synthesizes! latex
CPT: !synthesizes! latex
anther calli: !differentiates! laticifer cells
JA: !promotes! laticifer cell differentiation
pH: !influences! laticifer cell differentiation