In their natural environment plants and algae are exposed to rapidly changing light conditions and light intensities. Illumination with high light intensities has the potential to overexcite the photosynthetic pigments and the electron transport chain and thus induce the production of toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS). To prevent damage by the action of ROS, plants and algae have developed a multitude of photoprotection mechanisms. One of the most important protection mechanisms is the dissipation of excessive excitation energy as heat in the light-harvesting complexes of the photosystems. This process requires a structural change of the photosynthetic antenna complexes that are normally optimized with regard to efficient light-harvesting. Enhanced heat dissipation in the antenna systems is accompanied by a strong quenching of the chlorophyll a fluorescence and has thus been termed non-photochemical quenching of chlorophyll a fluorescence, NPQ. The general importance of NPQ for the photoprotection of plants and algae is documented by its wide distribution in the plant kingdom. In the present review we will summarize the present day knowledge about NPQ in higher plants and different algal groups with a special focus on the molecular mechanisms that lead to the structural rearrangements of the antenna complexes and enhanced heat dissipation. We will present the newest models for NPQ in higher plants and diatoms and will compare the features of NPQ in different algae with those of NPQ in higher plants. In addition, we will briefly address evolutionary aspects of NPQ, i.e. how the requirements of NPQ have changed during the transition of plants from the aquatic habitat to the land environment. We will conclude with a presentation of open questions regarding the mechanistic basis of NPQ and suggestions for future experiments that may serve to obtain this missing information.

Light: !induces! Production of ROS
Photosystems: !dissipate! Excessive Excitation Energy
Chlorophyll a Fluorescence: !quenched by! NPQ
NPQ: !widely distributed in! Plant Kingdom
Molecular Mechanisms: !lead to! Structural Rearrangements of Antenna Complexes
Higher Plants: !compared with! Different Algal Groups
Evolutionary Aspects: !changed during! Transition from Aquatic to Land Environment