CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1 (COP1) is a RING/WD40 repeat-containing ubiquitin E3 ligase that is conserved from plants to humans. COP1 forms complexes with SUPPRESSOR OF PHYTOCHROME A (SPA) proteins, and these complexes degrade positively acting transcription factors in the dark to repress photomorphogenesis. Phytochrome-interacting basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors (PIFs) also repress photomorphogenesis in the dark. In response to light, the phytochrome family of sensory photoreceptors simultaneously inactivates COP1-SPA complexes and induces the rapid degradation of PIFs to promote photomorphogenesis. However, the functional relationship between PIFs and COP1-SPA complexes is still unknown. Here, we present genetic evidence that the pif and cop1/spa Arabidopsis thaliana mutants synergistically promote photomorphogenesis in the dark. LONG HYPOCOTYL5 (HY5) is stabilized in the cop1 pif1, spa123 pif1, and pif double, triple, and quadruple mutants in the dark. Moreover, the hy5 mutant suppresses the constitutive photomorphogenic phenotypes of the pifq mutant in the dark. PIF1 forms complexes with COP1, HY5, and SPA1 and enhances the substrate recruitment and autoubiquitylation and transubiquitylation activities of COP1. These data uncover a novel function of PIFs as the potential cofactors of COP1 and provide a genetic and biochemical model of how PIFs and COP1-SPA complexes synergistically repress photomorphogenesis in the dark.

COP1: !forms complexes with! SPA proteins
PIFs: !repress photomorphogenesis in the dark!
phytochrome family: !simultaneously inactivates COP1-SPA complexes and induces degradation of PIFs!
pif and cop1/spa mutants: !synergistically promote photomorphogenesis in the dark!
HY5: !stabilized in! cop1 pif1, spa123 pif1, and pif double, triple, and quadruple mutants
hy5 mutant: !suppresses! constitutive photomorphogenic phenotypes of pifq mutant
PIF1: !forms complexes with! COP1, HY5, and SPA1
PIFs: !enhances substrate recruitment and autoubiquitylation and transubiquitylation activities of COP1