The effects of blue and red light irradiation at night on abscisic acid (ABA) metabolism and anthocyanin synthesis were examined in grape berries. The expressions of VlMYBA1-2, VlMYBA2, UDP-glucose-flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase (VvUFGT), 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase (VvNCED1), and ABA 8'-hydroxylase (VvCYP707A1) were also investigated. Endogenous ABA, its metabolite phaseic acid (PA), and the expressions of VvNCED1 and VvCYP707A1 were highest in red light-emitting diode (LED)-treated skin. In contrast, anthocyanin concentrations were highest in blue LED-treated skin, followed by red LED treatment. However, the expressions of VlMYBA1-2, VlMYBA2, and VvUFGT did not necessarily coincide with anthocyanin concentrations. The quality of coloring may depend on the amount of malvidin-based anthocyanin, which increased toward harvest in blue and red LED-treated skin, unlike in untreated controls. An increase in sugars was also observed in blue and red LED-treated skin. These results suggest that blue LED irradiation at night may be effective in increasing anthocyanin and sugar concentrations in grape berries. However, there is evidence that another factor may influence anthocyanin concentrations in grape berry skin significantly more than endogenous ABA: ABA concentrations were highest in red LED-treated skin, which had lower anthocyanin concentrations than blue LED-treated skin.

VlMYBA1-2: !expresses in! red and blue LED-treated skin
VlMYBA2: !expresses in! red and blue LED-treated skin
UDP-glucose-flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase (VvUFGT): !expresses in! red and blue LED-treated skin
9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase (VvNCED1): !expresses in! red LED-treated skin
ABA 8'-hydroxylase (VvCYP707A1): !expresses in! red LED-treated skin
ABA: !highest in! red LED-treated skin
PA: !highest in! red LED-treated skin
anthocyanin: !highest in! blue LED-treated skin
malvidin-based anthocyanin: !increases in! blue and red LED-treated skin
sugars: !increases in! blue and red LED-treated skin