Fruits of angiosperms can be divided into dry and fleshy fruits, depending on their dispersal strategies. Despite their apparently different developmental programmes, researchers have attempted to compare dry and fleshy fruits to establish analogies of the distinct biochemical and physiological processes that occur. But what are the common and specific phenomena in both biological strategies? Is valve dehiscence and senescence of dry fruits comparable to final ripening of fleshy fruits, when seeds become mature and fruits are competent for seed dispersal, or to over-ripening when advanced senescence occurs? We briefly review current knowledge on dry and fleshy fruit development, which has been extensively reported recently, and is the topic of this special issue. We compare the processes taking place in Arabidopsis (dry) and tomato (fleshy) fruit during final development steps using transcriptome data to establish possible analogies. Interestingly, the transcriptomic programme of Arabidopsis silique shares little similarity in gene number to tomato fruit ripening or over-ripening. In contrast, the biological processes carried out by these common genes from ripening and over-ripening programmes are similar, as most biological processes are shared during both programmes. On the other hand, several biological terms are specific of Arabidopsis and tomato ripening, including senescence, but little or no specific processes occur during Arabidopsis and tomato over-ripening. These suggest a closer analogy between silique senescence and ripening than over-ripening, but a major common biological programme between Arabidopsis silique senescence and the last steps of tomato development, irrespective of its distinction between ripening and over-ripening.

Arabidopsis: !shares little similarity in gene number with! Tomato
Arabidopsis: !shares biological processes with! Tomato ripening/over-ripening
Arabidopsis: !has specific biological terms with! Tomato ripening
Arabidopsis: !has closer analogy with! Tomato ripening than over-ripening