Anthocyanidin reductase (ANR) is an NADPH-/NADH-dependent enzyme that transfers two hydrides to anthocyanidins to produce three types of isomeric flavan-3-ols. This reductase forms the ANR pathway toward the biosynthesis of proanthocyanidins (PAs, which are also called condensed tannins). Here, we report cloning and functional characterization of an ANR (called VbANR) homolog from the leaves of Vitis bellula, a newly developed grape crop in southern China. The open reading frame (ORF) of VbANR is 1,017 bp in length and encodes 339 amino acids. A phylogenetic analysis and an alignment using 17 sequences revealed that VbANR is approximately 99.9 % identical to the ANR homolog from Vitis vinifera. The VbANR ORF is fused to the Trx gene containing a His-tag in the pET32a(+) vector to obtain a pET32a(+)-VbANR construct for expressing the recombinant VbANR. In vitro enzyme assays show that VbANR converts cyanidin, delphinidin, and pelargonidin to their corresponding flavan-3-ols. Enzymatic products include 2S,3R-trans- and 2R,3R-cis-flavan-3-ols isomers, such as (-)-catechin and (-)-epicatechin. In addition, the third compound that is observed from the enzymatic products is most likely a 2S,3S-cis-flavan-3-ol. To analyze the kinetics and optimize pH and temperature values, a UV spectrometry method was developed to quantify the concentrations of total enzymatic products. The optimum pH and temperature values are 4.0 and 40 °C, respectively. The K m , K cat, V max, and K cat/K m values for pelargonidin and delphinidin were similar. In comparison, VbANR exhibits a slightly lower affinity to cyanidin. VbANR uses both NADPH and NADH but prefers to employ NADPH. GFP fusion and confocal microscopy analyses revealed the cytosolic localization of VbANR. The overexpression of VbANR in ban mutants reconstructed the biosynthetic pathway of PAs in the seed coat. These data demonstrate that VbANR forms the ANR pathway, leading to the formation of three types of isomeric flavan-3-ols and PAs in the leaves of V. bellula.

VbANR: !converts! cyanidin, delphinidin, and pelargonidin 
VbANR: !localizes to! cytosol 
VbANR: !prefers! NADPH 
VbANR: !enhances! biosynthesis of PAs 
VbANR: !interacts with! Trx gene