Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi form a symbiotic association with several plant species. An arbuscule, a finely branched structure of AM fungi, is formed in root cells and plays essential roles in resource exchange. Because arbuscules are ephemeral, host cells containing collapsed arbuscules can be recolonized, and a wide region of roots can be continuously colonized by AM fungi, suggesting that repetitive recolonization in root cells is required for continuous mycorrhization. However, recolonization frequency has not been quantified because of the lack of appropriate markers for visualization of the cellular processes after arbuscule collapse; therefore, the nature of the colonization sequence remains uncertain. Here we observed that a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged secretory carrier membrane protein (SCAMP) of rice was expressed even in cells with collapsed arbuscules, allowing live imaging coupled with GFP-SCAMP to evaluate the colonization and recolonization sequences. The average lifetime of intact arbuscules was 1-2 d. Cells with collapsed arbuscules were rarely recolonized and formed a new arbuscule during the observation period of 5 d, whereas de novo colonization occurred even in close proximity to cells containing collapsed arbuscules and contributed to the expansion of the colonized region. Colonization spread into an uncolonized region of roots but sparsely into a previously colonized region having no metabolically active arbuscule but several intercellular hyphae. Therefore, we propose that a previously colonized region tends to be intolerant to new colonization in rice roots. Our observations highlight the overlooked negative impact of the degeneration stage of arbuscules in the colonization sequence.

Arbuscule: !forms! Symbiotic Association 
AM Fungi: !colonizes! Root Cells 
GFP-SCAMP: !expresses in! Cells with Collapsed Arbuscules 
Arbuscule: !lasts! 1-2 Days 
Cells with Collapsed Arbuscules: !rarely recolonized! 
De Novo Colonization: !occurs in! Close Proximity to Cells with Collapsed Arbuscules 
Colonization: !spreads into! Uncolonized Region of Roots 
Previously Colonized Region: !tends to be intolerant to! New Colonization