ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) is a key allosteric enzyme in plant starch biosynthesis. Plant AGPase is a heterotetrameric enzyme that consists of large (LS) and small subunits (SS), which are encoded by two different genes. Computational and experimental studies have revealed that the heterotetrameric assembly of AGPase is thermodynamically weak. Modeling studies followed by the mutagenesis of the LS of the potato AGPase identified a heterotetramer-deficient mutant, LS(R88A). To enhance heterotetrameric assembly, LS(R88A) cDNA was subjected to error-prone PCR, and second-site revertants were identified according to their ability to restore glycogen accumulation, as assessed with iodine staining. Selected mutations were introduced into the wild-type (WT) LS and co-expressed with the WT SS in Escherichia coli glgC(-). The biochemical characterization of revertants revealed that LS(I90V)SS(WT), LS(Y378C)SS(WT) and LS(D410G)SS(WT) mutants displayed enhanced heterotetrameric assembly with the WT SS. Among these mutants, LS(Y378C)SS(WT) AGPase displayed increased heat stability compared with the WT enzyme. Kinetic characterization of the mutants indicated that the LS(I90V)SS(WT) and LS(Y378C)SS(WT) AGPases have comparable allosteric and kinetic properties. However, the LS(D410G)SS(WT) mutant exhibited altered allosteric properties of being less responsive and more sensitive to 3-phosphoglyceric acid activation and inorganic phosphate inhibition. This study not only enhances our understanding of the interaction between the SS and the LS of AGPase but also enables protein engineering to obtain enhanced assembled heat-stable variants of AGPase, which can be used for the improvement of plant yields.

LS: !encodes! SS 
LS(R88A): !mutagenized to! LS(I90V)SS(WT) 
LS(R88A): !mutagenized to! LS(Y378C)SS(WT) 
LS(R88A): !mutagenized to! LS(D410G)SS(WT) 
LS(I90V)SS(WT): !displays! enhanced heterotetrameric assembly 
LS(Y378C)SS(WT): !displays! increased heat stability 
LS(D410G)SS(WT): !exhibits! altered allosteric properties