['24914891', 'Eukaryotes have evolved complex defense pathways to combat invading pathogens.  Here, we investigated the role of the Arabidopsis thaliana heterogeneous nuclear  ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP-Q) LIF2 in the plant innate immune response. We show  that LIF2 loss-of-function in A. thaliana leads to changes in the basal  expression of the salicylic acid (SA)- and jasmonic acid (JA)- dependent defense  marker genes PR1 and PDF1.2, respectively. Whereas the expression of genes  involved in SA and JA biosynthesis and signaling was also affected in the lif2-1  mutant, no change in SA and JA hormonal contents was detected. In addition, the  composition of glucosinolates, a class of defense-related secondary metabolites,  was altered in the lif2-1 mutant in the absence of pathogen challenge. The lif2-1  mutant exhibited reduced susceptibility to the hemi-biotrophic pathogen  Pseudomonas syringae and the necrotrophic ascomycete Botrytis cinerea.  Furthermore, the lif2-1 sid2-2 double mutant was less susceptible than the wild  type to P. syringae infection, suggesting that the lif2 response to pathogens was  independent of SA accumulation. Together, our data suggest that lif2-1 exhibits a  basal primed defense state, resulting from complex deregulation of gene  expression, which leads to increased resistance to pathogens with various  infection strategies. Therefore, LIF2 may function as a suppressor of  cell-autonomous immunity. Similar to its human homolog, NSAP1/SYNCRIP, a  trans-acting factor involved in both cellular processes and the viral life cycle,  LIF2 may regulate the conflicting aspects of development and defense programs,  suggesting that a conserved evolutionary trade-off between growth and defense  pathways exists in eukaryotes.', '2014', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0099343', 'Gaudin']

LIF2: !affects! PR1 and PDF1.2 expression 
LIF2: !alters! glucosinolate composition 
LIF2: !increases! resistance to pathogens 
LIF2: !suppresses! cell-autonomous immunity 
NSAP1/SYNCRIP: !regulates! cellular processes 
NSAP1/SYNCRIP: !regulates! viral life cycle