Trunk phloem necrosis (TPN), a physiological bark disorder of the rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis), is a serious problem that affects the yield of natural rubber. The resultant bark dryness occurs in up to half of a plantation's trees in almost every rubber tree plantation region, causing a great annual loss of dry rubber for natural rubber production. Different types of injury and physical damage caused by mechanical activation as well as environmental stresses cause physiological bark disorder in tree. Due to the essential role of miR166, miR393 and miR167 in vascular development and abiotic stress response in diverse plant species, it was interesting to investigate the role of these miRNAs in rubber trees, particularly during development of a physiological bark disorder. In this study, the expression pattern of miR166, miR393 and miR167; and their target genes, HD-ZIP III; TIR1 and ARF8, respectively; was demonstrated in healthy tree and different TPN trees. Their existence and function in vivo was validated using RNA ligase-mediated 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends. Taken together, the results suggest a possible dual role of these three miRNAs in maintaining normal bark regeneration in healthy trees, coping with overtapping by affecting the wound healing system leading to abnormal bark regeneration in overtapped-TPN trees, and act as additional forces that enhance the attenuation of vascular development resulting in bark necrosis and cell death in the natural-TPN tree. This is the first study to address the molecular events of miRNAs involved in the physiological bark disorder TPN in rubber tree. Further study will open the possibility to better understanding of physiological and molecular perspectives during TPN development, and lead to improvement of monitoring the exploitation of rubber tree plantations.

miR166: !affects! vascular development 
miR393: !affects! wound healing system 
miR167: !enhances! attenuation of vascular development 
HD-ZIP III: !targeted by! miR166 
TIR1: !targeted by! miR393 
ARF8: !targeted by! miR167