['24982198', 'Many aspects of plant photomorphogenesis are controlled by the phytochrome (Phy)  family of bilin-containing photoreceptors that detect red and far-red light by  photointerconversion between a dark-adapted Pr state and a photoactivated Pfr  state. Whereas 3D models of prokaryotic Phys are available, models of their plant  counterparts have remained elusive. Here, we present the crystal structure of the  photosensing module (PSM) from a seed plant Phy in the Pr state using the PhyB  isoform from Arabidopsis thaliana. The PhyB PSM crystallized as a head-to-head  dimer with strong structural homology to its bacterial relatives, including a  5(Z)syn, 10(Z)syn, 15(Z)anti configuration of the phytochromobilin chromophore  buried within the cGMP phosphodiesterase/adenylyl cyclase/FhlA (GAF) domain, and  a well-ordered hairpin protruding from the Phy-specific domain toward the bilin  pocket. However, its Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS) domain, knot region, and helical spine  show distinct structural differences potentially important to signaling. Included  is an elongated helical spine, an extended beta-sheet connecting the GAF domain and  hairpin stem, and unique interactions between the region upstream of the PAS  domain knot and the bilin A and B pyrrole rings. Comparisons of this structure  with those from bacterial Phys combined with mutagenic studies support a toggle  model for photoconversion that engages multiple features within the PSM to  stabilize the Pr and Pfr end states after rotation of the D pyrrole ring. Taken  together, this Arabidopsis PhyB structure should enable molecular insights into  plant Phy signaling and provide an essential scaffold to redesign their  activities for agricultural benefit and as optogenetic reagents.', '2014 Jul 15', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1403096111', 'Vierstra']

Phy: !photointerconverts! Pr/Pfr 
PhyB: !crystallizes! head-to-head dimer 
GAF domain: !buries! phytochromobilin chromophore 
hairpin: !protrudes! Phy-specific domain 
Per/Arnt/Sim domain: !shows! distinct structural differences 
helical spine: !elongates! beta-sheet 
bilin A/B pyrrole rings: !uniquely interacts with! region upstream of PAS domain knot 
toggle model: !engages! multiple features within PSM 
structure: !enables! molecular insights into plant Phy signaling