['24994761', 'Sucrose (Suc)-phosphate synthase (SPS) catalyses one of the rate-limiting steps  in the synthesis of Suc in plants. The Arabidopsis genome contains four annotated  SPS genes which can be grouped into three different families (SPSA1, SPSA2, SPSB,  and SPSC). However, the functional significance of this multiplicity of SPS genes  is as yet only poorly understood. All four SPS isoforms show enzymatic activity  when expressed in yeast although there is variation in sensitivity towards  allosteric effectors. Promoter-reporter gene analyses and quantitative real-time  reverse transcription-PCR studies indicate that no two SPS genes have the same  expression pattern and that AtSPSA1 and AtSPSC represent the major isoforms  expressed in leaves. An spsa1 knock-out mutant showed a 44% decrease in leaf SPS  activity and a slight increase in leaf starch content at the end of the light  period as well as at the end of the dark period. The spsc null mutant displayed  reduced Suc contents towards the end of the photoperiod and a concomitant 25%  reduction in SPS activity. In contrast, an spsa1/spsc double mutant was strongly  impaired in growth and accumulated high levels of starch. This increase in starch  was probably not due to an increased partitioning of carbon into starch, but was  rather caused by an impaired starch mobilization during the night. Suc export  from excised petioles harvested from spsa1/spsc double mutant plants was  significantly reduced under illumination as well as during the dark period. It is  concluded that loss of the two major SPS isoforms in leaves limits Suc synthesis  without grossly changing carbon partitioning in favour of starch during the light  period but limits starch degradation during the dark period.', '2014 Oct', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/eru282', 'Bornke']

SPS: !catalyses! Suc synthesis 
AtSPSA1/C: !major isoforms expressed in leaves! 
spsa1/spsc double mutant: !impaired growth! 
spsa1/spsc double mutant: !increased starch accumulation! 
spsa1/spsc double mutant: !impaired starch mobilization during night! 
spsa1/spsc double mutant: !reduced Suc export from petioles!