Solar ultraviolet irradiation regulates anthocyanin synthesis in apple peel by modulating the production of reactive oxygen species via plasma membrane NADPH oxidase instead of other pathways. The synthesis of anthocyanin in apple peels is dependent upon solar irradiation. Using 3-mm commercial glass to attenuate solar UV-A and UV-B light, we confirmed that solar UV irradiation regulated anthocyanin synthesis in apple peels after exposing previously bagged fruit to sunlight. During sunlight exposure, UV attenuation did not affect the expression of MdHY5, MdCOP1, or MdCRY2, but significantly lowered plasma membrane NADPH oxidase activity and superoxide anion concentrations. UV attenuation also reduced the expression levels of MdMYB10, MdPAL, MdCHS, MdF3H, MdDFR, MdANS and MdUFGT1, UDP-glycose:flavonoid 3-O-glycosyltransferase (UFGT) activity, and local concentrations of anthocyanin and quercetin-3-glycoside. In contrast, exogenous application of hydrogen peroxide could enhance anthocyanin and quercetin-3-glycoside synthesis. Xanthophyll cycle pool size on a chlorophyll basis was higher but its de-epoxidation was lower under direct sunlight irradiation than that under UV-attenuating conditions. This suggests that reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced in chloroplast are not major contributors to anthocyanin synthesis regulation. Inhibition of plasma membrane NADPH oxidase activity lowered the production of ROS through this mechanism, significantly inhibited the synthesis of anthocyanin, and increased the total production of ROS in apple peel under direct sunlight irradiation, suggesting that ROS produced via plasma membrane NADPH oxidase regulates anthocyanin synthesis. In summary, solar UV irradiation regulated anthocyanin synthesis in apple peels by modulating the production of ROS via plasma membrane NADPH oxidase.

Solar UV: !regulates! Anthocyanin synthesis
MdHY5: !expresses! Under sunlight exposure
MdMYB10: !expresses! Under UV attenuation
Hydrogen peroxide: !enhances! Anthocyanin synthesis
Xanthophyll cycle pool size: !increases! Under direct sunlight irradiation
Plasma membrane NADPH oxidase activity: !inhibits! Anthocyanin synthesis
ROS: !produced by! Plasma membrane NADPH oxidase