Engineering C4 photosynthetic metabolism into C3 crops is regarded as a major strategy to increase crop productivity, and clarification of the evolutionary processes of C4 photosynthesis can help the better use of this strategy. Here, Eleocharis baldwinii, a species in which C4 photosynthesis can be induced from a C3-C4 state under either environmental or ABA treatments, was used to identify the major transcriptional modifications during the process from C3-C4 to C4. The transcriptomic comparison suggested that in addition to the major differences in C4 core pathway, the pathways of glycolysis, citrate acid metabolism and protein synthesis were dramatically modified during the inducement of C4 photosynthetic states. Transcripts of many transporters, including not only metabolite transporters but also ion transporters, were dramatically increased in C4 photosynthetic state. Many candidate regulatory genes with unidentified functions were differentially expressed in C3-C4 and C4 photosynthetic states. Finally, it was indicated that ABA, auxin signaling and DNA methylation play critical roles in the regulation of C4 photosynthesis. In summary, by studying the different photosynthetic states of the same species, this work provides the major transcriptional differences between C3-C4 and C4 photosynthesis, and many of the transcriptional differences are potentially related to C4 development and therefore are the potential targets for reverse genetics studies.

ABA: !regulates! C4 photosynthesis
auxin signaling: !regulates! C4 photosynthesis
DNA methylation: !regulates! C4 photosynthesis
C3-C4: !differs from! C4 photosynthetic state
glycolysis: !modified during! C4 induction
citrate acid metabolism: !modified during! C4 induction
protein synthesis: !modified during! C4 induction
metabolite transporters: !increased in! C4 photosynthetic state
ion transporters: !increased in! C4 photosynthetic state
candidate regulatory genes: !differentially expressed in! C3-C4 and C4 photosynthetic states