['25010425', 'Multivesicular bodies (MVBs) play essential roles in many cellular processes. The  MVB pathway requires reversible membrane association of the endosomal sorting  complexes required for transports (ESCRTs) for sustained protein trafficking.  Membrane dissociation of ESCRTs is catalyzed by the AAA ATPase SKD1, which is  stimulated by LYST-interacting protein 5 (LIP5). We report here that LIP5 is a  target of pathogen-responsive mitogen-activated protein kinases (MPKs) and plays  a critical role in plant basal resistance. Arabidopsis LIP5 interacts with MPK6  and MPK3 and is phosphorylated in vitro by activated MPK3 and MPK6 and in vivo  upon expression of MPK3/6-activating NtMEK2DD and pathogen infection. Disruption  of LIP5 has little effects on flg22-, salicylic acid-induced defense responses  but compromises basal resistance to Pseudomonas syringae. The critical role of  LIP5 in plant basal resistance is dependent on its ability to interact with SKD1.  Mutation of MPK phosphorylation sites in LIP5 does not affect interaction with  SKD1 but reduces the stability and compromises the ability to complement the lip5  mutant phenotypes. Using the membrane-selective FM1-43 dye and transmission  electron microscopy, we demonstrated that pathogen infection increases formation  of both intracellular MVBs and exosome-like paramural vesicles situated between  the plasma membrane and the cell wall in a largely LIP5-dependent manner. These  results indicate that the MVB pathway is positively regulated by  pathogen-responsive MPK3/6 through LIP5 phosphorylation and plays a critical role  in plant immune system likely through relocalization of defense-related  molecules.', '2014 Jul', 'PLoS Pathog', '10.1371/journal.ppat.1004243', 'Chen']

MPK3/6: !phosphorylates! LIP5
LIP5: !interacts with! SKD1
SKD1: !stimulated by! LIP5
Pathogen infection: !increases formation of! MVBs
Pathogen infection: !increases formation of! paramural vesicles
LIP5: !plays critical role in! plant basal resistance