['25020232', 'In plants, the ureide pathway is a metabolic route that converts the ring  nitrogen atoms of purine into ammonia via sequential enzymatic reactions, playing  an important role in nitrogen recovery. In the final step of the pathway,  (S)-ureidoglycolate amidohydrolase (UAH) catalyzes the conversion of  (S)-ureidoglycolate into glyoxylate and releases two molecules of ammonia as  by-products. UAH is homologous in structure and sequence with allantoate  amidohydrolase (AAH), an upstream enzyme in the pathway with a similar function  as that of an amidase but with a different substrate. Both enzymes exhibit strict  substrate specificity and catalyze reactions in a concerted manner, resulting in  purine degradation. Here, we report three crystal structures of Arabidopsis  thaliana UAH (bound with substrate, reaction intermediate, and product) and a  structure of Escherichia coli AAH complexed with allantoate. Structural analyses  of UAH revealed a distinct binding mode for each ligand in a bimetal reaction  center with the active site in a closed conformation. The ligand directly  participates in the coordination shell of two metal ions and is stabilized by the  surrounding residues. In contrast, AAH, which exhibits a substrate-binding site  similar to that of UAH, requires a larger active site due to the additional  ureido group in allantoate. Structural analyses and mutagenesis revealed that  both enzymes undergo an open-to-closed conformational transition in response to  ligand binding and that the active-site size and the interaction environment in  UAH and AAH are determinants of the substrate specificities of these two  structurally homologous enzymes.', '2014 Aug 26', 'J Mol Biol', '10.1016/j.jmb.2014.06.017', 'Rhee']

UAH: !catalyzes! conversion 
UAH: !binds with! substrate 
UAH: !stabilized by! surrounding residues 
AAH: !similar to! UAH 
AAH: !requires! larger active site 
AAH: !undergoes! open-to-closed conformational transition 
UAH/AAH: !determinants of! substrate specificities