['25036661', 'Chitin, an integral component of the fungal cell wall, is one of the best-studied  microbe-associated molecular patterns. Previous work identified a LysM  receptor-like kinase (LysM-RLK1/CERK1) as the primary chitin receptor in  Arabidopsis. In order to identify proteins that interact with CERK1, we conducted  a yeast two-hybrid screen using the intracellular kinase domain of CERK1 as the  bait. This screen identified 54 putative CERK1-interactors. Screening mutants  defective in 43 of these interacting proteins identified only two, a calmodulin  like protein (At3g10190) and a leucine-rich repeat receptor like kinase  (At3g14840), which differed in their response to pathogen challenge. In the  present work, we focused on characterizing the LRR-RLK gene where mutations  altered responses to chitin elicitation. This LRR-RLK was named LysM  RLK1-interacting kinase 1 (LIK1). The interaction between CERK1 and LIK1 was  confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation using protoplasts and transgenic plants. In  vitro experiments showed that LIK1 was directly phosphorylated by CERK1. In vivo  phosphorylation assays showed that Col-0 wild-type plants have more  phosphorylated LIK1 than cerk1 mutant plants, suggesting that LIK1 may be  directly phosphorylated by CERK1. Lik1 mutant plants showed an enhanced response  to both chitin and flagellin elicitors. In comparison to the wild-type plants,  lik1 mutant plants were more resistant to the hemibiotrophic pathogen Pseudomonas  syringae, but more susceptible to the necrotrophic pathogen Sclerotinia  sclerotiorum. Consistent with the enhanced susceptibility to necrotrophs, lik1  mutants showed reduced expression of genes involved in jasmonic acid and ethylene  signaling pathways. These data suggest that LIK1 directly interacts with CERK1  and regulates MAMP-triggered innate immunity.', '2014', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0102245', 'Stacey']

LysM-RLK1/CERK1: !interacts with! LIK1
LIK1: !phosphorylated by! CERK1
LIK1: !enhances! MAMP-triggered innate immunity
LIK1: !represses! jasmonic acid and ethylene signaling pathways