['25049361', "A seed's ability to properly germinate largely depends on its oxidative poise.  The level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  is controlled by a large gene network, which includes the gene coding for the  hydrogen peroxide-scavenging enzyme, cytosolic ASCORBATE PEROXIDASE6 (APX6), yet  its specific function has remained unknown. In this study, we show that seeds  lacking APX6 accumulate higher levels of ROS, exhibit increased oxidative damage,  and display reduced germination on soil under control conditions and that these  effects are further exacerbated under osmotic, salt, or heat stress. In addition,  ripening APX6-deficient seeds exposed to heat stress displayed reduced  germination vigor. This, together with the increased abundance of APX6 during  late stages of maturation, indicates that APX6 activity is critical for the  maturation-drying phase. Metabolic profiling revealed an altered activity of the  tricarboxylic acid cycle, changes in amino acid levels, and elevated metabolism  of abscisic acid (ABA) and auxin in drying apx6 mutant seeds. Further germination  assays showed an impaired response of the apx6 mutants to ABA and to  indole-3-acetic acid. Relative suppression of abscisic acid insensitive3 (ABI3)  and ABI5 expression, two of the major ABA signaling downstream components  controlling dormancy, suggested that an alternative signaling route inhibiting  germination was activated. Thus, our study uncovered a new role for APX6, in  protecting mature desiccating and germinating seeds from excessive oxidative  damage, and suggested that APX6 modulate the ROS signal cross talk with hormone  signals to properly execute the germination program in Arabidopsis.", '2014 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.245324', 'Miller']

APX6: !controls! ROS 
ROS: !affects! germination 
APX6: !regulates! tricarboxylic acid cycle 
APX6: !modulates! ROS signal cross talk 
ABA: !inhibits! germination 
ABI3/ABI5: !suppressed by! APX6