MGDG leads to a dimerization of isolated, monomeric PSII core complexes. SQDG and PG induce a detachment of CP43 from the PSII core, thereby disturbing the intrinsic PSII electron transport. The influence of the four thylakoid membrane lipids monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG), digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG), sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol (SQDG) and phosphatidylglycerol (PG) on the structure and function of isolated monomeric photosystem (PS) II core complexes was investigated. Incubation with the negatively charged lipids SQDG and PG led to a loss of the long-wavelength 77 K fluorescence emission at 693 nm that is associated with the inner antenna proteins. The neutral galactolipids DGDG and MGDG had no or only minor effects on the fluorescence emission spectra of the PSII core complexes, respectively. Pigment analysis, absorption and 77 K fluorescence excitation spectroscopy showed that incubation with SQDG and PG led to an exposure of chlorophyll molecules to the surrounding medium followed by conversion to pheophytin under acidic conditions. Size-exclusion chromatography and polypeptide analysis corroborated the findings of the spectroscopic measurements and pigment analysis. They showed that the negatively charged lipid SQDG led to a dissociation of the inner antenna protein CP43 and the 27- and 25-kDa apoproteins of the light-harvesting complex II, that were also associated with a part of the PSII core complexes used in the present study. Incubation of PSII core complexes with MGDG, on the other hand, induced an almost complete dimerization of the monomeric PSII. Measurements of the fast PSII fluorescence induction demonstrated that MGDG and DGDG only had a minor influence on the reduction kinetics of plastoquinone QA and the artificial PSII electron acceptor 2,5-dimethyl-p-benzoquinone (DMBQ). SQDG and, to a lesser extent, PG perturbed the intrinsic PSII electron transport significantly.

MGDG: !induces! dimerization 
SQDG/PG: !detach! CP43 
SQDG/PG: !expose! chlorophyll 
SQDG: !dissociate! inner antenna protein CP43 
MGDG/DGDG: !minor influence on! reduction kinetics