The effect of 2-chloro-6-(3-methoxyphenyl)aminopurine [inhibitor of cytokinin degradation (INCYDE)] at 10 nM on growth, biochemical and photosynthetic efficiency in sodium chloride (NaCl)-stressed (75, 100 and 150 mM) tomato plants was investigated. NaCl-induced decline in plant vigor index was slightly reversed by both drenching and foliar application of INCYDE. Foliar application of INCYDE significantly increased the flower number in the control and 75 mM NaCl-supplemented plants, while drenching was more effective in 150 mM NaCl-stressed plants. Antioxidant enzymes (peroxidase, catalase and superoxide dismutase) were enhanced in the presence of INCYDE in the control and NaCl-stressed plants. Higher concentration of malondialdehyde (MDA) associated with oxidative (lipid peroxidation) damage in leaf tissue which was evident in the presence of NaCl stress was significantly attenuated with the drenching and foliar application of INCYDE. Regardless of NaCl concentration, application of INCYDE had no significant influence on maximum quantum efficiency of photosystem II. However, the reduced quantum yield of photosystem II and coefficient of photochemical quenching under continuous illumination with actinic light at four intensities (264, 488, 800 and 1,200 µmol m(-2) s(-1)) in NaCl-stressed (100 and 150 mM) tomato plants were significantly alleviated by drenching application with INCYDE. Non-photochemical quenching of the singlet excited state of chlorophyll a and relative electron transfer rate were generally higher in INCYDE-treated plants than in the controls. From an agricultural perspective, these findings indicate the potential of INCYDE in protecting plants against NaCl stress and the possibility of enhanced productivity.

NaCl: !induces! decline in plant vigor index 
INCYDE: !reverses! decline in plant vigor index 
INCYDE: !enhances! antioxidant enzymes 
NaCl: !induces! oxidative damage 
INCYDE: !attenuates! oxidative damage 
INCYDE: !alleviates! reduced quantum yield of photosystem II 
INCYDE: !increases! non-photochemical quenching of chlorophyll a