['25096979', 'Freezing can severely damage plants, limiting geographical distribution of  natural populations and leading to major agronomical losses. Plants native to  cold climates acquire increased freezing tolerance during exposure to low  nonfreezing temperatures in a process termed cold acclimation. This involves many  adaptative responses, including global changes in metabolite content and gene  expression, and the accumulation of cold-regulated (COR) proteins, whose  functions are largely unknown. Here we report that the chloroplast proteins  COR15A and COR15B are necessary for full cold acclimation in Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana). They protect cell membranes, as indicated by electrolyte  leakage and chlorophyll fluorescence measurements. Recombinant COR15 proteins  stabilize lactate dehydrogenase during freezing in vitro. However, a transgenic  approach shows that they have no influence on the stability of selected plastidic  enzymes in vivo, although cold acclimation results in increased enzyme stability.  This indicates that enzymes are stabilized by other mechanisms. Recombinant COR15  proteins are disordered in water, but fold into amphipathic alpha-helices at high  osmolyte concentrations in the presence of membranes, a condition mimicking  molecular crowding induced by dehydration during freezing. X-ray scattering  experiments indicate protein-membrane interactions specifically under such  crowding conditions. The COR15-membrane interactions lead to liposome  stabilization during freezing. Collectively, our data demonstrate the requirement  for COR15 accumulation for full cold acclimation of Arabidopsis. The function of  these intrinsically disordered proteins is the stabilization of chloroplast  membranes during freezing through a folding and binding mechanism, but not the  stabilization of chloroplastic enzymes. This indicates a high functional  specificity of these disordered plant proteins.', '2014 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.245399', 'Hincha']

COR15A: !protects! cell membranes 
COR15B: !protects! cell membranes 
COR15 proteins: !stabilize! lactate dehydrogenase 
COR15 proteins: !have no influence on! plastidic enzymes 
COR15 proteins: !fold into! amphipathic alpha-helices 
COR15 proteins: !interact with! membranes 
COR15 proteins: !stabilize! liposomes 
COR15 proteins: !are required for! cold acclimation