['25093810', 'VIP1 is a bZIP protein in Arabidopsis thaliana. VIP1 accumulates in the nucleus  under hypo-osmotic conditions and interacts with the promoters of  hypo-osmolarity-responsive genes, CYP707A1 and CYP707A3 (CYP707A1/3), but neither  overexpression of VIP1 nor truncation of its DNA-binding region affects the  expression of CYP707A3 in vivo, raising the possibility that VIP and other  proteins are functionally redundant. Here we show further analyses on VIP1 and  its close homologs, namely, Arabidopsis group I bZIP proteins. The patterns of  the signals of the GFP-fused group I bZIP proteins were similar in onion and  Arabidopsis cells, suggesting that they have similar subcellular localization. In  a yeast one-hybrid assay, the group I bZIP proteins caused reporter gene  activation in the yeast reporter strain. VIP1 and other group I bZIP proteins  showed positive results in a yeast two-hybrid assay and a bimolecular  fluorescence complementation assay, suggesting that they physically interact.  These results support the idea that they have somewhat similar functions. By gel  shift assays, VIP1-binding sequences in the CYP707A1/3 promoters were confirmed  to be AGCTGT/G. Their presence in the promoters of the genes that respond to  hypo-osmotic conditions was evaluated using previously published microarray data.  Interestingly, a significantly higher proportion of the promoters of the genes  that were up-regulated by rehydration treatment and/or submergence treatment  (treatment by a hypotonic solution) and a significantly lower proportion of the  promoters of the genes that were down-regulated by such treatment shared  AGCTGT/G. To further assess the physiological role of VIP1, constitutively  nuclear-localized variants of VIP1 were generated. When overexpressed in  Arabidopsis, some of them as well as VIP1 caused growth retardation under a  mannitol-stressed condition, where VIP1 is localized mainly in the cytoplasm.  This raises the possibility that the expression of VIP1 itself rather than its  nuclear localization is responsible for regulating the mannitol responses.', '2014', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0103930', 'Takano']

VIP1: !accumulates in! nucleus 
VIP1: !interacts with! promoters of hypo-osmolarity-responsive genes
Group I bZIP proteins: !localize to! onion and Arabidopsis cells
Group I bZIP proteins: !activate! reporter gene in yeast reporter strain
Group I bZIP proteins: !interact with! each other
VIP1: !binds to! AGCTGT/G sequences in CYP707A1/3 promoters
AGCTGT/G: !present in! promoters of genes up-regulated by rehydration/submergence treatment
Constitutively nuclear-localized variants of VIP1: !cause growth retardation under! mannitol-stressed condition