In the life cycle of flowering plants, the sporophytic generation takes up most of the time and plays a dominant role in influencing plant growth and development. The embryo cell and endosperm free nucleus divisions establish the critical initiation phase of early sporophyte development, which forms mature seeds through a series of cell growth and differentiation events. Here, we report on the biological functions of two Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mitochondrial proteins, TRANSLOCASE OF THE INNER MEMBRANE9 (TIM9) and TIM10. We found that dysfunction of either AtTIM9 or AtTIM10 led to an early sporophyte-lethal phenotype; the embryo and endosperm both arrest division when the embryo proper developed to 16 to 32 cells. The abortion of tim9-1 and tim10 embryos at the 16/32-cell stage was caused by the loss of cell viability and the cessation of division in the embryo proper region, and this inactivation was due to the collapse of the mitochondrial structure and activity. Our characterization of tim9-1 and tim10 showed that mitochondrial membrane permeability increased and that cytochrome c was released from mitochondria into the cytoplasm in the 16/32-cell embryo proper, indicating that mitochondrial dysfunction occurred in the early sporophytic cells, and thus caused the initiation of a necrosis-like programmed cell death, which was further proved by the evidence of reactive oxygen species and DNA fragmentation tests. Consequently, we verified that AtTIM9 and AtTIM10 are nonredundantly essential for maintaining the mitochondrial function of early embryo proper cells and endosperm-free nuclei; these proteins play critically important roles during sporophyte initiation and development in Arabidopsis.

AtTIM9: !essential for maintaining! mitochondrial function 
AtTIM10: !essential for maintaining! mitochondrial function 
dysfunction of AtTIM9/AtTIM10: !leads to! early sporophyte-lethal phenotype 
AtTIM9/AtTIM10: !causes! collapse of mitochondrial structure and activity 
mitochondrial membrane permeability: !increases! in 16/32-cell embryo proper 
cytochrome c: !released from! mitochondria into cytoplasm 
reactive oxygen species/DNA fragmentation tests: !evidence of! necrosis-like programmed cell death