['25116939', 'Crossovers (COs) are at the origin of genetic variability, occurring across  successive generations, and they are also essential for the correct segregation  of chromosomes during meiosis. Their number and position are precisely  controlled, however the mechanisms underlying these controls are poorly  understood. Neddylation/rubylation is a regulatory pathway of posttranslational  protein modification that is required for numerous cellular processes in  eukaryotes, but has not yet been linked to homologous recombination. In a screen  for meiotic recombination-defective mutants, we identified several axr1 alleles,  disrupting the gene encoding the E1 enzyme of the neddylation complex in  Arabidopsis. Using genetic and cytological approaches we found that axr1 mutants  are characterised by a shortage in bivalent formation correlated with strong  synapsis defects. We determined that the bivalent shortage in axr1 is not due to  a general decrease in CO formation but rather due to a mislocalisation of class I  COs. In axr1, as in wild type, COs are still under the control of the ZMM group  of proteins. However, in contrast to wild type, they tend to cluster together and  no longer follow the obligatory CO rule. Lastly, we showed that this deregulation  of CO localisation is likely to be mediated by the activity of a cullin 4 RING  ligase, known to be involved in DNA damage sensing during somatic DNA repair and  mouse spermatogenesis. In conclusion, we provide evidence that the  neddylation/rubylation pathway of protein modification is a key regulator of  meiotic recombination. We propose that rather than regulating the number of  recombination events, this pathway regulates their localisation, through the  activation of cullin 4 RING ligase complexes. Possible targets for these ligases  are discussed.', '2014 Aug', 'PLoS Biol', '10.1371/journal.pbio.1001930', 'Grelon']

Crossovers: !are controlled by! Neddylation/rubylation pathway 
Neddylation/rubylation pathway: !regulates! Localisation of Crossovers 
axr1 mutants: !have shortage in! Bivalent formation 
axr1 mutants: !show mislocalisation of! Class I Crossovers 
ZMM group of proteins: !controls! Crossover localisation 
Cullin 4 RING ligase: !mediates! Deregulation of Crossover localisation