Most elucidated hydroxylations in plant secondary metabolism are catalyzed by oxoglutarate- or cytochrome P450-dependent oxygenases. Numerous hydroxylations still evade clarification, suggesting that they might be performed by alternative enzyme types. Here, we report the identification of the flavone 8-hydroxylase (F8H) in sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum L.) trichomes as a Rieske-type oxygenase. Several features of the F8H activity in trichome protein extracts helped to differentiate it from a cytochrome P450-catalyzed reaction and identify candidate genes in the basil trichome EST database. The encoded ObF8H proteins share approximately 50% identity with Rieske-type protochlorophyllide a oxygenases (PTC52) from higher plants. Homology cloning and DNA blotting revealed the presence of several PTC52-like genes in the basil genome. The transcripts of the candidate gene designated ObF8H-1 are strongly enriched in trichomes compared to whole young leaves, indicating trichome-specific expression. The full-length ObF8H-1 protein possesses a predicted N-terminal transit peptide, which directs green fluorescent protein at least in part to chloroplasts. The F8H activity in crude trichome protein extracts correlates well with the abundance of ObF8H peptides. The purified recombinant ObF8H-1 displays high affinity for salvigenin and is inactive with other tested flavones except cirsimaritin, which is 8-hydroxylated with less than 0.2% relative activity. The efficiency of in vivo 8-hydroxylation by engineered yeast was improved by manipulation of protein subcellular targeting. blast searches showed that occurrence of several PTC52-like genes is rather common in sequenced plant genomes. The discovery of ObF8H suggests that Rieske-type oxygenases may represent overlooked candidate catalysts for oxygenations in specialized plant metabolism.

ObF8H: !catalyzes! 8-hydroxylation 
ObF8H: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
ObF8H: !enhances! in vivo 8-hydroxylation 
PTC52: !shares identity with! ObF8H 
Rieske-type oxygenases: !represent! overlooked catalysts