Chlorophyll biosynthesis in plants is subjected to modulation by various environmental factors. To understand the modulation of the chlorophyll (Chl) biosynthesis during greening process by salt, 100-200 mM NaCl was applied to the roots of etiolated rice seedlings 12 h prior to the transfer to light. Application of 200 mM NaCl to rice seedlings that were grown in light for further 72 h resulted in reduced dry matter production (-58%) and Chl accumulation (-66%). Ionic imbalance due to salinity stress resulted in additional downregulation (41-45%) of seedling dry weight, Chl and carotenoid contents over and above that of similar osmotic stress induced by polyethylene glycol. Downregulation of Chl biosynthesis may be attributed to decreased activities of Chl biosynthetic pathway enzymes, i.e. 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) dehydratase (EC-2.4.1.24), porphobilinogen deaminase (EC-4.3.1.8), coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (EC-1.3.3.3), protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase (EC-1.3.3.4), Mg-protoporphyrin IX chelatase (EC-6.6.1.1) and protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (EC-1.3.33.1). Reduced enzymatic activities were due to downregulation of their protein abundance and/or gene expression in salt-stressed seedlings. The extent of downregulation of ALA biosynthesis nearly matched with that of protochlorophyllide and Chl to prevent the accumulation of highly photosensitive photodynamic tetrapyrroles that generates singlet oxygen under stress conditions. Although, ALA synthesis decreased, the gene/protein expression of glutamyl-tRNA reductase (EC-1.2.1.70) increased suggesting it may play a role in acclimation to salt stress. The similar downregulation of both early and late Chl biosynthesis intermediates in salt-stressed seedlings suggests a regulatory network of genes involved in tetrapyrrole biosynthesis.

NaCl: !downregulates! Chl biosynthesis
NaCl: !downregulates! dry matter production
NaCl: !downregulates! carotenoid contents
ALA dehydratase: !downregulated by! NaCl
Porphobilinogen deaminase: !downregulated by! NaCl
Coproporphyrinogen III oxidase: !downregulated by! NaCl
Protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase: !downregulated by! NaCl
Mg-protoporphyrin IX chelatase: !downregulated by! NaCl
Protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase: !downregulated by! NaCl
Glutamyl-tRNA reductase: !upregulated by! NaCl