['25148240', 'One of the most prominent features of xylem conducting cells is the deposition of  secondary walls. In Arabidopsis, secondary wall biosynthesis in the xylem  conducting cells, vessels, has been shown to be regulated by two VASCULAR-RELATED  NAC-DOMAIN (VND) genes, VND6 and VND7. In this report, we have investigated the  roles of five additional Arabidopsis VND genes, VND1 to VND5, in regulating  secondary wall biosynthesis in vessels. The VND1 to VND5 genes were shown to be  specifically expressed in vessels but not in interfascicular fibers in stems. The  expression of VND4 and VND5 was also seen specifically in vessels in the  secondary xylem of the root-hypocotyl region. When overexpressed, VND1 to VND5  were able to activate the expression of secondary wall-associated transcription  factors and genes involved in secondary wall biosynthesis and programmed cell  death. As a result, many normally parenchymatous cells in leaves and stems  acquired thickened secondary walls in the VND1 to VND5 overexpressors. In  contrast, dominant repression of VND3 function resulted in reduced secondary wall  thickening in vessels and a collapsed vessel phenotype. In addition, VND1 to VND5  were shown to be capable of rescuing the secondary wall defects in the fibers of  the snd1 nst1 double mutant when expressed under the SND1 promoter. Furthermore,  transactivation analysis revealed that VND1 to VND5 could activate expression of  the GUS reporter gene driven by the secondary wall NAC binding element (SNBE).  Together, these results demonstrate that VND1 to VND5 possess functions similar  to that of the SND1 secondary wall NAC and are transcriptional regulators of  secondary wall biosynthesis in vessels.', '2014', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0105726', 'Ye']

VND1-5: !express in! vessels 
VND4-5: !express in! secondary xylem of root-hypocotyl region 
VND1-5: !overexpress! secondary wall-associated transcription factors and genes 
VND3: !repress! secondary wall thickening 
VND1-5: !rescue! snd1 nst1 double mutant 
VND1-5: !activate! GUS reporter gene driven by SNBE