['25144737', "The RNA exosome is the major 3'-5' RNA degradation machine of eukaryotic cells  and participates in processing, surveillance and turnover of both nuclear and  cytoplasmic RNA. In both yeast and human, all nuclear functions of the exosome  require the RNA helicase MTR4. We show that the Arabidopsis core exosome can  associate with two related RNA helicases, AtMTR4 and HEN2. Reciprocal  co-immunoprecipitation shows that each of the RNA helicases co-purifies with the  exosome core complex and with distinct sets of specific proteins. While AtMTR4 is  a predominantly nucleolar protein, HEN2 is located in the nucleoplasm and appears  to be excluded from nucleoli. We have previously shown that the major role of  AtMTR4 is the degradation of rRNA precursors and rRNA maturation by-products.  Here, we demonstrate that HEN2 is involved in the degradation of a large number  of polyadenylated nuclear exosome substrates such as snoRNA and miRNA precursors,  incompletely spliced mRNAs, and spurious transcripts produced from pseudogenes  and intergenic regions. Only a weak accumulation of these exosome substrate  targets is observed in mtr4 mutants, suggesting that MTR4 can contribute, but  plays rather a minor role for the degradation of non-ribosomal RNAs and cryptic  transcripts in Arabidopsis. Consistently, transgene post-transcriptional gene  silencing (PTGS) is marginally affected in mtr4 mutants, but increased in hen2  mutants, suggesting that it is mostly the nucleoplasmic exosome that degrades  aberrant transgene RNAs to limit their entry in the PTGS pathway. Interestingly,  HEN2 is conserved throughout green algae, mosses and land plants but absent from  metazoans and other eukaryotic lineages. Our data indicate that, in contrast to  human and yeast, plants have two functionally specialized RNA helicases that  assist the exosome in the degradation of specific nucleolar and nucleoplasmic RNA  populations, respectively.", '2014 Aug', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1004564', 'Gagliardi']

AtMTR4: !localizes to! nucleoli 
HEN2: !localizes to! nucleoplasm 
AtMTR4: !enhances! rRNA degradation 
HEN2: !enhances! polyadenylated nuclear exosome substrate degradation 
MTR4: !contributes to! non-ribosomal RNA degradation 
HEN2: !contributes to! transgene post-transcriptional gene silencing