Jasmonic acid (JA) functions in plant development, including senescence and immunity. Arabidopsis thaliana CORONATINE INSENSITIVE 1 encodes a JA receptor and functions in the JA-responsive signaling pathway. The Arabidopsis genome harbors a single COI gene, but the rice (Oryza sativa) genome harbors three COI homologs, OsCOI1a, OsCOI1b, and OsCOI2. Thus, it remains unclear whether each OsCOI has distinct, additive, synergistic, or redundant functions in development. Here, we use the oscoi1b-1 knockout mutants to show that OsCOI1b mainly affects leaf senescence under senescence-promoting conditions. oscoi1b-1 mutants stayed green during dark-induced and natural senescence, with substantial retention of chlorophylls and photosynthetic capacity. Furthermore, several senescence-associated genes were downregulated in oscoi1b-1 mutants, including homologs of Arabidopsis thaliana ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE 3 and ORESARA 1, important regulators of leaf senescence. These results suggest that crosstalk between JA signaling and ethylene signaling affects leaf senescence. The Arabidopsis coi1-1 plants containing 35S:OsCOI1a or 35S:OsCOI1b rescued the delayed leaf senescence during dark incubation, suggesting that both OsCOI1a and OsCOI1b are required for promoting leaf senescence in rice. oscoi1b-1 mutants showed significant decreases in spikelet fertility and grain weight, leading to severe reduction of grain yield, indicating that OsCOI1-mediated JA signaling affects spikelet fertility and grain filling.

Jasmonic acid: !functions in! plant development 
CORONATINE INSENSITIVE 1: !encodes JA receptor and functions in! JA-responsive signaling pathway 
OsCOI1a/b/2: !harbors in! rice genome 
oscoi1b-1 mutants: !affects! leaf senescence 
ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE 3/ORESARA 1: !downregulated in! oscoi1b-1 mutants 
JA signaling: !crosstalks with! ethylene signaling 
35S:OsCOI1a/b: !rescue delayed leaf senescence in! Arabidopsis coi1-1 plants 
OsCOI1-mediated JA signaling: !affects! spikelet fertility and grain filling