['25155524', 'Inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6 ) provides a phosphorous reservoir in plant seeds;  in addition, along with its biosynthesis intermediates and derivatives, IP6 also  plays important roles in diverse developmental and physiological processes.  Disruption of the Arabidopsis inositol pentakisphosphate 2-kinase coding gene  AtIPK1 was previously shown to reduce IP6 content in vegetative tissues and  affect phosphate (Pi) sensing. Here we show that AtIPK1 is required for  sustaining plant growth, as null mutants are non-viable. An incomplete  loss-of-function mutant, atipk1-1, exhibited disturbed Pi homeostasis and  overaccumulated Pi as a consequence of increased Pi uptake activity and  root-to-shoot Pi translocation. The atipk1-1 mutants also showed a Pi  deficiency-like root system architecture with reduced primary root and enhanced  lateral root growth. Transcriptome analysis indicated that a subset of Pi  starvation-responsive genes was transcriptionally perturbed in the atipk1-1  mutants and the expression of multiple genes involved in Pi uptake, allocation,  and remobilization was increased. Genetic and transcriptional analyses suggest  that disturbance of Pi homeostasis caused by atipk1 mutation involved components  in addition to PHR1(-like) transcription factors. Notably, the transcriptional  increase of a number of Pi starvation-responsive genes in the atipk1-1 mutants is  correlated with the reduction of histone variant H2A.Z occupation in chromatin.  The myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase mutants, atmips1 and atmips2 with  comparable reduction in vegetative IP6 to that in the atipk1-1 mutants did not  overaccumulate Pi, suggesting that Pi homeostasis modulated by AtIPK1 is not  solely attributable to IP6 level. This study reveals that AtIPK1 has important  roles in growth and Pi homeostasis.', '2014 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12650', 'Chiou']

AtIPK1: !affects! Pi homeostasis 
AtIPK1: !enhances! Plant growth 
AtIPK1: !represses! H2A.Z occupation 
AtIPK1: !synthesizes! IP6 
PHR1(-like): !regulates! Pi starvation-responsive genes 
AtMIPS1/2: !reduces! Vegetative IP6