['25173843', 'Plant secondary metabolism is an active research area because of the unique and  important roles the specialized metabolites have in the interaction of plants  with their biotic and abiotic environment, the diversity and complexity of the  compounds and their importance to human medicine. Thousands of natural accessions  of Arabidopsis thaliana characterized with increasing genomic precision are  available, providing new opportunities to explore the biochemical and genetic  mechanisms affecting variation in secondary metabolism within this model species.  In this study, we focused on four aromatic metabolites that were differentially  accumulated among 96 Arabidopsis natural accessions as revealed by leaf metabolic  profiling. Using UV, mass spectrometry, and NMR data, we identified these four  compounds as different dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHBA) glycosides, namely  2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (gentisic acid) 5-O-beta-D-glucoside, 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic  acid 3-O-beta-D-glucoside, 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid 5-O-beta-D-xyloside, and  2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid 3-O-beta-D-xyloside. Quantitative trait locus (QTL)  mapping using recombinant inbred lines generated from C24 and Col-0 revealed a  major-effect QTL controlling the relative proportion of xylosides vs. glucosides.  Association mapping identified markers linked to a gene encoding a UDP  glycosyltransferase gene. Analysis of Transfer DNA (T-DNA) knockout lines  verified that this gene is required for DHBA xylosylation in planta and  recombinant protein was able to xylosylate DHBA in vitro. This study demonstrates  that exploiting natural variation of secondary metabolism is a powerful approach  for gene function discovery.', '2014 Nov', 'Genetics', '10.1534/genetics.114.168690', 'Chapple']

Metabolites: !differentially accumulated! Arabidopsis thaliana 
QTL mapping: !revealed! major-effect QTL 
Association mapping: !identified! markers 
Gene: !encodes! UDP glycosyltransferase 
T-DNA knockout lines: !verified! gene requirement 
Recombinant protein: !xylosylates! DHBA