Long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons are the major DNA components of flowering plants. They are generally enriched in pericentromeric heterochromatin regions of their host genomes, which could result from the preferential insertion of LTR retrotransposons and the low effectiveness of purifying selection in these regions. To estimate the relative importance of the actions of these two factors on their distribution pattern, the LTR retrotransposons in Solanum lycopersicum (tomato) plants were characterized at the genome level, and then the distribution of young elements was compared with that of relatively old elements. The current data show that old elements are mainly located in recombination-suppressed heterochromatin regions, and that young elements are preferentially located in the gene-rich euchromatic regions. Further analysis showed a negative correlation between the insertion time of LTR retrotransposons and the recombination rate. The data also showed there to be more solo LTRs in genic regions than in intergenic regions or in regions close to genes. These observations indicate that, unlike in many other plant genomes, the current LTR retrotransposons in tomatoes have a tendency to be preferentially located into euchromatic regions, probably caused by their severe suppression of activities in heterochromatic regions. These elements are apt to be maintained in heterochromatin regions, probably as a consequence of the pericentromeric effect in tomatoes. These results also indicate that local recombination rates and intensities of purifying selection in different genomic regions are largely responsible for structural variation and non-random distribution of LTR retrotransposons in tomato plants.

LTR retrotransposons: !enriched in! pericentromeric heterochromatin regions
LTR retrotransposons: !preferentially located in! gene-rich euchromatic regions
LTR retrotransposons: !negatively correlated with! recombination rate
LTR retrotransposons: !severely suppressed in! heterochromatic regions
LTR retrotransposons: !maintained in! heterochromatin regions
Recombination rates: !responsible for! structural variation of LTR retrotransposons