There is increasing interest in evaluating the environmental effects on crop architectural traits and yield improvement. However, crop models describing the dynamic changes in canopy structure with environmental conditions and the complex interactions between canopy structure, light interception, and dry mass production are only gradually emerging. Using tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) as a model crop, a dynamic functional-structural plant model (FSPM) was constructed, parameterized, and evaluated to analyse the effects of temperature on architectural traits, which strongly influence canopy light interception and shoot dry mass. The FSPM predicted the organ growth, organ size, and shoot dry mass over time with high accuracy (>85%). Analyses of this FSPM showed that, in comparison with the reference canopy, shoot dry mass may be affected by leaf angle by as much as 20%, leaf curvature by up to 7%, the leaf length:width ratio by up to 5%, internode length by up to 9%, and curvature ratios and leaf arrangement by up to 6%. Tomato canopies at low temperature had higher canopy density and were more clumped due to higher leaf area and shorter internodes. Interestingly, dry mass production and light interception of the clumped canopy were more sensitive to changes in architectural traits. The complex interactions between architectural traits, canopy light interception, dry mass production, and environmental conditions can be studied by the dynamic FSPM, which may serve as a tool for designing a canopy structure which is 'ideal' in a given environment.

Temperature: !affects! Architectural traits 
Architectural traits: !influence! Canopy light interception 
Architectural traits: !influence! Shoot dry mass 
Leaf angle: !affects! Shoot dry mass 
Leaf curvature: !affects! Shoot dry mass 
Leaf length:width ratio: !affects! Shoot dry mass 
Internode length: !affects! Shoot dry mass 
Curvature ratios: !affects! Shoot dry mass 
Leaf arrangement: !affects! Shoot dry mass 
Low temperature: !increases! Canopy density 
Low temperature: !increases! Leaf area 
Low temperature: !decreases! Internodes 
Canopy density: !influences! Dry mass production 
Canopy density: !influences! Light interception