['25185123', 'The triphosphate tunnel metalloenzyme (TTM) superfamily represents a group of  enzymes that is characterized by their ability to hydrolyze a range of  tripolyphosphate substrates. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) encodes three TTM  genes, AtTTM1, AtTTM2, and AtTTM3. Although AtTTM3 has previously been reported  to have tripolyphosphatase activity, recombinantly expressed AtTTM2 unexpectedly  exhibited pyrophosphatase activity. AtTTM2 knockout mutant plants exhibit an  enhanced hypersensitive response, elevated pathogen resistance against both  virulent and avirulent pathogens, and elevated accumulation of salicylic acid  (SA) upon infection. In addition, stronger systemic acquired resistance compared  with wild-type plants was observed. These enhanced defense responses are  dependent on SA, PHYTOALEXIN-DEFICIENT4, and NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED  GENES1. Despite their enhanced pathogen resistance, ttm2 plants did not display  constitutively active defense responses, suggesting that AtTTM2 is not a  conventional negative regulator but a negative regulator of the amplification of  defense responses. The transcriptional suppression of AtTTM2 by pathogen  infection or treatment with SA or the systemic acquired resistance activator  benzothiadiazole further supports this notion. Such transcriptional regulation is  conserved among TTM2 orthologs in the crop plants soybean (Glycine max) and  canola (Brassica napus), suggesting that TTM2 is involved in immunity in a wide  variety of plant species. This indicates the possible usage of TTM2 knockout  mutants for agricultural applications to generate pathogen-resistant crop plants.', '2014 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.248757', 'Yoshioka']

AtTTM2: !exhibits! pyrophosphatase activity
AtTTM2: !knockout mutant plants exhibit! enhanced hypersensitive response
AtTTM2: !knockout mutant plants exhibit! elevated pathogen resistance
AtTTM2: !knockout mutant plants exhibit! elevated accumulation of salicylic acid
AtTTM2: !dependent on! SA, PHYTOALEXIN-DEFICIENT4, and NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1
AtTTM2: !not a conventional negative regulator but a negative regulator of! amplification of defense responses
AtTTM2: !transcriptionally suppressed by! pathogen infection or treatment with SA or systemic acquired resistance activator benzothiadiazole
AtTTM2: !involved in immunity in! wide variety of plant species