The Arabidopsis SQUAMOSA PROMOTER-BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE (SPL) transcription factor SPL7 reprograms cellular gene expression to adapt plant growth and cellular metabolism to copper (Cu) limited culture conditions. Plant cells require Cu to maintain essential processes, such as photosynthesis, scavenging reactive oxygen species, cell wall lignification and hormone sensing. More specifically, SPL7 activity promotes a high-affinity Cu-uptake system and optimizes Cu (re-)distribution to essential Cu-proteins by means of specific miRNAs targeting mRNA transcripts for those dispensable. However, the functional mechanism underlying SPL7 activation is still to be elucidated. As SPL7 transcript levels are largely non-responsive to Cu availability, post-translational modification seems an obvious possibility. Previously, it was reported that the SPL7 SBP domain does not bind to DNA in vitro in the presence of Cu ions and that SPL7 interacts with a kin17 domain protein to raise SPL7-target gene expression upon Cu deprivation. Here we report how additional conserved SPL7 protein domains may contribute to the Cu deficiency response in Arabidopsis. Cytological and biochemical approaches confirmed an operative transmembrane domain (TMD) and uncovered a dual localisation of SPL7 between the nucleus and an endomembrane system, most likely the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). This new perspective unveiled a possible link between Cu deficit and ER stress, a metabolic dysfunction found capable of inducing SPL7 targets in an SPL7-dependent manner. Moreover, in vivo protein-protein interaction assays revealed that SPL7 is able to homodimerize, probably mediated by the IRPGC domain. These observations, in combination with the constitutive activation of SPL7 targets, when ectopically expressing the N-terminal part of SPL7 including the SBP domain, shed some light on the mechanisms governing SPL7 function. Here, we propose a revised model of SPL7 activation and regulation. According to our results, SPL7 would be initially located to endomembranes and activated during ER stress as a result of Cu deficiency. Furthermore, we added the SPL7 dimerization in the presence of Cu ions as an additional regulatory mechanism to modulate the Cu deficiency response.

SPL7: !promotes! high-affinity Cu-uptake system 
SPL7: !localizes to! endomembranes 
SPL7: !activates! during ER stress 
SPL7: !dimerizes in presence of! Cu ions 
SPL7: !interacts with! kin17 domain protein 
SPL7: !synthesizes! specific miRNAs