['25217507', 'Effective regulation of water balance in plants requires localized extracellular  barriers that control water and solute movement. We describe a clade of five  Arabidopsis thaliana ABCG half-transporters that are required for synthesis of an  effective suberin barrier in roots and seed coats (ABCG2, ABCG6, and ABCG20) and  for synthesis of an intact pollen wall (ABCG1 and ABCG16). Seed coats of abcg2  abcg6 abcg20 triple mutant plants had increased permeability to tetrazolium red  and decreased suberin content. The root system of triple mutant plants was more  permeable to water and salts in a zone complementary to that affected by the  Casparian strip. Suberin of mutant roots and seed coats had distorted lamellar  structure and reduced proportions of aliphatic components. Root wax from the  mutant was deficient in alkylhydroxycinnamate esters. These mutant plants also  had few lateral roots and precocious secondary growth in primary roots. abcg1  abcg16 double mutants defective in the other two members of the clade had pollen  with defects in the nexine layer of the tapetum-derived exine pollen wall and in  the pollen-derived intine layer. Mutant pollen collapsed at the time of anther  desiccation. These mutants reveal transport requirements for barrier synthesis as  well as physiological and developmental consequences of barrier deficiency.', '2014 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.114.129049', 'Reed']

ABCG2: !synthesizes! suberin barrier in roots and seed coats
ABCG6: !synthesizes! suberin barrier in roots and seed coats
ABCG20: !synthesizes! suberin barrier in roots and seed coats
ABCG1: !synthesizes! pollen wall
ABCG16: !synthesizes! pollen wall
abcg2 abcg6 abcg20 triple mutant plants: !have increased permeability to! tetrazolium red
abcg2 abcg6 abcg20 triple mutant plants: !have decreased suberin content!
abcg2 abcg6 abcg20 triple mutant plants: !have more permeable root system!
abcg2 abcg6 abcg20 triple mutant plants: !have distorted lamellar structure!
abcg2 abcg6 abcg20 triple mutant plants: !have reduced proportions of aliphatic components!
abcg2 abcg6 abcg20 triple mutant plants: !have few lateral roots!
abcg2 abcg6 abcg20 triple mutant plants: !have precocious secondary growth in