We focused on the changes of metabolite profiles in navel orange plants under long-term boron (B) deficiency using a gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) approach. Curling of the leaves and leaf chlorosis were observed only in the upper leaves (present before start of the treatment) of B-deficient plants, while the lower leaves (grown during treatment) did not show any visible symptoms. The metabolites with up-accumulation in B-deficient leaves were mainly proline, l-ornithine, lysine, glucoheptonic acid, fucose, fumarate, oxalate, quinate, myo-inositol and allo-inositol, while the metabolites with down-accumulation in B-deficient leaves were mainly serine, asparagine, saccharic acid, citrate, succinate, shikimate and phytol. The levels of glucose and fructose were increased only in the upper leaves by B deficiency, while starch content was increased in all the leaves and in roots. The increased levels of malate, ribitol, gluconic acid and glyceric acid occurred only in the lower leaves of B-deficient plants. The increased levels of phenols only in the upper leaves indicated that the effects of B on phenol metabolism in citrus plants may be a consequence of disruptions in leaf structure. Metabolites with opposite reactions in upper and lower leaves were mainly glutamine, glycine and pyrrole-2-carboxylic acid. To our knowledge, the phenomena of allo-inositol even higher than myo-inositol occurred characterized for the first time in this species. These results suggested that the altered pattern of central metabolism may be either specific or adaptive responses of navel orange plants to B deficiency.

Gene: !affects! Metabolite profile 
Metabolite: !accumulates! Proline 
Metabolite: !accumulates! Lysine 
Metabolite: !decreases! Serine 
Metabolite: !increases! Glucose 
Metabolite: !increases! Fructose 
Metabolite: !increases! Starch 
Metabolite: !increases! Malate 
Metabolite: !increases! Ribitol 
Metabolite: !increases! Gluconic acid 
Metabolite: !increases! Glyceric acid 
Metabolite: !increases! Phenols 
Metabolite: !decreases! Glutamine 
Metabolite: !decreases! Glycine 
Metabolite: !decreases! Pyrrole-2-carboxylic acid