['25219852', 'The reprogramming of epigenetic states in gametes and embryos is essential for  correct development in plants and mammals. In plants, the germ line arises from  somatic tissues of the flower, necessitating the erasure of chromatin  modifications that have accumulated at specific loci during development or in  response to external stimuli. If this process occurs inefficiently, it can lead  to epigenetic states being inherited from one generation to the next. However, in  most cases, accumulated epigenetic modifications are efficiently erased before  the next generation. An important example of epigenetic reprogramming in plants  is the resetting of the expression of the floral repressor locus FLC in  Arabidopsis thaliana. FLC is epigenetically silenced by prolonged cold in a  process called vernalization. However, the locus is reactivated before the  completion of seed development, ensuring the requirement for vernalization in  every generation. In contrast to our detailed understanding of the  polycomb-mediated epigenetic silencing induced by vernalization, little is known  about the mechanism involved in the reactivation of FLC. Here we show that a  hypomorphic mutation in the jumonji-domain-containing protein ELF6 impaired the  reactivation of FLC in reproductive tissues, leading to the inheritance of a  partially vernalized state. ELF6 has H3K27me3 demethylase activity, and the  mutation reduced this enzymatic activity in planta. Consistent with this, in the  next generation of mutant plants, H3K27me3 levels at the FLC locus stayed higher,  and FLC expression remained lower, than in the wild type. Our data reveal an  ancient role for H3K27 demethylation in the reprogramming of epigenetic states in  plant and mammalian embryos.', '2014 Nov 27', 'Nature', '10.1038/nature13722', 'Dean']

FLC: !silenced by! vernalization
ELF6: !impaired reactivation of! FLC
ELF6: !has H3K27me3 demethylase activity!
Mutation: !reduced! ELF6's enzymatic activity
H3K27me3: !stayed higher at! FLC locus
FLC: !expression remained lower than! wild type