AtC3H14 (At1 g66810) is a plant-specific tandem CCCH zinc-finger (TZF) protein that belongs to the 68-member CCCH family in Arabidopsis thaliana. In animals, TZFs have been shown to bind and recruit target mRNAs to the cytoplasmic foci where mRNA decay enzymes are active. However, it is not known whether plant TZF proteins such as AtC3H14 function. So far, no mRNA targets of plant TZFs have been identified. We have obtained several lines of experimental evidence in support of our hypothesis that AtC3H14 is involved in post-transcriptional regulation of its target genes. Nucleic acid binding assays using [(35) S]-labeled AtC3H14 protein showed that AtC3H14 could bind to ssDNA, dsDNA, and ribohomopolymers, suggesting its RNA-binding activity. RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assay identified several putative target RNAs of AtC3H14, including a polygalacturonase, a well-known cell wall modifying gene. RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays (RNA-EMSA) were used to confirm the RIP results and demonstrate that the TZF domain of AtC3H14 is required for the target RNA binding. Microarray analysis of 35S::AtC3H14 plants revealed that many of the cell wall elongation and/or modification-associated genes were differentially expressed, which is consistent with the cell elongation defect phenotype and the changes in the cell wall monosaccharide composition. In addition, yeast activation assay showed that AtC3H14 also function as a transcriptional activator, which is consistent with the previous finding that AtC3H14 activate the secondary wall biosynthesis genes. Taken together, we conclude that AtC3H14 may play a key role in both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation.

AtC3H14: !binds to! ssDNA
AtC3H14: !binds to! dsDNA
AtC3H14: !binds to! ribohomopolymers
AtC3H14: !identifies! putative target RNAs
AtC3H14: !requires! TZF domain for target RNA binding
AtC3H14: !activates! secondary wall biosynthesis genes
AtC3H14: !regulates! transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes