Tea is one of the most consumed beverages worldwide. The healthy effects of tea are attributed to a wealthy of different chemical components from tea. Thousands of studies on the chemical constituents of tea had been reported. However, data from these individual reports have not been collected into a single database. The lack of a curated database of related information limits research in this field, and thus a cohesive database system should necessarily be constructed for data deposit and further application. The Tea Metabolome database (TMDB), a manually curated and web-accessible database, was developed to provide detailed, searchable descriptions of small molecular compounds found in Camellia spp. esp. in the plant Camellia sinensis and compounds in its manufactured products (different kinds of tea infusion). TMDB is currently the most complete and comprehensive curated collection of tea compounds data in the world. It contains records for more than 1393 constituents found in tea with information gathered from 364 published books, journal articles, and electronic databases. It also contains experimental 1H NMR and 13C NMR data collected from the purified reference compounds or collected from other database resources such as HMDB. TMDB interface allows users to retrieve tea compounds entries by keyword search using compound name, formula, occurrence, and CAS register number. Each entry in the TMDB contains an average of 24 separate data fields including its original plant species, compound structure, formula, molecular weight, name, CAS registry number, compound types, compound uses including healthy benefits, reference literatures, NMR, MS data, and the corresponding ID from databases such as HMDB and Pubmed. Users can also contribute novel regulatory entries by using a web-based submission page. The TMDB database is freely accessible from the URL of http://pcsb.ahau.edu.cn:8080/TCDB/index.jsp. The TMDB is designed to address the broad needs of tea biochemists, natural products chemists, nutritionists, and members of tea related research community. The TMDB database provides a solid platform for collection, standardization, and searching of compounds information found in tea. As such this database will be a comprehensive repository for tea biochemistry and tea health research community.

Tea: !contains! Compounds 
Compounds: !collected in! TMDB 
TMDB: !provides! Information 
Information: !includes! Plant species 
Plant species: !found in! Camellia spp. 
Camellia spp.: !manufactures! Different kinds of tea infusion 
TMDB: !contains! Records 
Records: !gathered from! Published books, journal articles, and electronic databases 
TMDB: !allows users to! Retrieve tea compounds entries 
Entries: !searchable by! Keyword search 
Keyword search: !using! Compound name, formula, occurrence, and CAS register number 
TMDB: !contains! 24 data fields 
Data fields: !including! Original plant species, compound structure, formula, molecular weight, name, CAS registry number, compound types, compound uses, reference literatures, NMR, MS data, and corresponding ID 
Users: !can contribute! Novel regulatory entries