The study is the first to reveal the proteomic response in plants to a single PAH stress, and indicates that NDPK3 is a positive regulator in the Arabidopsis response to phenanthrene stress. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are highly carcinogenic pollutants that are byproducts of carbon-based fuel combustion, and tend to persist in the environment for long periods of time. PAHs elicit complex, damaging responses in plants, and prior research at the physiological, biochemical, and transcriptional levels has indicated that reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress play major roles in the PAH response. However, the proteomic response has remained largely unexplored. This study hypothesized that the proteomic response in Arabidopsis thaliana to phenanthrene, a model PAH, would include a strong oxidative stress signature, and would provide leads to potential signaling molecules involved. To explore that proteomic signature, we performed 2D-PAGE experiments and identified 30 proteins levels that were significantly altered including catalases (CAT), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), peroxiredoxins (POD), glutathione-S-transferase, and glutathione reductase. Also upregulated was nucleoside diphosphate kinase 3 (NDPK-3), a protein known to have metabolic and stress signaling functions. To address whether NDPK-3 functions upstream of the oxidative stress response, we measured levels of stress-responsive enzymes in NDPK-3 overexpressor, loss-of-function knockout, and wild-type plant lines. In the NDPK-3 overexpressor, the enzyme activities of APX, CAT, POD, as well as superoxide dismutase were all increased compared to wild type; in the NDPK-3 knockout line, these enzymes had reduced activity. This pattern occurred in untreated as well as phenanthrene-treated plants. These data support a model in which NDPK-3 is a positive regulator of the Arabidopsis stress response to PAHs.

PAH: !elicits! complex response
ROS: !plays major role in! PAH response
CAT: !upregulated by! NDPK3
APX: !upregulated by! NDPK3
POD: !upregulated by! NDPK3
GST: !upregulated by! NDPK3
GR: !upregulated by! NDPK3
NDPK3: !positive regulator of! Arabidopsis stress response to PAHs