['25226037', 'Transcriptional activation in response to hypoxia in plants is orchestrated by  ethylene-responsive factor group VII (ERF-VII) transcription factors, which are  stable during hypoxia but destabilized during normoxia through their targeting to  the N-end rule pathway of selective proteolysis. Whereas the conditionally  expressed ERF-VII genes enable effective flooding survival strategies in rice,  the constitutive accumulation of N-end-rule-insensitive versions of the  Arabidopsis thaliana ERF-VII factor RAP2.12 is maladaptive. This suggests that  transcriptional activation under hypoxia that leads to anaerobic metabolism may  need to be fine-tuned. However, it is presently unknown whether a counterbalance  of RAP2.12 exists. Genome-wide transcriptome analyses identified an  uncharacterized trihelix transcription factor gene, which we named HYPOXIA  RESPONSE ATTENUATOR1 (HRA1), as highly up-regulated by hypoxia. HRA1 counteracts  the induction of core low oxygen-responsive genes and transcriptional activation  of hypoxia-responsive promoters by RAP2.12. By yeast-two-hybrid assays and  chromatin immunoprecipitation we demonstrated that HRA1 interacts with the  RAP2.12 protein but with only a few genomic DNA regions from hypoxia-regulated  genes, indicating that HRA1 modulates RAP2.12 through protein-protein  interaction. Comparison of the low oxygen response of tissues characterized by  different levels of metabolic hypoxia (i.e., the shoot apical zone versus mature  rosette leaves) revealed that the antagonistic interplay between RAP2.12 and HRA1  enables a flexible response to fluctuating hypoxia and is of importance to stress  survival. In Arabidopsis, an effective low oxygen-sensing response requires  RAP2.12 stabilization followed by HRA1 induction to modulate the extent of the  anaerobic response by negative feedback regulation of RAP2.12. This mechanism is  crucial for plant survival under suboptimal oxygenation conditions. The discovery  of the feedback loop regulating the oxygen-sensing mechanism in plants opens new  perspectives for breeding flood-resistant crops.', '2014 Sep', 'PLoS Biol', '10.1371/journal.pbio.1001950', 'Perata']

ERF-VII: !stabilizes! under hypoxia
RAP2.12: !induces! core low oxygen-responsive genes
HRA1: !interacts with! RAP2.12
HRA1: !counteracts! induction of core low oxygen-responsive genes
HRA1: !modulates! RAP2.12