['25231969', 'Although N-acetylglucosamine-1-P uridylyltransferase (GlcNAc1pUT) that catalyzes  the final step of the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway and is conserved among,  organisms, produces UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc), an essential sugar  moiety involved in protein glycosylation and structural polymers, its biological  function in plants remains unknown. In this study, two GlcNA.UT genes were  characterized in Arabidopsis thaliana. The single mutants glcna.ut1 and glcna.ut2  revealed no obvious phenotype, but their homozygous double mutant was lethal,  reflecting the functional redundancy of these genes in being essential for plant  growth. Mutant plants, GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/ glcna.ut2, obtained from an  F2-segregating population following reciprocal crosses of glcna.ut1 with  glcna.ut2, displayed shorter siliques and fewer seed sets combined with impaired  pollen viability and unfertilized ovules. Genetic analyses further demonstrated  that the progeny of the GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/glcna.ut2 mutant plants,  but not those of the glcna.ut1/glcna.ut1 GlcNA.UT2/glcna.ut2 mutant plants,  suffer from the aberrant transmission of (glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2) gametes. In  parallel, cell biology analyses revealed a substantial defect in male  gametophytes appearing during the late vacuolated or pollen mitosis I stages and  that the female gametophyte is arrested during the uninucleate embryo sac stage  in GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/glcna.ut2 mutant plants. Nevertheless, although  the glcna.ut1/glcna.ut1 GlcNA.UT2/glcna.ut2 mutant plants exhibited a normal  transmission of (glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2) gametes and gametophytic development, the  development of numerous embryos was arrested during the early globular stage  within the embryo sacs. Collectively, despite having overlapping functions, the  GlcNA.UT genes play an indispensable role in the unique mediation of  gametogenesis and embryogenesis.', '2014 Nov', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcu127', 'Cheng']

GlcNA.UT1: !affects! gametogenesis 
GlcNA.UT2: !affects! gametogenesis 
GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/glcna.ut2: !displays! shorter siliques 
GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/glcna.ut2: !displays! fewer seed sets 
GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/glcna.ut2: !displays! impaired pollen viability 
GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/glcna.ut2: !displays! unfertilized ovules 
GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/glcna.ut2: !suffers from! aberrant transmission of (glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2) gametes 
GlcNA.UT1/glcna.ut1 glcna.ut2/