Collections of specimens held by natural history museums are invaluable material for biodiversity inventory and evolutionary studies, with specimens accumulated over 300 years readily available for sampling. Unfortunately, most museum specimens yield low-quality DNA. Recent advances in sequencing technologies, so called next-generation sequencing, are revolutionizing phylogenetic investigations at a deep level. Here, the Illumina technology (HiSeq) was used on herbarium specimens of Sartidia (subfamily Aristidoideae, Poaceae), a small African-Malagasy grass lineage (six species) characteristic of wooded savannas, which is the C3 sister group of Stipagrostis, an important C4 genus from Africa and SW Asia. Complete chloroplast and nuclear ribosomal sequences were assembled for two Sartidia species, one of which (S. perrieri) is only known from a single specimen collected in Madagascar 100 years ago. Partial sequences of a few single-copy genes encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylases (ppc) and malic enzymes (nadpme) were also assembled. Based on these data, the phylogenetic position of Malagasy Sartidia in the subfamily Aristidoideae was investigated and the biogeographical history of this genus was analysed with full species sampling. The evolutionary history of two genes for C4 photosynthesis (ppc-aL1b and nadpme-IV) in the group was also investigated. The gene encoding the C4 phosphoenolpyruvate caroxylase of Stipagrostis is absent from S. dewinteri suggesting that it is not essential in C3 members of the group, which might have favoured its recruitment into a new metabolic pathway. Altogether, the inclusion of historical museum specimens in phylogenomic analyses of biodiversity opens new avenues for evolutionary studies.

DNA: !yields! Low-Quality 
Specimens: !accumulated over! 300 years 
Illumina Technology: !used on! Herbarium Specimens 
Sartidia: !characteristic of! Wooded Savannas 
Chloroplast/Nuclear Ribosomal Sequences: !assembled for! Two Sartidia Species 
Single-Copy Genes: !encoding! Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxylases/Malic Enzymes 
Phylogenetic Position: !investigated for! Malagasy Sartidia 
Biogeographical History: !analysed with! Full Species Sampling 
Evolutionary History: !investigated for! Two C4 Photosynthesis Genes 
Gene Encoding C4 Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxylase: !absent from! S. dewinteri 
Inclusion of Historical Museum Specimens: !opens new avenues for! Evolutionary Studies