Monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG) is the major lipid constituent of thylakoid membranes and is essential for chloroplast biogenesis in plants. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), MGDG is predominantly synthesized by inner envelope-localized MONOGALACTOSYLDIACYLGLYCEROL SYNTHASE1 (MGD1); its knockout causes albino seedlings. Because of the lethal phenotype of the null MGD1 mutant, functional details of MGDG synthesis at seedling development have remained elusive. In this study, we used an inducible gene-suppression system to investigate the impact of MGDG synthesis on cotyledon development. We created transgenic Arabidopsis lines that express an artificial microRNA targeting MGD1 (amiR-MGD1) under the control of a dexamethasone-inducible promoter. The induction of amiR-MGD1 resulted in up to 75% suppression of MGD1 expression, although the resulting phenotypes related to chloroplast development were diverse, even within a line. The strong MGD1 suppression by continuous dexamethasone treatment caused substantial decreases in galactolipid content in cotyledons, leading to severe defects in the formation of thylakoid membranes and impaired photosynthetic electron transport. Time-course analyses of the MGD1 suppression during seedling germination revealed that MGDG synthesis at the very early germination stage is particularly important for chloroplast biogenesis. The MGD1 suppression down-regulated genes associated with the photorespiratory pathway in peroxisomes and mitochondria as well as those responsible for photosynthesis in chloroplasts and caused high expression of genes for the glyoxylate cycle. MGD1 function may link galactolipid synthesis with the coordinated transcriptional regulation of chloroplasts and other organelles during cotyledon greening.

MGD1: !synthesizes! MGDG 
MGD1: !affects! Chloroplast biogenesis 
amiR-MGD1: !suppresses! MGD1 
MGD1 suppression: !decreases! Galactolipid content 
MGD1 suppression: !impairs! Photosynthetic electron transport 
MGD1 suppression: !down-regulates! Photorespiratory pathway genes 
MGD1 suppression: !causes high expression of! Glyoxylate cycle genes