Pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) provides a good experimental system for studying the molecular and functional genomics underlying the ability of plants to defend themselves against microbial pathogens. Cell death is a genetically programmed response that requires specific host cellular factors. Hypersensitive response (HR) is defined as rapid cell death in response to a pathogen attack. Pepper plants respond to pathogen attacks by activating genetically controlled HR- or disease-associated cell death. HR cell death, specifically in incompatible interactions between pepper and Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria, is mediated by the molecular genetics and biochemical machinery that underlie pathogen-induced cell death in plants. Gene expression profiles during the HR-like cell death response, virus-induced gene silencing and transient and transgenic overexpression approaches are used to isolate and identify HR- or disease-associated cell death genes in pepper plants. Reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide, cytosolic calcium ion and defense-related hormones such as salicylic acid, jasmonic acid, ethylene and abscisic acid are involved in the execution of pathogen-induced cell death in plants. In this review, we summarize recent molecular and cellular studies of the pepper cell death-mediated defense response, highlighting the signaling events of cell death in disease-resistant pepper plants. Comprehensive knowledge and understanding of the cellular functions of pepper cell death response genes will aid the development of novel practical approaches to enhance disease resistance in pepper, thereby helping to secure the future supply of safe and nutritious pepper plants worldwide.

Pathogen: !induces! Cell death
Pepper plants: !respond to! Pathogen attack
Reactive oxygen species: !involved in! Execution of pathogen-induced cell death
Nitric oxide: !involved in! Execution of pathogen-induced cell death
Cytosolic calcium ion: !involved in! Execution of pathogen-induced cell death
Salicylic acid: !involved in! Execution of pathogen-induced cell death
Jasmonic acid: !involved in! Execution of pathogen-induced cell death
Ethylene: !involved in! Execution of pathogen-induced cell death
Abscisic acid: !involved in! Execution of pathogen-induced cell death