Trees in temperate zones show periodicity by alternating active and dormant states to adapt to environmental conditions. Although phytohormones and transcriptional regulation were found to be involved in growth cessation and dormancy transition, little is known about the mechanisms of the dormancy-active growth transition, especially dormancy maintenance and release. Small RNAs are a group of short non-coding RNAs regulating gene expressions at the post-transcriptional level during plant development and the responses to environmental stress. No report on the expression profiling of small RNAs in the cambial meristem during the dormancy-active growth transition has been reported to date. Three small RNA libraries from the cambium of poplar, representing endodormancy induced by short day conditions, ecodormancy induced by chilling and active growth induced by long day conditions, respectively, were generated and sequenced by Illumina high-throughput sequencing technology. This yielded 123 known microRNAs (miRNAs) with significant expression changes, which included developmental-, phytohormone- and stress-related miRNAs. Interestingly, miR156 and miR172 showed opposite expression patterns in the cambial dormancy-active growth transition. Additionally, miR160, which is involved in the auxin signaling pathway, was expressed specifically during endodormancy release by chilling. Furthermore, 275 novel miRNAs expressed in the cambial zone were identified, and 34 of them had high detection frequencies and unique expression patterns. Finally, the target genes of these novel miRNAs were predicted and some were validated experimentally by 5'RACE. Our results provided a comprehensive analysis of small RNAs in the cambial meristem during dormancy-release at the genome-wide level and novel evidence of miRNAs involved in the regulation of this biological process.

miR156: !opposes! miR172
miR160: !specifically expressed during! endodormancy release
miRNA: !regulates! gene expression
miRNA: !predicts! target genes