['25284001', "Importin-alphas are essential adapter proteins that recruit cytoplasmic proteins  destined for active nuclear import to the nuclear transport machinery. Cargo  proteins interact with the importin-alpha armadillo repeat domain via nuclear  localization sequences (NLSs), short amino acids motifs enriched in Lys and Arg  residues. Plant genomes typically encode several importin-alpha paralogs that can  have both specific and partially redundant functions. Although some cargos are  preferentially imported by a distinct importin-alpha it remains unknown how this  specificity is generated and to what extent cargos compete for binding to nuclear  transport receptors. Here we report that the effector protein HaRxL106 from the  oomycete pathogen Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis co-opts the host cell's nuclear  import machinery. We use HaRxL106 as a probe to determine redundant and specific  functions of importin-alpha paralogs from Arabidopsis thaliana. A crystal structure  of the importin-alpha3/MOS6 armadillo repeat domain suggests that five of the six  Arabidopsis importin-alphas expressed in rosette leaves have an almost identical  NLS-binding site. Comparison of the importin-alpha binding affinities of HaRxL106 and  other cargos in vitro and in plant cells suggests that relatively small affinity  differences in vitro affect the rate of transport complex formation in vivo. Our  results suggest that cargo affinity for importin-alpha, sequence variation at the  importin-alpha NLS-binding sites and tissue-specific expression levels of importin-alphas  determine formation of cargo/importin-alpha transport complexes in plant cells.", '2015 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12691', 'Banfield']

Importin-alphas: !recruit! cytoplasmic proteins 
Cargo proteins: !interact with! importin-alpha armadillo repeat domain 
HaRxL106: !co-opts! host cell's nuclear import machinery 
Importin-alpha3/MOS6: !has! NLS-binding site 
HaRxL106: !compares with! other cargos in vitro and in plant cells 
Cargo affinity: !affects! rate of transport complex formation in vivo