Differential palisade and spongy parenchyma structural changes in oilseed rape leaf were demonstrated. These dismantling processes were linked to early senescence events and associated to remobilization processes. During leaf senescence, an ordered cell dismantling process allows efficient nutrient remobilization. However, in Brassica napus plants, an important amount of nitrogen (N) in fallen leaves is associated with low N remobilization efficiency (NRE). The leaf is a complex organ mainly constituted of palisade and spongy parenchyma characterized by different structures and functions concerning water relations and carbon fixation. The aim of the present study was to demonstrate a specific structural evolution of these parenchyma throughout natural senescence in B. napus, probably linked to differential nutrient remobilization processes. The study was performed on 340 leaves from 32 plants during an 8-week development period under controlled growing conditions. Water distribution and status at the cellular level were investigated by low-field proton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), while light and electron microscopy were used to observe cell and plast structure. Physiological parameters were determined on all leaves studied and used as indicators of leaf development and remobilization progress. The results revealed a process of hydration and cell enlargement of leaf tissues associated with senescence. Wide variations were observed in the palisade parenchyma while spongy cells changed only very slightly. The major new functional information revealed was the link between the early senescence events and specific tissue dismantling processes.

Palisade parenchyma: !changes with! Senescence 
Senescence: !linked to! Remobilization processes 
Leaf: !constituted of! Palisade and spongy parenchyma 
Water distribution: !investigated by! NMR 
Light and electron microscopy: !used to observe! Cell and plast structure 
Physiological parameters: !determined on! All leaves studied 
Hydration and cell enlargement: !associated with! Senescence 
Palisade parenchyma: !showed wide variations with! Senescence 
Early senescence events: !linked to! Specific tissue dismantling processes