['25293756', 'Global analyses of protein complex assembly, composition, and location are needed  to fully understand how cells coordinate diverse metabolic, mechanical, and  developmental activities. The most common methods for proteome-wide analysis of  protein complexes rely on affinity purification-mass spectrometry or yeast  two-hybrid approaches. These methods are time consuming and are not suitable for  many plant species that are refractory to transformation or genome-wide cloning  of open reading frames. Here, we describe the proof of concept for a method  allowing simultaneous global analysis of endogenous protein complexes that begins  with intact leaves and combines chromatographic separation of extracts from  subcellular fractions with quantitative label-free protein abundance profiling by  liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry. Applying this approach to the  crude cytosolic fraction of Arabidopsis thaliana leaves using size exclusion  chromatography, we identified hundreds of cytosolic proteins that appeared to  exist as components of stable protein complexes. The reliability of the method  was validated by protein immunoblot analysis and comparisons with published size  exclusion chromatography data and the masses of known complexes. The method can  be implemented with appropriate instrumentation, is applicable to any biological  system, and has the potential to be further developed to characterize the  composition of protein complexes and measure the dynamics of protein complex  localization and assembly under different conditions.', '2014 Oct', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.114.127563', 'Szymanski']

chromatography: !separates! subcellular fractions 
quantitative label-free protein abundance profiling: !identifies! cytosolic proteins 
protein immunoblot analysis: !validates! method 
published size exclusion chromatography data: !compares with! masses of known complexes 
instrumentation: !implements! method 
biological system: !applicable to! method