Sesame (Sesamum indicum L., 2n = 26) is an important oilseed crop with an estimated genome size of 369 Mb. The genetic basis, including the number and locations of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) of sesame grain yield and quality remain poorly understood, due in part to the lack of reliable markers and genetic maps. Here we report on the construction of a hitherto most high-density genetic map of sesame using the restriction-site associated DNA sequencing (RAD-seq) combined with 89 PCR markers, and the identification of grain yield-related QTLs using a recombinant inbred line (RIL) population. In total, 3,769 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers were identified from RAD-seq, and 89 polymorphic PCR markers were identified including 44 expressed sequence tag-simple sequence repeats (EST-SSRs), 10 genomic-SSRs and 35 Insertion-Deletion markers (InDels). The final map included 1,230 markers distributed on 14 linkage groups (LGs) and was 844.46 cM in length with an average of 0.69 cM between adjacent markers. Using this map and RIL population, we detected 13 QTLs on 7 LGs and 17 QTLs on 10 LGs for seven grain yield-related traits by the multiple interval mapping (MIM) and the mixed linear composite interval mapping (MCIM), respectively. Three major QTLs had been identified using MIM with R2 > 10.0% or MCIM with ha 2 > 5.0%. Two co-localized QTL groups were identified that partially explained the correlations among five yield-related traits. Three thousand eight hundred and four pairs of new DNA markers including SNPs and InDels were developed by RAD-seq, and a so far most high-density genetic map was constructed based on these markers in combination with SSR markers. Several grain yield-related QTLs had been identified using this population and genetic map. We report here the first QTL mapping of yield-related traits with a high-density genetic map using a RIL population in sesame. Results of this study solidified the basis for studying important agricultural traits and implementing marker-assisted selection (MAS) toward genetic improvement in sesame.

RAD-seq: !identifies! SNPs
RAD-seq: !develops! DNA markers
RIL population: !detects! QTLs
MIM: !identifies! major QTLs
MCIM: !identifies! co-localized QTL groups
MAS: !implements! genetic improvement