['25316414', "BACKGROUND: Plants have evolved a unique epigenetic process to target DNA  cytosine methylation: RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM). During RdDM, small  RNAs (smRNAs) guide methylation of homologous DNA loci. In Arabidopsis thaliana,  the de novo DNA methyltransferase that ultimately methylates cytosines guided by  smRNAs in all sequence contexts is Domains Rearranged Methyltransferase 2 (DRM2).  Recent reports have shown that DRM2 requires the catalytic mutated paralog DRM3  to exert its function through a still largely unknown process. To shed light on  how DRM3 affects RdDM, we have further characterized its role at the molecular  and cytological levels. FINDINGS: Although DRM3 is not required for RdDM loci  transcriptional silencing, it specifically affects loci's DNA methylation.  Interestingly, DRM3 and DRM2 regulate the DNA methylation in a subset of loci  differently.Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization and immunolocalization analyses  showed that DRM3 is not required for the large-scale nuclear organization of  heterochromatin during interphase, with the notable exception of the 45S  ribosomal RNA loci. DRM3 localizes exclusively to the nucleus and is enriched in  a round-shaped domain located in the nucleolar periphery, in which it colocalizes  with components of the RdDM pathway. CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses reinforce the  previously proposed chaperone role of DRM3 in RdDM. Overall, our work further  demonstrates that DRM3 most likely functions exclusively with DRM2 in RdDM and  not with other A. thaliana DNA methyltransferases. However, DRM3's regulation of  DNA methylation is likely target- or chromatin context-dependent. DRM3  hypothetically acts in RdDM either upstream of DRM2, or in a parallel step.", '2014 Oct 14', 'BMC Res Notes', '10.1186/1756-0500-7-721', 'Pontes']

DRM2: !guides! DNA methylation 
DRM3: !affects! DNA methylation 
DRM3: !localizes to! nucleolar periphery 
DRM3: !colocalizes with! components of RdDM pathway 
DRM3: !functions with! DRM2 in RdDM