The present study documented the predominant role of WRKY transcription factor in controlling genes of different pathways related to fibre formation in jute and could be a candidate gene for the improvement of jute fiber. Understanding of molecular mechanism associated with bast fibre development is of immense significance to achieve desired improvement in jute (Corchorus sp.). Therefore, suppression subtractive hybridization was successfully applied to identify genes involved in fibre developmental process in jute. The subtracted library of normal Corchorus capsularis as tester with respect to its fibre-deficient mutant as driver resulted in 2,685 expressed sequence tags which were assumed to represent the differentially expressed genes between two genotypes. The identified expressed sequence tags were assembled and clustered into 225 contigs and 231 singletons. Among these 456 unigenes, 377 were classified into 15 different functional categories while others were of unknown functional category. Reverse Northern analysis of the unigenes showed distinct variation in hybridization intensity of 11 transcripts between two genotypes tested. The findings were also documented by Northern and real-time PCR analysis. Varied expression level of these transcripts suggested their crucial involvement in fibre development in this species. Among these transcripts, WRKY transcription factor was documented to be a most important transcript which was in agreement with its known role in other plant species in possible regulation related to cell wall biosynthesis, expansion and lignification. This report constitutes first systematic analysis of genes involved in fibre development process in jute. It may be suggested that the information generated in this study would be useful for genetic improvement of fibre traits in this plant species.

WRKY transcription factor: !controls! genes of different pathways related to fibre formation in jute
Subtractive hybridization: !identifies! genes involved in fibre developmental process in jute
Expressed sequence tags: !clustered into! 225 contigs and 231 singletons
Reverse Northern analysis: !showed variation in hybridization intensity of! 11 transcripts between two genotypes tested
Northern and real-time PCR analysis: !confirmed! varied expression level of transcripts
WRKY transcription factor: !most important transcript! for possible regulation related to cell wall biosynthesis, expansion and lignification