['25330213', 'Ethylene has been regarded as a stress hormone to regulate myriad stress  responses. Salinity stress is one of the most serious abiotic stresses limiting  plant growth and development. But how ethylene signaling is involved in plant  response to salt stress is poorly understood. Here we showed that Arabidopsis  plants pretreated with ethylene exhibited enhanced tolerance to salt stress.  Gain- and loss-of-function studies demonstrated that EIN3 (ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE  3) and EIL1 (EIN3-LIKE 1), two ethylene-activated transcription factors, are  necessary and sufficient for the enhanced salt tolerance. High salinity induced  the accumulation of EIN3/EIL1 proteins by promoting the proteasomal degradation  of two EIN3/EIL1-targeting F-box proteins, EBF1 and EBF2, in an EIN2-independent  manner. Whole-genome transcriptome analysis identified a list of SIED  (Salt-Induced and EIN3/EIL1-Dependent) genes that participate in salt stress  responses, including several genes encoding reactive oxygen species (ROS)  scavengers. We performed a genetic screen for ein3 eil1-like salt-hypersensitive  mutants and identified 5 EIN3 direct target genes including a previously unknown  gene, SIED1 (At5g22270), which encodes a 93-amino acid polypeptide involved in  ROS dismissal. We also found that activation of EIN3 increased peroxidase (POD)  activity through the direct transcriptional regulation of PODs expression.  Accordingly, ethylene pretreatment or EIN3 activation was able to preclude excess  ROS accumulation and increased tolerance to salt stress. Taken together, our  study provides new insights into the molecular action of ethylene signaling to  enhance plant salt tolerance, and elucidates the transcriptional network of EIN3  in salt stress response.', '2014 Oct', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1004664', 'Guo']

Ethylene: !regulates! Stress Responses 
EIN3/EIL1: !necessary and sufficient for! Enhanced Salt Tolerance 
EBF1/EBF2: !targeted by! EIN3/EIL1 
SIED genes: !participate in! Salt Stress Responses 
EIN3: !activates! PODs Expression 
PODs: !dismiss! ROS Accumulation