['25336520', 'Mutations that eliminate chloroplast translation in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) result in embryo lethality. The stage of embryo arrest, however, can be  influenced by genetic background. To identify genes responsible for improved  growth in the absence of chloroplast translation, we examined seedling responses  of different Arabidopsis accessions on spectinomycin, an inhibitor of chloroplast  translation, and crossed the most tolerant accessions with embryo-defective  mutants disrupted in chloroplast ribosomal proteins generated in a sensitive  background. The results indicate that tolerance is mediated by ACC2, a duplicated  nuclear gene that targets homomeric acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase to plastids,  where the multidomain protein can participate in fatty acid biosynthesis. In the  presence of functional ACC2, tolerance is enhanced by a second locus that maps to  chromosome 5 and heightened by additional genetic modifiers present in the most  tolerant accessions. Notably, some of the most sensitive accessions contain  nonsense mutations in ACC2, including the "Nossen" line used to generate several  of the mutants studied here. Functional ACC2 protein is therefore not required  for survival in natural environments, where heteromeric acetyl-coenzyme A  carboxylase encoded in part by the chloroplast genome can function instead. This  work highlights an interesting example of a tandem gene duplication in  Arabidopsis, helps to explain the range of embryo phenotypes found in Arabidopsis  mutants disrupted in essential chloroplast functions, addresses the nature of  essential proteins encoded by the chloroplast genome, and underscores the value  of using natural variation to study the relationship between chloroplast  translation, plant metabolism, protein import, and plant development.', '2014 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.249052', 'Meinke']

Mutations: !eliminate! chloroplast translation 
ACC2: !targets! homomeric acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase 
ACC2: !enhances! tolerance 
Chromosome 5: !heightens! tolerance 
Nonsense mutations: !present in! sensitive accessions 
Functional ACC2 protein: !not required for! survival