['25371504', 'Senescence involves increased expression of proteases, which may participate in  nitrogen recycling or cellular signalling. 2D zymograms detected two protein  species with increased proteolytic activity in senescing leaves of Arabidopsis  thaliana. A proteomic analysis revealed that both protein species correspond to a  subtilisin protease encoded by At3g14067, termed Senescence-Associated Subtilisin  Protease (SASP). SASP mRNA levels and enzyme activity increase during leaf  senescence in leaves senescing during both the vegetative or the reproductive  phase of the plant life cycle, but this increase is more pronounced in  reproductive plants. SASP is expressed in all above-ground organs, but not in  roots. Putative AtSASP orthologues were identified in dicot and monocot crop  species. A phylogenetic analysis shows AtSASP and its putative orthologues  clustering in one discrete group of subtilisin proteases in which no other  Arabidospsis subtilisin protease is present. Phenotypic analysis of two knockout  lines for SASP showed that mutant plants develop more inflorescence branches  during reproductive development. Both AtSASP and its putative rice orthologue  (OsSASP) were constitutively expressed in sasp-1 to complement the mutant  phenotype. At maturity, sasp-1 plants produced 25% more inflorescence branches  and siliques than either the wild-type or the rescued lines. These differences  were mostly due to an increased number of second and third order branches. The  increased number of siliques was compensated for by a small decrease (5.0%) in  seed size. SASP downregulates branching and silique production during monocarpic  senescence, and its function is at least partially conserved between Arabidopsis  and rice.', '2015 Jan', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/eru409', 'Guiamet']

SASP: !increases! proteolytic activity 
SASP: !enhances! inflorescence branching 
SASP: !downregulates! silique production 
AtSASP: !clusters with! subtilisin proteases 
AtSASP: !orthologous to! OsSASP 
OsSASP: !rescues! sasp-1 phenotype