['25376907', 'Arabidopsis downy mildew resistant 6 (dmr6) mutants have lost their  susceptibility to the downy mildew Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis. Here we show  that dmr6 is also resistant to the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae and the  oomycete Phytophthora capsici. Resistance is accompanied by enhanced defense gene  expression and elevated salicylic acid levels. The suppressive effect of the DMR6  oxygenase was confirmed in transgenic Arabidopsis lines overexpressing DMR6 that  show enhanced susceptibility to H. arabidopsidis, P. capsici, and P. syringae.  Phylogenetic analysis of the superfamily of 2-oxoglutarate Fe(II)-dependent  oxygenases revealed a subgroup of DMR6-LIKE OXYGENASEs (DLOs). Within  Arabidopsis, DMR6 is most closely related to DLO1 and DLO2. Overexpression of  DLO1 and DLO2 in the dmr6 mutant restored the susceptibility to downy mildew  indicating that DLOs negatively affect defense, similar to DMR6. DLO1, but not  DLO2, is co-expressed with DMR6, showing strong activation during pathogen attack  and following salicylic acid treatment. DMR6 and DLO1 differ in their spatial  expression pattern in downy mildew-infected Arabidopsis leaves; DMR6 is mostly  expressed in cells that are in contact with hyphae and haustoria of H.  arabidopsidis, while DLO1 is expressed mainly in the vascular tissues near  infection sites. Strikingly, the dmr6-3_dlo1 double mutant, that is completely  resistant to H. arabidopsidis, showed a strong growth reduction that was  associated with high levels of salicylic acid. We conclude that DMR6 and DLO1  redundantly suppress plant immunity, but also have distinct activities based on  their differential localization of expression.', '2015 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12719', 'Van']

DMR6: !affects! Resistance 
DMR6: !enhances! Defense gene expression 
DMR6: !elevates! Salicylic acid levels 
DLOs: !negatively affect! Defense 
DLO1: !co-expresses with! DMR6 
DLO1: !localizes to! Vascular tissues 
DMR6: !localizes to! Cells in contact with hyphae and haustoria 
DMR6/DLO1: !redundantly suppress! Plant immunity