Calorespirometric measurements proved to be useful for phenotyping temperature response in terms of optimum temperatures for growth and low temperature limits for growth respiration in diverse carrot genotypes. High and low-temperature tolerance is an important trait in many breeding programs, but to date, improvement strategies have had limited success. Developing new, cost efficient and reliable screening tools to identify and select the most tolerant crop plant genotypes is necessary to assist plant breeding on cold and heat tolerance, and calorespirometry is proposed for this. Calorespirometry is a technique to simultaneously measure metabolic heat rates and CO2 emission rates of respiring tissues and can be used as a rapid method to determine how changes in the environment (e.g., temperature) influence plant growth. The main aim of this work was, therefore, to test the usefulness of calorespirometry as a phenotyping tool for carrot taproot growth in response to temperature. Calorespirometric measurements in the carrot taproot meristems of plants from eight carrot inbred lines allowed identification of optimum and minimum temperatures for growth of plants and to distinguish between phenotypes based on those characteristics. The technique proved to be useful for predicting yield-determining temperature responses in diverse carrot genotypes. Preliminary screening of new crop plant genotypes with calorespirometry based on their temperature adaptation and acclimation capability could make the screening process much less laborious by allowing selection of genotypes presenting the best growth performance under particular biotic or abiotic conditions before field tests.

Calorespirometry: !measures! Metabolic heat rates and CO2 emission rates 
Calorespirometry: !identifies! Optimum and minimum temperatures for growth 
Calorespirometry: !distinguishes between! Phenotypes based on temperature characteristics 
Calorespirometry: !predicts! Yield-determining temperature responses in diverse carrot genotypes 
Calorespirometry: !allows selection of! Genotypes presenting best growth performance under particular conditions