['25385769', 'A major antiviral mechanism in plants is mediated by RNA silencing, which relies  on the cleavage of viral dsRNA into virus-derived small interfering RNAs  (vsiRNAs) by DICER-like enzymes. Members of the Argonaute (AGO) family of  endonucleases then use these vsiRNA as guides to target viral RNA. This can  result in a phenomenon known as recovery, whereby the plant silences viral gene  expression and recovers from viral symptoms. Endogenous mRNAs can also be  targeted by vsiRNAs in a phenomenon known as virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS).  Although related to other RNA silencing mechanisms, it has not been established  if recovery and VIGS are mediated by the same molecular mechanisms. We used  tobacco rattle virus (TRV) carrying a fragment of the phytoene desaturase (PDS)  gene (TRV-PDS) or expressing green fluorescent protein (TRV-GFP) as readouts for  VIGS and recovery, respectively, in Arabidopsis ago mutants. Our results  demonstrated roles for AGO2 and AGO4 in susceptibility to TRV, whereas VIGS of  endogenous genes appeared to be largely mediated by AGO1. However, recovery  appeared to be mediated by different components, as all the aforementioned  mutants were able to recover from TRV-GFP inoculation. TRV RNAs from recovered  plants associated less with ribosomes, suggesting that recovery involves  translational repression of viral transcripts. Translationally repressed RNAs  often accumulate in RNA processing bodies (PBs), where they are eventually  processed by decapping enzymes. Consistent with this, we found that viral  recovery induced increased PB formation and that a decapping mutant (DCP2) showed  increased VIGS and virus RNA accumulation, indicating an important role for PBs  in eliminating viral RNA.', '2015 Feb', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/eru447', 'Moffett']

DICER-like enzymes: !cleave! viral dsRNA 
AGO family: !use! vsiRNA as guides 
AGO2/4: !affect! susceptibility to TRV 
AGO1: !mediates! VIGS of endogenous genes 
Recovery: !mediated by! different components 
TRV RNAs: !accumulate in! RNA processing bodies 
PB: !process! viral RNA 
Decapping mutant: !increases! VIGS and virus RNA accumulation