['25399018', 'Tap46, a regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), plays an essential  role in plant growth and development through a functional link with the Target of  Rapamycin (TOR) signalling pathway. Here, we have characterized the molecular  mechanisms behind a gain-of-function phenotype of Tap46 and its relationship with  TOR to gain further insights into Tap46 function in plants. Constitutive  overexpression of Tap46 in Arabidopsis resulted in overall growth stimulation  with enlarged organs, such as leaves and siliques. Kinematic analysis of leaf  growth revealed that increased cell size was mainly responsible for the leaf  enlargement. Tap46 overexpression also enhanced seed size and viability under  accelerated ageing conditions. Enhanced plant growth was also observed in  dexamethasone (DEX)-inducible Tap46 overexpression Arabidopsis lines, accompanied  by increased cellular activities of nitrate-assimilating enzymes. DEX-induced  Tap46 overexpression and Tap46 RNAi resulted in increased and decreased  phosphorylation of S6 kinase (S6K), respectively, which is a sensitive indicator  of endogenous TOR activity, and Tap46 interacted with S6K in planta based on  bimolecular fluorescence complementation and co-immunoprecipitation. Furthermore,  inactivation of TOR by estradiol-inducible RNAi or rapamycin treatment decreased  Tap46 protein levels, but increased PP2A catalytic subunit levels. Real-time  quantitative PCR analysis revealed that Tap46 overexpression induced  transcriptional modulation of genes involved in nitrogen metabolism, ribosome  biogenesis, and lignin biosynthesis. These findings suggest that Tap46 modulates  plant growth as a positive effector of the TOR signalling pathway and Tap46/PP2Ac  protein abundance is regulated by TOR activity.', '2015 Feb', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/eru438', 'Pai']

Tap46: !enhances! Plant Growth 
Tap46: !interacts with! S6K 
Tap46: !regulates! TOR Signalling Pathway 
TOR: !regulates! Tap46/PP2Ac Protein Abundance