Like other biotrophic plant pathogens, plant-parasitic nematodes secrete effector proteins into host cells to facilitate infection. Effector proteins that mimic plant CLAVATA3/ENDOSPERM SURROUNDING REGION-related (CLE) proteins have been identified in several cyst nematodes, including the potato cyst nematode (PCN); however, the mechanistic details of this cross-kingdom mimicry are poorly understood. Plant CLEs are posttranslationally modified and proteolytically processed to function as bioactive ligands critical to various aspects of plant development. Using ectopic expression coupled with nanoliquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis, we show that the in planta mature form of proGrCLE1, a multidomain CLE effector secreted by PCN during infection, is a 12-amino acid arabinosylated glycopeptide (named GrCLE1-1Hyp4,7g) with striking structural similarity to mature plant CLE peptides. This glycopeptide is more resistant to hydrolytic degradation and binds with higher affinity to a CLAVATA2-like receptor (StCLV2) from potato (Solanum tuberosum) than its nonglycosylated forms. We further show that StCLV2 is highly up-regulated at nematode infection sites and that transgenic potatoes with reduced StCLV2 expression are less susceptible to PCN infection, indicating that interference of the CLV2-mediated signaling pathway confers nematode resistance in crop plants. These results strongly suggest that phytonematodes have evolved to utilize host cellular posttranslational modification and processing machinery for the activation of CLE effectors following secretion into plant cells and highlight the significance of arabinosylation in regulating nematode CLE effector activity. Our finding also provides evidence that multidomain CLEs are modified and processed similarly to single-domain CLEs, adding new insight into CLE maturation in plants.

PCN: !secretes! Effector proteins 
Effector proteins: !mimic! Plant CLEs 
CLEs: !posttranslationally modified and proteolytically processed! to function as bioactive ligands 
GrCLE1: !arabinosylated! to form GrCLE1-1Hyp4,7g 
GrCLE1-1Hyp4,7g: !binds with higher affinity! to StCLV2 
StCLV2: !highly up-regulated! at nematode infection sites 
Transgenic potatoes: !less susceptible! to PCN infection 
CLE effectors: !activated! by host cellular posttranslational modification and processing machinery 
Arabinosylation: !regulates! nematode CLE effector activity 
Multidomain CLEs: !modified and processed similarly! to single-domain CLEs