The multiple BjuCYP83A1 genes formed as a result of polyploidy have retained cell-, tissue-, and condition-specific transcriptional sub-functionalization to control the complex aliphatic glucosinolates biosynthesis in the allotetraploid Brassica juncea. Glucosinolates along with their breakdown products are associated with diverse roles in plant metabolism, plant defense and animal nutrition. CYP83A1 is a key enzyme that oxidizes aliphatic aldoximes to aci-nitro compounds in the complex aliphatic glucosinolate biosynthetic pathway. In this study, we reported the isolation of four CYP83A1 genes named BjuCYP83A1-1, -2, -3, and -4 from allotetraploid Brassica juncea (AABB genome), an economically important oilseed crop of Brassica genus. The deduced BjuCYP83A1 proteins shared 85.7-88.4 % of sequence identity with A. thaliana AtCYP83A1 and 84.2-95.8 % among themselves. Phylogenetic and divergence analysis revealed that the four BjuCYP83A1 proteins are evolutionary conserved and have evolved via duplication and hybridization of two relatively simpler diploid Brassica genomes namely B. rapa (AA genome) and B. nigra (BB genome), and have retained high level of sequence conservation following allopolyploidization. Ectopic over-expression of BjuCYP83A1-1 in A. thaliana showed that it is involved mainly in the synthesis of C4 aliphatic glucosinolates. Detailed expression analysis using real-time qRT-PCR in B. juncea and PromoterBjuCYP83A1-GUS lines in A. thaliana confirmed that the four BjuCYP83A1 genes have retained ubiquitous, overlapping but distinct expression profiles in different tissue and cell types of B. juncea, and in response to various elicitor treatments and environmental conditions. Taken together, this study demonstrated that transcriptional sub-functionalization and coordinated roles of multiple BjuCYP83A1 genes control the biosynthesis of aliphatic glucosinolates in the allotetraploid B. juncea, and provide a framework for metabolic engineering of aliphatic glucosinolates in economically important Brassica species.

BjuCYP83A1: !synthesizes! C4 aliphatic glucosinolates 
BjuCYP83A1: !retains! cell-, tissue-, and condition-specific transcriptional sub-functionalization 
BjuCYP83A1: !evolved via! duplication and hybridization of two diploid Brassica genomes 
BjuCYP83A1: !has retained! high level of sequence conservation following allopolyploidization 
BjuCYP83A1: !controls! biosynthesis of aliphatic glucosinolates in allotetraploid B. juncea