Tocopherol cyclase, encoded by the gene SUCROSE EXPORT DEFECTIVE1, catalyses the second step in the synthesis of the antioxidant tocopherol. Depletion of SXD1 activity in maize and potato leaves leads to tocopherol deficiency and a 'sugar export block' phenotype that comprises massive starch accumulation and obstruction of plasmodesmata in paraveinal tissue by callose. We grew two transgenic StSXD1:RNAi potato lines with severe tocopherol deficiency under moderate light conditions and subjected them to salt stress. After three weeks of salt exposure, we observed a strongly reduced sugar exudation rate and a lack of starch mobilization in leaves of salt-stressed transgenic plants, but not in wild-type plants. However, callose accumulation in the vasculature declined upon salt stress in all genotypes, indicating that callose plugging of plasmodesmata was not the sole cause of the sugar export block phenotype in tocopherol-deficient leaves. Based on comprehensive gene expression analyses, we propose that enhanced responsiveness of SnRK1 target genes in mesophyll cells and altered redox regulation of phloem loading by SUT1 contribute to the attenuation of sucrose export from salt-stressed SXD:RNAi source leaves. Furthermore, we could not find any indication that elevated oxidative stress may have served as a trigger for the salt-induced carbohydrate phenotype of SXD1:RNAi transgenic plants. In leaves of the SXD1:RNAi plants, sodium accumulation was diminished, while proline accumulation and pools of soluble antioxidants were increased. As supported by phytohormone contents, these differences seem to increase longevity and prevent senescence of SXD:RNAi leaves under salt stress.

Tocopherol cyclase: !encoded by! SUCROSE EXPORT DEFECTIVE1 
SXD1 activity: !depletion of! tocopherol deficiency 
StSXD1:RNAi potato lines: !subjected to! salt stress 
sugar exudation rate: !reduced in! transgenic plants 
callose accumulation: !declined in! all genotypes 
SnRK1 target genes: !enhanced responsiveness of! mesophyll cells 
SUT1: !altered redox regulation of! phloem loading 
oxidative stress: !no indication of! trigger for phenotype 
sodium accumulation: !diminished in! SXD1:RNAi plants 
proline accumulation: !increased in! SXD1:RNAi plants 
soluble antioxidants: !increased pools of! SXD1:RNAi plants 
phytohormone contents: !supported by! longevity and senescence prevention