['25428980', 'Cryptochromes are blue light receptors with multiple signaling roles in plants  and animals. Plant cryptochrome (cry1 and cry2) biological activity has been  linked to flavin photoreduction via an electron transport chain comprising three  evolutionarily conserved tryptophan residues known as the Trp triad. Recently, it  has been reported that cry2 Trp triad mutants, which fail to undergo  photoreduction in vitro, nonetheless show biological activity in vivo, raising  the possibility of alternate signaling pathways. Here, we show that Arabidopsis  thaliana cry2 proteins containing Trp triad mutations indeed undergo robust  photoreduction in living cultured insect cells. UV/Vis and electron paramagnetic  resonance spectroscopy resolves the discrepancy between in vivo and in vitro  photochemical activity, as small metabolites, including NADPH, NADH, and ATP,  were found to promote cry photoreduction even in mutants lacking the classic Trp  triad electron transfer chain. These metabolites facilitate alternate electron  transfer pathways and increase light-induced radical pair formation. We conclude  that cryptochrome activation is consistent with a mechanism of light-induced  electron transfer followed by flavin photoreduction in vivo. We further conclude  that in vivo modulation by cellular compounds represents a feature of the  cryptochrome signaling mechanism that has important consequences for light  responsivity and activation.', '2014 Nov', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.114.129809', 'Ahmad']

cry1/cry2: !affects! Flavon photoreduction 
Trp triad: !facilitates! Electron transport chain 
Trp triad mutants: !show biological activity in! vivo 
Cry2 proteins: !undergo photoreduction in! living insect cells 
Small metabolites: !promote cry photoreduction in! Trp triad mutants 
Metabolites: !facilitate alternate electron transfer pathways and! increase light-induced radical pair formation 
Cryptochrome activation: !consistent with! light-induced electron transfer followed by flavin photoreduction in vivo