The post-phloem unloading pathway and the mechanism of sugar accumulation remain unclear in litchi fruit. A combination of electron microscopy, transport of phloem-mobile symplasmic tracer (carboxyfluorescein, CF) and biochemical and molecular assays was used to explore the post-phloem transport pathway and the mechanism of aril sugar accumulation in litchi. In the funicle, where the aril originates, abundant plasmodesmata were observed, and CF introduced from the peduncle diffused to the parenchyma cells. In addition, abundant starch and pentasaccharide were detected and the sugar concentration was positively correlated with activities of sucrose hydrolysis enzymes. These results clearly showed that the phloem unloading and post-phloem transport in the funicle were symplastic. On the other hand, imaging of CF showed that it remained confined to the parenchyma cells in funicle tissues connecting the aril. Infiltration of both an ATPase inhibitor [eosin B (EB)] and a sucrose transporter inhibitor [p-chloromercuribenzene sulfonate (PCMBS)] inhibited sugar accumulation in the aril. These results indicated an apoplasmic post-phloem sugar transport from the funicle to the aril. Although facilitated diffusion might help sucrose uptake from the cytosol to the vacuole in cultivars with high soluble invertase, membrane ATPases in the aril, especially tonoplast ATPase, are crucial for aril sugar accumulation. The expression of a putative aril vacuolar membrane sucrose transporter gene (LcSUT4) was highly correlated with the sugar accumulation in the aril of litchi. These data suggest that apoplasmic transport is critical for sugar accumulation in litchi aril and that LcSUT4 is involved in this step.

CF: !diffused to! parenchyma cells
starch/pentasaccharide: !detected in! funicle
sugar concentration: !positively correlated with! sucrose hydrolysis enzymes
EB/PCMBS: !inhibited! sugar accumulation
facilitated diffusion: !helped! sucrose uptake
membrane ATPases: !crucial for! aril sugar accumulation
LcSUT4: !involved in! apoplasmic transport