['25438943', 'Tight control of membrane protein homeostasis by selective degradation is crucial  for proper cell signaling and multicellular organismal development. Membrane  proteins destined for degradation, such as misfolded proteins or activated  receptors, are usually ubiquitinated and sorted into the intraluminal vesicles  (ILVs) of prevacuolar compartments/multivesicular bodies (PVCs/MVBs), which then  fuse with vacuoles/lysosomes to deliver their contents to the lumen for  degradation by luminal proteases. The formation of ILVs and the sorting of  ubiquitinated membrane cargoes into them are facilitated by the endosomal sorting  complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery. Plants possess most  evolutionarily conserved members of the ESCRT machinery but apparently lack  orthologs of ESCRT-0 subunits and the ESCRT-I component Mvb12. Here, we  identified a unique plant ESCRT component called FYVE domain protein required for  endosomal sorting 1 (FREE1). FREE1 binds to phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate  (PI3P) and ubiquitin and specifically interacts with Vps23 via PTAP-like  tetrapeptide motifs to be incorporated into the ESCRT-I complex. Arabidopsis  free1 mutant is seedling lethal and defective in the formation of ILVs in MVBs.  Consequently, endocytosed plasma membrane (PM) proteins destined for degradation,  such as the auxin efflux carrier PIN2, cannot reach the lumen of the vacuole and  mislocalize to the tonoplast. Collectively, our findings provide the first  functional characterization of a plant FYVE domain protein, which is essential  for plant growth via its role as a unique evolutionary ESCRT component for MVB  biogenesis and vacuolar sorting of membrane proteins.', '2014 Nov 3', 'Curr Biol', '10.1016/j.cub.2014.09.014', 'Jiang']

ESCRT machinery: !facilitates! formation of ILVs 
FREE1: !binds to! PI3P and ubiquitin 
FREE1: !interacts with! Vps23 
FREE1: !essential for! plant growth 
MVBs: !sort! ubiquitinated membrane cargoes 
PIN2: !mislocalizes to! tonoplast in free1 mutant 
Vacuole: !delivers! contents to lumen for degradation