Latex harvesting in Hevea brasiliensis amounts to strong abiotic stress that can cause a halt in production in the most susceptible clones. Although the role of jasmonic acid has been suggested in laticifer differentiation, its role in latex production and in the response to harvesting stress has received very little attention. Only a few key genes acting in the COI-JAZ-MYC module have been isolated and studied at transcriptional level. Use of a reference transcriptome obtained on rubber clone PB 260 covering a large number of tissues under different environmental conditions enabled us to identify 24 contigs implicated in the jasmonate signalling pathway in the rubber tree. An analysis of their expression profile by qPCR, combined with hierarchical clustering, suggested that the jasmonate signalling pathway is highly activated in laticifer cells and, more particularly, in the response to harvesting stress. By comparison with their genomic sequences, the existence of regulation by alternative splicing was discovered for JAZ transcripts in response to harvesting stress. Lastly, positive transcriptional regulation of the HbJAZ_1405 gene by MYC was demonstrated. This study led to the identification of all actors of jasmonate signalling pathway and revealed a specific gene expression pattern in latex cells. In-depth analysis of this regulation showed alternative splicing that has been previously shown in Arabidopsis. Interestingly, genotypic variation was observed in Hevea clones with contrasting latex metabolism. This result suggests an involvement of jasmonate signalling pathway in latex production. The data suggest that specific variability of the JA pathway may have some major consequences for resistance to stress. The data support the hypothesis that a better understanding of transcriptional regulations of jasmonate pathway during harvesting stress, along with the use of genotypic diversity in response to such stress, can be used to improve resistance to stress and rubber production in Hevea.

jasmonic acid: !suggested to affect! laticifer differentiation 
COI-JAZ-MYC module: !isolated and studied! transcriptional level 
24 contigs: !implicated in! jasmonate signalling pathway 
qPCR: !revealed! highly activated jasmonate signalling pathway 
alternative splicing: !discovered for! JAZ transcripts 
HbJAZ_1405 gene: !positively regulated by! MYC 
genotypic variation: !observed in! Hevea clones 
JA pathway: !involved in! latex production 
transcriptional regulations: !better understanding of! harvesting stress