['25464340', 'Inorganic arsenic is a carcinogen, and its ingestion through foods such as rice  presents a significant risk to human health. Plants chemically reduce arsenate to  arsenite. Using genome-wide association (GWA) mapping of loci controlling natural  variation in arsenic accumulation in Arabidopsis thaliana allowed us to identify  the arsenate reductase required for this reduction, which we named High Arsenic  Content 1 (HAC1). Complementation verified the identity of HAC1, and expression  in Escherichia coli lacking a functional arsenate reductase confirmed the  arsenate reductase activity of HAC1. The HAC1 protein accumulates in the  epidermis, the outer cell layer of the root, and also in the pericycle cells  surrounding the central vascular tissue. Plants lacking HAC1 lose their ability  to efflux arsenite from roots, leading to both increased transport of arsenic  into the central vascular tissue and on into the shoot. HAC1 therefore functions  to reduce arsenate to arsenite in the outer cell layer of the root, facilitating  efflux of arsenic as arsenite back into the soil to limit both its accumulation  in the root and transport to the shoot. Arsenate reduction by HAC1 in the  pericycle may play a role in limiting arsenic loading into the xylem. Loss of  HAC1-encoded arsenic reduction leads to a significant increase in arsenic  accumulation in shoots, causing an increased sensitivity to arsenate toxicity. We  also confirmed the previous observation that the ACR2 arsenate reductase in A.  thaliana plays no detectable role in arsenic metabolism. Furthermore, ACR2 does  not interact epistatically with HAC1, since arsenic metabolism in the acr2 hac1  double mutant is disrupted in an identical manner to that described for the hac1  single mutant. Our identification of HAC1 and its associated natural variation  provides an important new resource for the development of low arsenic-containing  food such as rice.', '2014 Dec', 'PLoS Biol', '10.1371/journal.pbio.1002009', 'Salt']

HAC1: !reduces! Arsenate 
HAC1: !accumulates in! Epidermis 
HAC1: !facilitates efflux of! Arsenite 
HAC1: !limits transport to! Shoot 
HAC1: !plays role in! Limiting arsenic loading into xylem 
HAC1: !causes increased sensitivity to! Arsenate toxicity 
ACR2: !does not interact epistatically with! HAC1