The tea plant (Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze) is one of the most economically important woody crops. Recently, many leaf color genotypes have been developed during tea plant breeding and have become valuable materials in the processing of green tea. Although the physiological characteristics of some leaf color mutants of tea plants have been partially revealed, little is known about the molecular mechanisms leading to the chlorina phenotype in tea plants. The yellow-leaf tea cultivar Zhonghuang 2 (ZH2) was selected during tea plant breeding. In comparison with Longjing 43 (LJ43), a widely planted green tea cultivar, ZH2 exhibited the chlorina phenotype and displayed significantly decreased chlorophyll contents. Transmission electron microscopy analysis revealed that the ultrastructure of the chloroplasts was disrupted, and the grana were poorly stacked in ZH2. Moreover, the contents of theanine and free amino acids were significantly higher, whereas the contents of carotenoids, catechins and anthocyanin were lower in ZH2 than in LJ43. Microarray analysis showed that the expression of 259 genes related to amino acid metabolism, photosynthesis and pigment metabolism was significantly altered in ZH2 shoots compared with those of LJ43 plants. Pathway analysis of 4,902 differentially expressed genes identified 24 pathways as being significantly regulated, including 'cysteine and methionine metabolism', 'glycine, serine and threonine metabolism', 'flavonoid biosynthesis', 'porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism' and 'carotenoid biosynthesis'. Furthermore, a number of differentially expressed genes could be mapped to the 'theanine biosynthesis', 'chlorophyll biosynthesis' and 'flavonoid biosynthesis' pathways. Changes in the expression of genes involved in these pathways might be responsible for the different phenotype of ZH2. A novel chlorophyll-deficient chlorina tea plant cultivar was identified. Biochemical characteristics were analyzed and gene expression profiling was performed using a custom oligonucleotide-based microarray. This study provides further insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the phenotype of the chlorina cultivar of Camellia sinensis.

Gene: !affects! Phenotype 
Gene: !regulates! Amino acid metabolism 
Gene: !regulates! Photosynthesis 
Gene: !regulates! Pigment metabolism 
Gene: !regulates! Cysteine and methionine metabolism 
Gene: !regulates! Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism 
Gene: !regulates! Flavonoid biosynthesis 
Gene: !regulates! Porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism 
Gene: !regulates! Carotenoid biosynthesis 
Gene: !regulates! Theanine biosynthesis 
Gene: !regulates! Chlorophyll biosynthesis