Drought is by far the most important environmental factor contributing to yield losses in crops, including soybeans [Glycine max (L.) Merr.]. To address this problem, a gene that encodes an osmotin-like protein isolated from Solanum nigrum var. americanum (SnOLP) driven by the UBQ3 promoter from Arabidopsis thaliana was transferred into the soybean genome by particle bombardment. Two independently transformed soybean lines expressing SnOLP were produced. Segregation analyses indicated single-locus insertions for both lines. qPCR analysis suggested a single insertion of SnOLP in the genomes of both transgenic lines, but one copy of the hpt gene was inserted in the first line and two in the second line. Transgenic plants exhibited no remarkable phenotypic alterations in the seven analyzed generations. When subjected to water deficit, transgenic plants performed better than the control ones. Leaf physiological measurements revealed that transgenic soybean plants maintained higher leaf water potential at predawn, higher net CO2 assimilation rate, higher stomatal conductance and higher transpiration rate than non-transgenic plants. Grain production and 100-grain weight were affected by water supply. Decrease in grain productivity and 100-grain weight were observed for both transgenic and non-transgenic plants under water deficit; however, it was more pronounced for non-transgenic plants. Moreover, transgenic lines showed significantly higher 100-grain weight than non-transgenic plants under water shortage. This is the first report showing that expression of SnOLP in transgenic soybeans improved physiological responses and yield components of plants when subjected to water deficit, highlighting the potential of this gene for biotechnological applications.

SnOLP: !encodes! osmotin-like protein 
SnOLP: !transferred into! soybean genome 
UBQ3 promoter: !drives! SnOLP 
Solanum nigrum var. americanum: !isolates! SnOLP 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !provides! UBQ3 promoter 
Glycine max (L.) Merr.: !contributes to yield losses in! crops 
water deficit: !affects! transgenic plants 
transgenic plants: !maintain! higher leaf water potential 
transgenic plants: !exhibit! higher net CO2 assimilation rate 
transgenic plants: !show! higher stomatal conductance 
transgenic plants: !have! higher transpiration rate 
transgenic plants: !improve! physiological responses 
transgenic plants: !enhance! yield components