['25502410', "Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis in plants engenders myriad phenolics with diverse  biological functions. Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) is the first committed  enzyme in the pathway, directing primary metabolic flux into a phenylpropanoid  branch. Previously, we demonstrated that the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  Kelch domain-containing F-box proteins, AtKFB01, AtKFB20, and AtKFB50, function  as the negative regulators controlling phenylpropanoid biosynthesis via mediating  PAL's ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. Here, we reveal that Arabidopsis  KFB39, a close homolog of AtKFB50, also interacts physically with PAL isozymes  and modulates PAL stability and activity. Disturbing the expression of KFB39  reciprocally affects the accumulation/deposition of a set of phenylpropanoid end  products, suggesting that KFB39 is an additional posttranslational regulator  responsible for the turnover of PAL and negatively controlling phenylpropanoid  biosynthesis. Furthermore, we discover that exposure of Arabidopsis to  ultraviolet (UV)-B radiation suppresses the expression of all four KFB genes  while inducing the transcription of PAL isogenes; these data suggest that  Arabidopsis consolidates both transcriptional and posttranslational regulation  mechanisms to maximize its responses to UV light stress. Simultaneous  down-regulation of all four identified KFBs significantly enhances the production  of (poly)phenols and the plant's tolerance to UV irradiation. This study offers a  biotechnological approach for engineering the production of useful phenolic  chemicals and for increasing a plant's resistance to environmental stress.", '2015 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.249136', 'Liu']

PAL: !interacts with! KFB39 
KFB39: !modulates! PAL stability/activity 
KFB39: !affects! accumulation/deposition of phenylpropanoid end products 
UV-B radiation: !suppresses! expression of all four KFB genes 
UV-B radiation: !induces! transcription of PAL isogenes 
Down-regulation of all four KFBs: !enhances! production of (poly)phenols 
Down-regulation of all four KFBs: !increases! plant's tolerance to UV irradiation