Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae establishes root nodule symbioses with several legume genera. Although most isolates are equally effective in establishing symbioses with all host genera, previous evidence suggests that hosts select specific rhizobial genotypes among those present in the soil. We have used population genomics to further investigate this observation. Pisum sativum, Lens culinaris, Vicia sativa, and V. faba plants were used to trap rhizobia from a well-characterized soil, and pooled genomic DNA from 100 isolates from each plant were sequenced. Sequence reads were aligned to the R. leguminosarum bv. viciae 3841 reference genome. High overall conservation of sequences was observed in all subpopulations, although several multigenic regions were absent from the soil population. A large fraction (16 to 22%) of sequence reads could not be recruited to the reference genome, suggesting that they represent sequences specific to that particular soil population. Although highly conserved, the 16S to 23S ribosomal RNA gene region presented single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) regarding the reference genome, but no striking differences could be found among plant-selected subpopulations. Plant-specific SNP patterns were, however, clearly observed within the nod gene cluster, supporting the existence of a plant preference for specific rhizobial genotypes. This was also shown after genome-wide analysis of SNP patterns.

Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae: !establishes root nodule symbioses with! Legume genera
Pisum sativum, Lens culinaris, Vicia sativa, and V. faba plants: !trap rhizobia from! Well-characterized soil
Sequence reads: !aligned to! R. leguminosarum bv. viciae 3841 reference genome
16S to 23S ribosomal RNA gene region: !presented single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) regarding! Reference genome
Nod gene cluster: !showed plant-specific SNP patterns! Plant preference for specific rhizobial genotypes
Genome-wide analysis of SNP patterns: !supported! Plant preference for specific rhizobial genotypes