['25522736', 'BACKGROUND: Plant perception of conserved microbe-derived or damage-derived  molecules (so-called microbe- or damage-associated molecular patterns, MAMPs or  DAMPs, respectively) triggers cellular signaling cascades to initiate  counteracting defence responses. Using MAMP-induced rise in cellular calcium  levels as one of the earliest biochemical readouts, we initiated a genetic screen  for components involved in early MAMP signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana. RESULTS:  We characterized here the "changed calcium elevation 5" (cce5) mutant, where five  allelic cce5 mutants were isolated. They all show reduced calcium levels after  elicitation with peptides representing bacteria-derived MAMPs (flg22 and elf18)  and endogenous DAMP (AtPep1), but a normal response to chitin octamers. Mapping,  sequencing of the mutated locus and complementation studies revealed CCE5 to  encode the receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase (RLCK), avrPphB sensitive 1-like 1  (PBL1). Kinase activities of PBL1 derived from three of the cce5 alleles are  abrogated in vivo. Validation with T-DNA mutants revealed that, besides PBL1,  another RLCK, Botrytis-induced kinase 1 (BIK1), is also required for  MAMP/DAMP-induced calcium elevations. CONCLUSIONS: Hence, PBL1 and BIK1 (but not  two related RLCKs, PBS1 and PBL2) are required for MAMP/DAMP-induced calcium  signaling. It remains to be investigated if the many other RLCKs encoded in the  Arabidopsis genome affect early calcium signal transduction - perhaps in  dependence on the type of MAMP/DAMP ligands. A future challenge would be to  identify the substrates of these various RLCKs, in order to elucidate their  signaling role between the receptor complexes at the plasma membrane and  downstream cellular signaling components.', '2014 Dec 19', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-014-0374-4', 'Lee']

CCE5: !encodes! RLCK 
PBL1: !abrogates kinase activity in! cce5 alleles 
BIK1: !required for! MAMP/DAMP-induced calcium elevations 
PBS1: !not required for! MAMP/DAMP-induced calcium elevations 
PBL2: !not required for! MAMP/DAMP-induced calcium elevations