['25524442', 'Germination of pollen grains is a crucial step in plant reproduction. However,  the molecular mechanisms involved remain unclear. We investigated the role of  PECTIN METHYLESTERASE48 (PME48), an enzyme implicated in the remodeling of  pectins in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) pollen. A combination of functional  genomics, gene expression, in vivo and in vitro pollen germination,  immunolabeling, and biochemical analyses was used on wild-type and Atpme48 mutant  plants. We showed that AtPME48 is specifically expressed in the male gametophyte  and is the second most expressed PME in dry and imbibed pollen grains. Pollen  grains from homozygous mutant lines displayed a significant delay in imbibition  and germination in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, numerous pollen grains showed two  tips emerging instead of one in the wild type. Immunolabeling and Fourier  transform infrared analyses showed that the degree of methylesterification of the  homogalacturonan was higher in pme48-/- pollen grains. In contrast, the PME  activity was lower in pme48-/-, partly due to a reduction of PME48 activity  revealed by zymogram. Interestingly, the wild-type phenotype was restored in  pme48-/- with the optimum germination medium supplemented with 2.5 mm calcium  chloride, suggesting that in the wild-type pollen, the weakly methylesterified  homogalacturonan is a source of Ca(2+) necessary for pollen germination. Although  pollen-specific PMEs are traditionally associated with pollen tube elongation,  this study provides strong evidence that PME48 impacts the mechanical properties  of the intine wall during maturation of the pollen grain, which, in turn,  influences pollen grain germination.', '2015 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.250928', 'Mollet']

PME48: !affects! Pollen germination 
PME48: !localizes to! Male gametophyte 
Atpme48 mutant plants: !display! Delay in imbibition and germination 
Atpme48 mutant plants: !show! Two tips emerging instead of one 
Homogalacturonan: !higher methylesterification in! pme48-/- pollen grains 
PME activity: !lower in! pme48-/- 
Calcium chloride: !restores wild-type phenotype in! pme48-/- 
PMEs: !traditionally associated with! Pollen tube elongation