Plants growing in phosphorus (P)-deficient conditions can either increase their exploration of the environment (hence increasing P uptake) or can solubilize and reutilize P from established tissue sources. However, it is currently unclear if P stored in root cell wall can be reutilized. The present study shows that culture of the rice cultivars 'Nipponbare' (Nip) and 'Kasalath' (Kas) in P-deficient conditions results in progressive reductions in root soluble inorganic phosphate (Pi). However, Nip consistently maintains a higher level of soluble Pi and lower relative cell wall P content than does Kas, indicating that more cell wall P is released in Nip than in Kas. P-deficient Nip has a greater pectin and hemicellulose 1 (HC1) content than does P-deficient Kas, consistent with the significant positive relationship between pectin and root-soluble Pi levels amongst multiple rice cultivars. These observations suggest that increased soluble Pi might result from increased pectin content during P starvation. In vitro experiments showed that pectin releases Pi from insoluble FePO4. Furthermore, an Arabidopsis thaliana mutant with reduced pectin levels (qua1-2), has less root soluble Pi and is more sensitive to P deficiency than the wild type (WT) Col-0, whereas NaCl-treated WT plants exhibit both an increased root pectin content and an elevated soluble Pi content during P-starvation. These observations indicate that pectin can facilitate the remobilization of P deposited in the cell wall. This is a previously unknown mechanism for the reutilization of P in P-starved plants.

P-deficient plants: !increase! exploration of environment
P-deficient Nip: !maintains higher! level of soluble Pi
P-deficient Kas: !releases more! cell wall P
P-deficient Nip: !has greater! pectin and HC1 content
multiple rice cultivars: !positively related! pectin and root-soluble Pi levels
pectin: !releases! Pi from insoluble FePO4
qua1-2 mutant: !less! root soluble Pi than WT Col-0
NaCl-treated WT plants: !increased! root pectin content and elevated soluble Pi content