Histone proteins and the nucleosomes along with DNA are the essential components of eukaryotic chromatin. Post-translational histone-DNA interactions and modifications eventually offer significant alteration in the chromatin environment and potentially influence diverse fundamental biological processes, some of which are known to be epigenetically inherited and constitute the "epigenetic code". Such chromatin modifications evidently uncover remarkable diversity and biological specificity associated with distinct patterns of covalent histone marks. The past few years have witnessed major breakthroughs in plant biology research by utilizing chromatin modification-specific antibodies through molecular cytogenetic tools to ascertain hallmark signatures of chromatin domains on the chromosomes. Here, we survey current information on chromosomal distribution patterns of chromatin modifications with special emphasis on histone methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation, and centromere-specific histone 3 (CENH3) marks in plants using immuno-FISH as a basic tool. Major available information has been classified under typical and comparative cytogenetic detection of chromatin modifications in plants. Further, spatial distribution of chromatin environment that exists between different cell types such as angiosperm/gymnosperm, monocot/dicot, diploid/polyploids, vegetative/generative cells, as well as different stages, i.e., mitosis versus meiosis has also been discussed in detail. Several challenges and future perspectives of molecular cytogenetics in the grooming field of plant chromatin dynamics have also been addressed.

Histone proteins: !interact with! DNA 
Post-translational histone-DNA interactions: !influence! biological processes 
Chromatin modifications: !uncover! diversity and specificity 
Molecular cytogenetic tools: !ascertain! hallmark signatures of chromatin domains 
Immuno-FISH: !detect! chromatin modifications in plants 
Angiosperm/gymnosperm: !differ in! spatial distribution of chromatin environment 
Monocot/dicot: !differ in! spatial distribution of chromatin environment 
Diploid/polyploids: !differ in! spatial distribution of chromatin environment 
Vegetative/generative cells: !differ in! spatial distribution of chromatin environment 
Mitosis/meiosis: !differ in! spatial distribution of chromatin environment