['25535363', 'The formation of glycoconjugates depends on nucleotide sugars, which serve as  donor substrates for glycosyltransferases in the lumen of Golgi vesicles and the  endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Import of nucleotide sugars from the cytosol is an  important prerequisite for these reactions and is mediated by nucleotide sugar  transporters. Here, we report the identification of REPRESSOR OF CYTOKININ  DEFICIENCY 1 (ROCK1, At5g65000) as an ER-localized facilitator of  UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) and UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine (UDP-GalNAc)  transport in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mutant alleles of ROCK1 suppress phenotypes  inferred by a reduced concentration of the plant hormone cytokinin. This  suppression is caused by the loss of activity of cytokinin-degrading enzymes,  cytokinin oxidases/dehydrogenases (CKXs). Cytokinin plays an essential role in  regulating shoot apical meristem (SAM) activity and shoot architecture. We show  that rock1 enhances SAM activity and organ formation rate, demonstrating an  important role of ROCK1 in regulating the cytokinin signal in the meristematic  cells through modulating activity of CKX proteins. Intriguingly, genetic and  molecular analysis indicated that N-glycosylation of CKX1 was not affected by the  lack of ROCK1-mediated supply of UDP-GlcNAc. In contrast, we show that CKX1  stability is regulated in a proteasome-dependent manner and that ROCK1 regulates  the CKX1 level. The increased unfolded protein response in rock1 plants and  suppression of phenotypes caused by the defective brassinosteroid receptor bri1-9  strongly suggest that the ROCK1 activity is an important part of the ER quality  control system, which determines the fate of aberrant proteins in the secretory  pathway.', '2015 Jan 6', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1419050112', 'Werner']

ROCK1: !facilitates! UDP-N-acetylglucosamine/UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine transport 
ROCK1: !enhances! SAM activity/organ formation rate 
ROCK1: !regulates! CKX1 stability/CKX1 level 
CKX1: !degrades! cytokinin 
cytokinin: !regulates! SAM activity/shoot architecture