Male sterility is a common phenomenon in flowering plant species, and it has been successfully developed in several crops by taking advantage of heterosis. Using space mutation breeding of upland cotton, a novel photosensitive genetic male sterile (PGMS) mutant was isolated. To take advantage of the PGMS lines in cotton hybrid breeding, it is of great importance to study the molecular mechanisms of its male sterility. Delayed degradation of the PGMS anther tapetum occurred at different developmental stages as shown by analysis of anther cross-sections. To gain detailed insights into the cellular defects that occurred during PGMS pollen development, we used a differential proteomic approach to investigate the protein profiles of mutant and wild-type anthers at the tetrad, uninucleate and binucleate pollen stages. This approach identified 62 differentially expressed protein spots, including 19 associated with energy and metabolic pathways, 7 involved with pollen tube growth, 5 involved with protein metabolism, and 4 involved with pollen wall development. The remaining 27 protein spots were classified into other functional processes, such as protein folding and assembly (5 spots), and stress defense (4 spots). These differentially expressed proteins strikingly affected pollen development in the PGMS mutant anther and resulted in abnormal pollen grain formation, which may be the key reason for its male sterility. This work represents the first study using comparative proteomics between fertile and PGMS cotton plants to identify PGMS-related proteins. The results demonstrate the presence of a complicated metabolic network in anther development and advance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of microgamete formation, providing insights into the molecular mechanisms of male sterility.

PGMS: !causes! Delayed degradation of anther tapetum
PGMS: !affects! Protein profiles of mutant and wild-type anthers
Protein spots: !associated with! Energy and metabolic pathways
Protein spots: !involved with! Pollen tube growth
Protein spots: !involved with! Protein metabolism
Protein spots: !involved with! Pollen wall development
Protein spots: !classified into! Other functional processes
Differentially expressed proteins: !strikingly affect! Pollen development in PGMS mutant anther