['25588735', 'Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) is a crucial enzyme that catalyzes an  irreversible primary metabolic reaction in plants.Previous studies have used  transgenic plants expressing ectopic PEPC forms with diminished feedback  inhibition to examine the role of PEPC in carbon and nitrogen metabolism. To  date, the in vivo role of PEPC in carbon and nitrogen metabolism has not been  analyzed in plants. In this study, we examined the role of PEPC in plants,  demonstrating that PPC1 and PPC2 were highly expressed genes encoding PEPC in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) leaves and that PPC1 and PPC2 accounted for  approximately 93% of total PEPC activity in the leaves. A double mutant,  ppc1/ppc2, was constructed that exhibited a severe growth-arrest phenotype. The  ppc1/ppc2 mutant accumulated more starch and sucrose than wild-type plants when  seedlings were grown under normal conditions. Physiological and metabolic  analysis revealed that decreased PEPC activity in the ppc1/ppc2 mutant greatly  reduced the synthesis of malate and citrate and severely suppressed ammonium  assimilation. Furthermore, nitrate levels in the ppc1/ppc2 mutant were  significantly lower than those in wild-type plants due to the suppression of  ammonium assimilation. Interestingly, starch and sucrose accumulation could be  prevented and nitrate levels could be maintained by supplying the ppc1/ppc2  mutant with exogenous malate and glutamate, suggesting that low nitrogen status  resulted in the alteration of carbon metabolism and prompted the accumulation of  starch and sucrose in the ppc1/ppc2 mutant. Our results demonstrate that PEPC in  leaves plays a crucial role in modulating the balance of carbon and nitrogen  metabolism in Arabidopsis.', '2015 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.254474', 'Chen']

PPC1: !synthesizes! PEPC 
PPC2: !synthesizes! PEPC 
ppc1/ppc2 mutant: !accumulates! starch and sucrose 
ppc1/ppc2 mutant: !suppresses! ammonium assimilation 
ppc1/ppc2 mutant: !reduces! malate and citrate synthesis 
exogenous malate and glutamate: !prevents! starch and sucrose accumulation 
exogenous malate and glutamate: !maintains! nitrate levels