Carbohydrate metabolism is important in plant sexual reproduction because sugar contents are determining factors for both flower initiation and floral organ development. In woody plants, flowering represents the most energy-consuming step crucial to reproductive success. Nevertheless, in these species, the photosynthesis performed by flowers supplies the carbon required for reproduction. In grapevine (Vitis vinifera), the inflorescence has a specific status because this organ imports carbohydrates at the same time as it exports photoassimilates. In this study, fluctuations in carbohydrate metabolism were monitored by analyzing gas exchanges, photosynthetic electron transport capacity, carbohydrate contents and some activities of carbohydrate metabolism enzymes, in the inflorescences of Pinot noir and Gewurztraminer, two cultivars with a different sensitivity to coulure phenomenon. Our results showed that photosynthetic activity and carbohydrate metabolism are clearly different and differently regulated during the floral development in the two cultivars. Indeed, the regulation of the linear electron flow and the cyclic electron flow is not similar. Moreover, the regulation of PSII activity, with a higher Y(NPQ)/Y(NO) ratio in Gewurztraminer, can be correlated with the higher protection of the photosynthetic chain and consequently with the higher yield under optimal conditions of this cultivar. At least, our results showed a higher photosynthetic activity and a better protection of PSI in Pinot noir during the floral development.

Carbohydrate metabolism: !important for! Plant sexual reproduction 
Photosynthesis: !supplies! Carbon required for reproduction 
Gas exchanges: !monitored to analyze! Carbohydrate metabolism 
Pinot noir/Gewurztraminer: !differ in! Sensitivity to coulure phenomenon 
Linear electron flow: !differently regulated in! Two cultivars 
Y(NPQ)/Y(NO): !higher in! Gewurztraminer 
PSII activity: !correlated with! Higher protection of photosynthetic chain 
PSI: !higher activity in! Pinot noir