Overexpressing novel antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) in plants is a promising approach for crop disease resistance engineering. However, the in planta stability and subcellular localization of each AMP should be validated for the respective plant species, which can be challenging due to the small sizes and extreme pI ranges of AMPs which limits the utility of standard proteomic gel-based methods. Despite recent advances in quantitative shotgun proteomics, its potential for AMP analysis has not been utilized and high throughput methods are still lacking. We created transgenic Nicotiana attenuata plants that independently express 10 different AMPs under a constitutive 35S promoter and compared the extracellular accumulation of each AMP using a universal and versatile protein quantification method. We coupled a rapid apoplastic peptide extraction with label-free protein quantification by nanoUPLC-MSE analysis using Hi3 method and identified/quantified 7 of 10 expressed AMPs in the transgenic plants ranging from 37 to 91 amino acids in length. The quantitative comparison among the transgenic plant lines showed that three particular peptides, belonging to the defensin, knottin and lipid-transfer protein families, attained the highest concentrations of 91 to 254 pmol per g leaf fresh mass, which identified them as best suited for ectopic expression in N. attenuata. The chosen mass spectrometric approach proved to be highly sensitive in the detection of different AMP types and exhibited the high level of analytical reproducibility required for label-free quantitative measurements along with a simple protocol required for the sample preparation. Heterologous expression of AMPs in plants can result in highly variable and non-predictable peptide amounts and we present a universal quantitative method to confirm peptide stability and extracellular deposition. The method allows for the rapid quantification of apoplastic peptides without cumbersome and time-consuming purification or chromatographic steps and can be easily adapted to other plant species.

Overexpressing AMPs: !promises! Crop Disease Resistance Engineering
AMPs: !challenge! Standard Proteomic Gel-Based Methods
Quantitative Shotgun Proteomics: !lacks! High Throughput Methods
Transgenic Plants: !express! 10 Different AMPs
Apoplastic Peptide Extraction: !coupled with! Label-Free Protein Quantification
NanoUPLC-MSE Analysis: !identifies/quantifies! 7 of 10 Expressed AMPs
Defensin, Knottin and Lipid-Transfer Protein Families: !attain highest concentrations! 91 to 254 pmol per g Leaf Fresh Mass
Mass Spectrometry: !proves highly sensitive! Detection of Different AMP Types
Heterologous Expression: !results in! Highly Variable Peptide Amounts
Universal Quantitative Method: !confirms! Peptide Stability and Extracellular Deposition