Identification and characterization of 5,446 mlncRNAs from Salvia miltiorrhiza showed that the majority of identified mlncRNAs were stress responsive, providing a framework for elucidating mlncRNA functions in S. miltiorrhiza. mRNA-like noncoding RNAs (mlncRNAs) are transcribed by RNA polymerase II and are polyadenylated, capped and spliced. They play important roles in plant development and defense responses. However, there is no information available for mlncRNAs in Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge, the first Chinese medicinal material entering the international market. To perform a transcriptome-wide identification of S. miltiorrhiza mlncRNAs, we assembled over 8 million RNA-seq reads from GenBank database and 5,624 ESTs from PlantGDB into 44422 unigenes. Using a computational identification pipeline, we identified 5446 S. miltiorrhiza mlncRNA candidates from the assembled unigenes. Of the 5446 mlncRNAs, 2 are primary transcripts of conserved miRNAs, and 2030 can be grouped into 470 families with at least two members in a family. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of mlncRNAs with at least 900 nt showed that the majority were differentially expressed in roots, stems, leaves and flowers and responsive to methyl jasmonate (MeJA) treatment in S. miltiorrhiza. Analysis of published RNA-seq data showed that a total of 3,044 mlncRNAs were expressed in hairy roots of S. miltiorrhiza and the expression of 1,904 of the 3,044 mlncRNAs was altered by yeast extract and Ag(+) treatment. The results indicate that the majority of mlncRNAs are involved in plant response to stress. This study provides a framework for understanding the roles of mlncRNAs in S. miltiorrhiza.

RNA polymerase II: !synthesizes! mlncRNAs 
mlncRNAs: !play important roles in! plant development and defense responses 
S. miltiorrhiza: !contains! 5,446 mlncRNAs 
mlncRNAs: !are stress responsive in! S. miltiorrhiza 
MeJA treatment: !alters expression of! mlncRNAs 
yeast extract and Ag(+): !alters expression of! mlncRNAs