Magnesium deficiency preferentially inhibits photosystem I rather than photosystem II in Sulla carnosa plants. The effects of magnesium (Mg(2+)) deficiency on growth, photosynthetic performance, pigment and polypeptide composition of chloroplast membranes were studied in the halophyte Sulla carnosa (Desf.), an annual legume endemic to Tunisia and Algeria. The results demonstrate a gradual decrease in biomass production with decreasing Mg(2+) availability in the growth medium. The increase of Mg(2+) deficiency was also associated with a decline of the net CO2 assimilation (Pn) in fully expanded leaves, a decrease in the amount of photosynthetic pigments, and an increase in the lipid peroxidation in plants exposed to decreased Mg(2+) concentrations. Interestingly, while CO2 assimilation already was affected at Mg(2+) concentrations below 1.5 mM, the photochemical efficiency of photosystem II (PSII) declined only in the absence of Mg(2+). In contrast, plants of S. carnosa grown in Mg(2+)-deficient conditions exhibited a significant decrease in photosystem I (PSI) photochemistry in vivo at much higher Mg(2+) levels compared to PSII photochemical activity. The inhibitory effect of Mg(2+) deficiency on PSI photochemistry strongly correlated with significantly lower relative abundance of PSI-related chlorophyll-protein complexes and lower amounts of PSI-associated polypeptides, PsaA, PsaB, and Lhca proteins within the same range of Mg(2+) concentrations. These observations were associated with a higher intersystem electron pool size, restricted linear electron transport and a lower rate of reduction of P700(+) in the dark indicating restricted capacity for PSI cyclic electron transfer in plants exposed to Mg(2+)-deficient conditions compared to controls. These results clearly indicate that PSI, rather than PSII is preferentially targeted and damaged under Mg(2+)-deficiency conditions.

Mg(2+): !inhibits! PSI
Mg(2+): !decreases! Pn
Mg(2+): !decreases! photosynthetic pigments
Mg(2+): !increases! lipid peroxidation
Mg(2+): !decreases! PSII photochemistry
PSI: !decreases! relative abundance of chlorophyll-protein complexes
PSI: !decreases! polypeptides
PSI: !increases! intersystem electron pool size
PSI: !restricts! linear electron transport
PSI: !reduces! P700(+) in the dark