MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small (approximately 21 nucleotide) non-coding RNAs that are key post-transcriptional gene regulators in eukaryotic organisms. More than 100 cassava miRNAs have been identified in a conservation analysis and a repertoire of cassava miRNAs have also been characterised by next-generation sequencing (NGS) in recent studies. Here, using NGS, we profiled small non-coding RNAs and mRNA genes in two cassava cultivars and their wild progenitor to identify and characterise miRNAs that are potentially involved in plant growth and starch biosynthesis. Six small RNA and six mRNA libraries from leaves and roots of the two cultivars, KU50 and Arg7, and their wild progenitor, W14, were subjected to NGS. Analysis of the sequencing data revealed 29 conserved miRNA families and 33 new miRNA families. Together, these miRNAs potentially targeted a total of 360 putative target genes. Whereas 16 miRNA families were highly expressed in cultivar leaves, another 13 miRNA families were highly expressed in storage roots of cultivars. Co-expression analysis revealed that the expression level of some targets had negative relationship with their corresponding miRNAs in storage roots and leaves; these targets included MYB33, ARF10, GRF1, RD19, APL2, NF-YA3 and SPL2, which are known to be involved in plant development, starch biosynthesis and response to environmental stimuli. The identified miRNAs, target mRNAs and target gene ontology annotation all shed light on the possible functions of miRNAs in Manihot species. The differential expression of miRNAs between cultivars and their wild progenitor, together with our analysis of GO annotation and confirmation of miRNA: target pairs, might provide insight into know the differences between wild progenitor and cultivated cassava.

miRNA: !targets! mRNA 
mRNA: !regulated by! miRNA 
miRNA: !highly expressed in! cultivar leaves 
miRNA: !highly expressed in! storage roots of cultivars 
target gene: !negatively related to! corresponding miRNA 
MYB33, ARF10, GRF1, RD19, APL2, NF-YA3, SPL2: !involved in! plant development, starch biosynthesis, response to environmental stimuli