In nature, plants are often exposed to combinations of different stresses at the same time, while in many laboratory studies of molecular stress induction phenomena, single stress responses are analyzed. This study aims to identify the common (i.e. more general stress-responsive) and the stress-specific adjustments of the leaf proteome of wild barley to two often co-occurring stress phenomena, i.e. in response to (long-term) drought acclimation (DA) or to (transient) heat stress (HS). In addition, we analyzed those alterations which are specific for the combination of both stresses. Leaf proteome analysis was performed using 2D difference gel electrophoresis followed by protein identification via mass spectrometry with a 1.5 threshold value of changes in relative protein contents. DA resulted in specific upregulation of proteins with cell detoxification functions, water homeostasis maintenance, amino acids synthesis and lipid metabolism and distinct forms of heat shock proteins (HSPs) and proteins with chaperon functions while proteins related to nitrogen metabolism were downregulated. This response was distinguished from the response to transient HS, which included upregulation of a broad range of HSP products. The common response to both stressors revealed upregulation of additional forms of HSPs and the downregulation of enzymes of the photosynthetic apparatus and chlorophyll binding proteins. The simultaneous exposure to both stress conditions resulted mostly in a combination of both stress responses and to unique abundance changes of proteins with yet unclear functions.

drought acclimation: !upregulates! proteins with cell detoxification functions 
drought acclimation: !upregulates! proteins with water homeostasis maintenance 
drought acclimation: !upregulates! proteins with amino acids synthesis 
drought acclimation: !upregulates! proteins with lipid metabolism 
drought acclimation: !upregulates! distinct forms of heat shock proteins 
drought acclimation: !downregulates! proteins related to nitrogen metabolism 
heat stress: !upregulates! broad range of heat shock proteins 
common response: !upregulates! additional forms of heat shock proteins 
common response: !downregulates! enzymes of photosynthetic apparatus 
common response: !downregulates! chlorophyll binding proteins 
simultaneous exposure: !combines! both stress responses 
simultaneous exposure: !uniquely changes! proteins with unclear functions