['25689861', "Genomic imprinting, an epigenetic process in mammals and flowering plants, refers  to the differential expression of alleles of the same genes in a  parent-of-origin-specific manner. In Arabidopsis, imprinting occurs primarily in  the endosperm, which nourishes the developing embryo. Recent high-throughput  sequencing analyses revealed that more than 200 loci are imprinted in  Arabidopsis; however, only a few of these imprinted genes and their imprinting  mechanisms have been examined in detail. Whereas most imprinted loci  characterized to date are maternally expressed imprinted genes (MEGs), PHERES1  (PHE1) and ADMETOS (ADM) are paternally expressed imprinted genes (PEGs). Here,  we report that UPWARD CURLY LEAF1 (UCL1), a gene encoding an E3 ligase that  degrades the CURLY LEAF (CLF) polycomb protein, is a PEG. After fertilization,  paternally inherited UCL1 is expressed in the endosperm, but not in the embryo.  The expression pattern of a beta-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene driven by the  UCL1 promoter suggests that the imprinting control region (ICR) of UCL1 is  adjacent to a transposable element in the UCL1 5'-upstream region. Polycomb  Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) silences the maternal UCL1 allele in the central cell  prior to fertilization and in the endosperm after fertilization. The UCL1  imprinting pattern was not affected in paternal PRC2 mutants. We found  unexpectedly that the maternal UCL1 allele is reactivated in the endosperm of  Arabidopsis lines with mutations in cytosine DNA METHYLTRANSFERASE 1 (MET1) or  the DNA glycosylase DEMETER (DME), which antagonistically regulate CpG  methylation of DNA. By contrast, maternal UCL1 silencing was not altered in  mutants with defects in non-CpG methylation. Thus, silencing of the maternal UCL1  allele is regulated by both MET1 and DME as well as by PRC2, suggesting that  divergent mechanisms for the regulation of PEGs evolved in Arabidopsis.", '2015', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0117431', 'Lee']

Genomic imprinting: !differentially expresses! alleles 
MEGs/PEGs: !expressed in! endosperm 
UCL1: !promoter driven by! transposable element 
PRC2: !silences! maternal UCL1 allele 
MET1/DME: !regulate! CpG methylation 
MET1/DME: !antagonistically regulate! CpG methylation 
PRC2/MET1/DME: !regulate! maternal UCL1 silencing