['25707794', 'Plants and plant pathogens are subject to continuous co-evolutionary pressure for  dominance, and the outcomes of these interactions can substantially impact  agriculture and food security. In virus-plant interactions, one of the major  mechanisms for plant antiviral immunity relies on RNA silencing, which is often  suppressed by co-evolving virus suppressors, thus enhancing viral pathogenicity  in susceptible hosts. In addition, plants use the nucleotide-binding and  leucine-rich repeat (NB-LRR) domain-containing resistance proteins, which  recognize viral effectors to activate effector-triggered immunity in a defence  mechanism similar to that employed in non-viral infections. Unlike most  eukaryotic organisms, plants are not known to activate mechanisms of host global  translation suppression to fight viruses. Here we demonstrate in Arabidopsis that  the constitutive activation of NIK1, a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase  (LRR-RLK) identified as a virulence target of the begomovirus nuclear shuttle  protein (NSP), leads to global translation suppression and translocation of the  downstream component RPL10 to the nucleus, where it interacts with a newly  identified MYB-like protein, L10-INTERACTING MYB DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN  (LIMYB), to downregulate translational machinery genes fully. LIMYB  overexpression represses ribosomal protein genes at the transcriptional level,  resulting in protein synthesis inhibition, decreased viral messenger RNA  association with polysome fractions and enhanced tolerance to begomovirus. By  contrast, the loss of LIMYB function releases the repression of  translation-related genes and increases susceptibility to virus infection.  Therefore, LIMYB links immune receptor LRR-RLK activation to global translation  suppression as an antiviral immunity strategy in plants.', '2015 Apr 30', 'Nature', '10.1038/nature14171', 'Fontes']

NSP: !targets! NIK1 
NIK1: !activates! RPL10 
RPL10: !interacts with! LIMYB 
LIMYB: !represses! ribosomal protein genes 
LIMYB: !inhibits! viral mRNA association 
LIMYB: !enhances! tolerance to begomovirus