['25704231', 'Salt stress is a detrimental factor for plant growth and development. The  response to salt stress has been shown to involve components in the intracellular  trafficking system, as well as components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system  (UPS). In this article, we have identified in Arabidopsis thaliana a little  reported ubiquitin ligase involved in salt-stress response, which we named STRF1  (Salt Tolerance RING Finger 1). STRF1 is a member of RING-H2 finger proteins and  we demonstrate that it has ubiquitin ligase activity in vitro. We also show that  STRF1 localizes mainly at the plasma membrane and at the intracellular endosomes.  strf1-1 loss-of-function mutant seedlings exhibit accelerated endocytosis in  roots, and have altered expression of several genes involved in the membrane  trafficking system. Moreover, protein trafficking inhibitor, brefeldin A (BFA),  treatment has increased BFA bodies in strf1-1 mutant. This mutant also showed  increased tolerance to salt, ionic and osmotic stresses, reduced accumulation of  reactive oxygen species during salt stress, and increased expression of AtRbohD,  which encodes a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase  involved in H2 O2 production. We conclude that STRF1 is a membrane  trafficking-related ubiquitin ligase, which helps the plant to respond to salt  stress by monitoring intracellular membrane trafficking and reactive oxygen  species (ROS) production.', '2015 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12797', 'Xie']

STRF1: !localizes to! plasma membrane and endosomes 
STRF1: !enhances! salt tolerance 
strf1-1 mutant: !exhibits accelerated! endocytosis 
strf1-1 mutant: !has altered expression of! several genes 
strf1-1 mutant: !increases tolerance to! salt, ionic and osmotic stresses 
strf1-1 mutant: !reduces accumulation of! reactive oxygen species 
strf1-1 mutant: !increases expression of! AtRbohD 
STRF1: !monitors intracellular! membrane trafficking 
STRF1: !helps plant respond to! salt stress