['25704846', "Pectins are critical polysaccharides of the cell wall that are involved in key  aspects of a plant's life, including cell-wall stiffness, cell-to-cell adhesion,  and mechanical strength. Pectins undergo methylesterification, which affects  their cellular roles. Pectin methyltransferases are believed to methylesterify  pectins in the Golgi, but little is known about their identity. To date, there is  only circumstantial evidence to support a role for QUASIMODO2 (QUA2)-like  proteins and an unrelated plant-specific protein, cotton Golgi-related 3 (CGR3),  in pectin methylesterification. To add to the knowledge of pectin biosynthesis,  here we characterized a close homolog of CGR3, named CGR2, and evaluated the  effect of loss-of-function mutants and over-expression lines of CGR2 and CGR3 in  planta. Our results show that, similar to CGR3, CGR2 is a Golgi protein whose  enzyme active site is located in the Golgi lumen where pectin  methylesterification occurs. Through phenotypical analyses, we also established  that simultaneous loss of CGR2 and CGR3 causes severe defects in plant growth and  development, supporting critical but overlapping functional roles of these  proteins. Qualitative and quantitative cell-wall analytical assays of the double  knockout mutant demonstrated reduced levels of pectin methylesterification,  coupled with decreased microsomal pectin methyltransferase activity. Conversely,  CGR2 and CGR3 over-expression lines have markedly opposite phenotypes to the  double knockout mutant, with increased cell-wall methylesterification levels and  microsomal pectin methyltransferase activity. Based on these findings, we propose  that CGR2 and CGR3 are critical proteins in plant growth and development that act  redundantly in pectin methylesterification in the Golgi apparatus.", '2015 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.12802', 'Brandizzi']

Pectins: !undergo! Methylesterification 
QUA2: !believed to! Methylesterify Pectins 
CGR3: !believed to! Methylesterify Pectins 
CGR2: !close homolog of! CGR3 
CGR2/CGR3: !cause severe defects in! Plant Growth & Development 
CGR2/CGR3: !reduce levels of! Pectin Methylesterification 
CGR2/CGR3: !decrease! Microsomal Pectin Methyltransferase Activity 
CGR2/CGR3: !act redundantly in! Pectin Methylesterification