The success of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii as a model organism is to a large extent due to the wide range of molecular techniques that are available for its characterization. Here, we review some of the techniques currently used to modify and interrogate the C. reinhardtii nuclear genome and explore several technologies under development. Nuclear mutants can be generated with ultraviolet (UV) light and chemical mutagens, or by insertional mutagenesis. Nuclear transformation methods include biolistic delivery, agitation with glass beads, and electroporation. Transforming DNA integrates into the genome at random sites, and multiple strategies exist for mapping insertion sites. A limited number of studies have demonstrated targeted modification of the nuclear genome by approaches such as zinc-finger nucleases and homologous recombination. RNA interference is widely used to knock down expression levels of nuclear genes. A wide assortment of transgenes has been successfully expressed in the Chlamydomonas nuclear genome, including transformation markers, fluorescent proteins, reporter genes, epitope tagged proteins, and even therapeutic proteins. Optimized expression constructs and strains help transgene expression. Emerging technologies such as the CRISPR/Cas9 system, high-throughput mutant identification, and a whole-genome knockout library are being developed for this organism. We discuss how these advances will propel future investigations.

UV light: !generates! Nuclear mutants 
Chemical mutagens: !generates! Nuclear mutants 
Insertional mutagenesis: !generates! Nuclear mutants 
Biolistic delivery: !facilitates! Nuclear transformation 
Glass beads: !facilitates! Nuclear transformation 
Electroporation: !facilitates! Nuclear transformation 
Random sites: !integrates! Transforming DNA 
Zinc-finger nucleases: !enables! Targeted modification of nuclear genome 
Homologous recombination: !enables! Targeted modification of nuclear genome 
RNA interference: !knocks down! Expression levels of nuclear genes 
Transgenes: !expressed in! Chlamydomonas nuclear genome 
CRISPR/Cas9 system: !developing! For this organism 
High-throughput mutant identification: !developing! For this organism 
Whole-genome knockout library: !developing! For this organism