['25716890', 'Glutathione homoeostasis is critical to plant life and its adaptation to stress.  The gamma-glutamyl cycle of glutathione biosynthesis and degradation plays a  pre-eminent role in glutathione homoeostasis. The genes encoding two enzymatic  steps of glutathione degradation, the gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase (GGCT; acting  on gamma-glutamyl amino acids) and the Cys-Gly dipeptidase, have, however, lacked  identification. We have investigated the family of GGCTs in Arabidopsis thaliana.  We show through in vivo functional assays in yeast that all three members of the  ChaC/GCG subfamily show significant activity towards glutathione but no  detectable activity towards gamma-glutamyl methionine. Biochemical characterization  of the purified recombinant enzymes GGCT2;2 and GGCT2;3 further confirmed that  they act specifically to degrade glutathione to yield 5-oxoproline and Cys-Gly  peptide and show no significant activity towards gamma-glutamyl cysteine. The Km for  glutathione was 1.7 and 4.96 mM for GGCT2;2 and GGCT2;3 respectively and was  physiologically relevant. Evaluation of representative members of other  subfamilies indicates the absence of GGCTs from plants showing significant  activity towards gamma-glutamyl-amino acids as envisaged in the classical gamma-glutamyl  cycle. To identify the Cys-Gly peptidase, we evaluated leucine aminopeptidases  (LAPs) as candidate enzymes. The cytosolic AtLAP1 (A. thaliana leucine  aminopeptidase 1) and the putative chloroplastic AtLAP3 displayed activity  towards Cys-Gly peptide through in vivo functional assays in yeast. Biochemical  characterization of the in vitro purified hexameric AtLAP1 enzyme revealed a Km  for Cys-Gly of 1.3 mM that was physiologically relevant and indicated that AtLAP1  represents a cytosolic Cys-Gly peptidase activity of A. thaliana. The studies  provide new insights into the functioning of the gamma-glutamyl cycle in plants.', '2015 May 15', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BJ20141154', 'Bachhawat']

GGCT: !degrades! Glutathione 
GGCT2;2: !has Km of! 1.7 mM 
GGCT2;3: !has Km of! 4.96 mM 
AtLAP1: !degrades! Cys-Gly peptide 
AtLAP1: !has Km of! 1.3 mM