The plasma membrane is the interface between the cell and the external environment. Plasma membrane lipids provide scaffolds for proteins and protein complexes that are involved in cell to cell communication, signal transduction, immune responses, and transport of small molecules. In animals, fungi, and plants, a substantial subset of these plasma membrane proteins function within ordered sterol- and sphingolipid-rich nanodomains. High-resolution microscopy, lipid dyes, pharmacological inhibitors of lipid biosynthesis, and lipid biosynthetic mutants have been employed to examine the relationship between the lipid environment and protein activity in plants. They have also been used to identify proteins associated with nanodomains and the pathways by which nanodomain-associated proteins are trafficked to their plasma membrane destinations. These studies suggest that plant membrane nanodomains function in a context-specific manner, analogous to similar structures in animals and fungi. In addition to the highly conserved flotillin and remorin markers, some members of the B and G subclasses of ATP binding cassette transporters have emerged as functional markers for plant nanodomains. Further, the glycophosphatidylinositol-anchored fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins, that are often associated with detergent-resistant membranes, appear also to have a functional role in membrane nanodomains.

Plasma membrane: !provides scaffolds for! proteins 
Lipids: !provide scaffolds for! proteins 
High-resolution microscopy: !examines! relationship between lipid environment and protein activity 
Lipid dyes: !examines! relationship between lipid environment and protein activity 
Pharmacological inhibitors of lipid biosynthesis: !examines! relationship between lipid environment and protein activity 
Lipid biosynthetic mutants: !examines! relationship between lipid environment and protein activity 
Flotillin: !emerges as! functional marker for plant nanodomains 
Remorin: !emerges as! functional marker for plant nanodomains 
ATP binding cassette transporters: !emerges as! functional marker for plant nanodomains 
Glycophosphatidylinositol-anchored fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins: !appear to have! functional role in membrane nanodomains