['25725436', 'BACKGROUND: Chloroplast biogenesis involves a collaboration between several  thousand nuclear genes and ~100 genes in the chloroplast. Many of the nuclear  genes are of cyanobacterial ancestry and continue to perform their ancestral  function. However, many others evolved subsequently and comprise a diverse set of  proteins found specifically in photosynthetic eucaryotes. Genetic approaches have  been key to the discovery of nuclear genes that participate in chloroplast  biogenesis, especially those lacking close homologs outside the plant kingdom.  SCOPE OF REVIEW: This article summarizes contributions from a genetic resource in  maize, the Photosynthetic Mutant Library (PML). The PML collection consists of  ~2000 non-photosynthetic mutants induced by Mu transposons. We include a summary  of mutant phenotypes for 20 previously unstudied maize genes, including genes  encoding chloroplast ribosomal proteins, a PPR protein, tRNA synthetases,  proteins involved in plastid transcription, a putative ribosome assembly factor,  a chaperonin 60 isoform, and a NifU-domain protein required for Photosystem I  biogenesis. MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Insertions in 94 maize genes have been linked thus  far to visible and molecular phenotypes with the PML collection. The spectrum of  chloroplast biogenesis genes that have been genetically characterized in maize is  discussed in the context of related efforts in other organisms. This comparison  shows how distinct organismal attributes facilitate the discovery of different  gene classes, and reveals examples of functional divergence between monocot and  dicot plants. GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: These findings elucidate the biology of an  organelle whose activities are fundamental to agriculture and the biosphere. This  article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Chloroplast Biogenesis.', '2015 Sep', 'Biochim Biophys Acta', '10.1016/j.bbabio.2015.02.014', 'Barkan']

Gene: !affects! Chloroplast biogenesis 
Gene: !encodes! Chloroplast ribosomal proteins 
Gene: !encodes! PPR protein 
Gene: !encodes! tRNA synthetases 
Gene: !encodes! Proteins involved in plastid transcription 
Gene: !encodes! Putative ribosome assembly factor 
Gene: !encodes! Chaperonin 60 isoform 
Gene: !encodes! NifU-domain protein 
Gene: !links to! Visible and molecular phenotypes 
Gene: !reveals! Functional divergence between monocot and dicot plants