['25736060', 'Tudor Staphylococcal Nuclease (TSN or Tudor-SN; also known as SND1) is an  evolutionarily conserved protein involved in the transcriptional and  posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression in animals. Although TSN was  found to be indispensable for normal plant development and stress tolerance, the  molecular mechanisms underlying these functions remain elusive. Here, we show  that Arabidopsis thaliana TSN is essential for the integrity and function of  cytoplasmic messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) complexes called stress granules  (SGs) and processing bodies (PBs), sites of posttranscriptional gene regulation  during stress. TSN associates with SGs following their microtubule-dependent  assembly and plays a scaffolding role in both SGs and PBs. The enzymatically  active tandem repeat of four SN domains is crucial for targeting TSN to the  cytoplasmic mRNA complexes and is sufficient for the cytoprotective function of  TSN during stress. Furthermore, our work connects the cytoprotective function of  TSN with its positive role in stress-induced mRNA decapping. While stress led to  a pronounced increase in the accumulation of uncapped mRNAs in wild-type plants,  this increase was abrogated in TSN knockout plants. Taken together, our results  establish TSN as a key enzymatic component of the catabolic machinery responsible  for the processing of mRNAs in the cytoplasmic mRNP complexes during stress.', '2015 Mar', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.114.134494', 'Bozhkov']

TSN: !associates with! SGs 
TSN: !plays a scaffolding role in! SGs and PBs 
TSN: !is essential for! integrity and function of cytoplasmic mRNP complexes 
SN domains: !target! TSN to cytoplasmic mRNA complexes 
SN domains: !are sufficient for! cytoprotective function of TSN during stress 
TSN: !connects! cytoprotective function with positive role in stress-induced mRNA decapping 
Wild-type plants: !increase accumulation of! uncapped mRNAs 
TSN knockout plants: !abrogate! increase in accumulation of uncapped mRNAs 
TSN: !establishes as! key enzymatic component of catabolic machinery