Natural illumination conditions are highly variable and because of their sessile life style, plants are forced to acclimate to them at the cellular and molecular level. Changes in light intensity or quality induce changes in the reduction/oxidation (redox) state of the photosynthetic electron chain that acts as a trigger for compensatory acclimation responses comprising functional and structural adjustments of photosynthesis and metabolism. Such responses include redox-controlled changes in plant gene expression in the nucleus and organelles. Here we describe a strategy for the identification of early redox-regulated genes (ERGs) in the nucleus of the model organism Arabidopsis thaliana that respond significantly 30 or 60 min after the generation of a reduction signal in the photosynthetic electron transport chain. By comparing the response of wild-type plants with that of the acclimation mutant stn7, we could specifically identify ERGs. The results reveal a significant impact of chloroplast redox signals on distinct nuclear gene groups including genes for the mitochondrial electron transport chain, tetrapyrrole biosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, and signaling lipid synthesis. These expression profiles are clearly different from those observed in response to the reduction of photosynthetic electron transport by high light treatments. Thus, the ERGs identified are unique to redox imbalances in photosynthetic electron transport and were then used for analyzing potential redox-responsive cis-elements, trans-factors, and chromosomal regulatory hot spots. The data identify a novel redox-responsive element and indicate extensive redox control at transcriptional and chromosomal levels that point to an unprecedented impact of redox signals on epigenetic processes.

Gene: !affects! Photosynthesis 
Gene: !affects! Metabolism 
Gene: !localizes to! Nucleus 
Gene: !interacts with! Chloroplast Redox Signals 
Gene: !enhances! Mitochondrial Electron Transport Chain 
Gene: !enhances! Tetrapyrrole Biosynthesis 
Gene: !enhances! Carbohydrate Metabolism 
Gene: !enhances! Signaling Lipid Synthesis 
Gene: !represses! High Light Treatments 
Gene: !synthesizes! Cis-Elements