Drought-tolerant rice variety, Nagina 22 (N22), has a unique spikelet miRNome during anthesis stage drought as well as transition from heading to anthesis. Molecular characterization of genetic diversity of rice is essential to understand the evolution and molecular basis of various agronomically important traits such as drought tolerance. miRNAs play an important role in regulating plant development as well as stress response such as drought. In this study, we characterized the yet unexplored dynamics of the spikelet miRNA population during developmental transition from 'heading' to 'anthesis' as well as anthesis stage drought stress in a drought-tolerant indica rice variety, N22. A significant proportion of miRNA population (~20 %) in N22 spikelets is modulated during transition from heading to anthesis indicating a unique miRNome at anthesis, a developmental stage highly sensitive to stress (drought/heat). Based on the analysis of degradome data, majority of differentially regulated miRNAs appear to regulate transcription factors, some of which are implicated in regulation of development and fertilization. Similarly, drought during anthesis leads to a global change in miRNA expression pattern including those which regulate ROS homeostasis. It was possible to identify several miRNAs that were not reported to be drought responsive in earlier studies. Interestingly, a significant proportion of the drought-regulated miRNAs co-localize within QTLs related to drought tolerance and associated traits. Comparison of the expression profiles between N22 and Pusa Basmati 1 (drought sensitive) identified miRNAs with variety-specific expression patterns during phase transition (miR164, miR396, miR812, and miR1881) as well as drought stress (miR1881) indicating an evolution of a distinct and variety-specific regulatory mechanism. The promoters of these miRNAs contain LREs (light-responsive elements) and are induced by dark treatment. It was also possible to identify 4 novel miRNAs including an intronic miRNA that was conserved in both rice varieties.

miRNA: !regulates! Transcription Factors 
miRNA: !co-localizes with! QTLs 
miRNA: !induces! Dark Treatment 
miRNA: !evolves! Variety-Specific Regulatory Mechanism 
miRNA: !controls! ROS Homeostasis