['25809944', 'The activity of bc1 complex kinase (ABC1K) family is a large group of atypical  protein kinases found in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In bacteria and  mitochondria, ABC1K kinases are necessary for the synthesis of coenzyme Q and are  therefore involved in the respiratory pathway. In chloroplasts, they are involved  in prenylquinone synthesis and stress responses, but their functional role  remains unclear. Plants can respond to biotic and abiotic stress by modifying  membrane fluidity in order to create a suitable environment for the activity of  integral membrane proteins. Therefore, this work was focused on the analysis of  the effect of ABC1K7 and ABC1K8 on the production of polar lipids and their  accumulation in Arabidopsis thaliana leaves. A comparison of abc1k7 and abc1k8  single mutants and the abc1k7/abc1k8 double mutant with wild-type plants and  transgenic lines overexpressing ABC1K7 and ABC1K8 was performed using untargeted  lipidomic analysis based on liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry.  Multivariate data analysis identified sets of chloroplast lipids representing the  different genotypes. The abc1k7 and abc1k8 single mutants produced lower levels  of the highly unsaturated lipid digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG) than wild-type  plants and also different forms of monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG) and  kaempferol. The abc1k8 mutant also produced higher levels of oxylipin-conjugated  DGDG and sinapates. The double mutant produced even higher levels of  oxylipin-conjugated MGDG and DGDG. These results show that ABC1K7 and ABC1K8  influence chloroplast lipid synthesis or accumulation and modulate chloroplast  membrane composition in response to stress.', '2015 Jun', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcv046', 'Furini']

ABC1K7: !influences! chloroplast lipid synthesis
ABC1K8: !influences! chloroplast lipid synthesis
ABC1K7/ABC1K8 double mutant: !produces higher levels of! oxylipin-conjugated MGDG and DGDG
ABC1K7: !produces lower levels of! highly unsaturated lipid digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG)
ABC1K8: !produces higher levels of! oxylipin-conjugated DGDG and sinapates
ABC1K7/ABC1K8 double mutant: !modulates! chloroplast membrane composition in response to stress