Rapid uniform germination and accumulation of biomass during initial phase of seedling establishment is an essential phenotypic trait considered as early seedling vigour for direct seeded situation in rice irrespective of environment. Enhanced role of carbohydrate, amylase, growth hormones, antioxidant enzymes and ascorbic acid brings changes in vigour and phenotype of seedling. Early establishment and demanding life form dominate the surroundings. Crop plant that has better growth overdrives the weed plant and suppresses its growth. Seedling early vigour is the characteristic of seed quality and describes the rapid, uniform germination and the establishment of strong seedlings in any environmental condition. The phenotype of modern rice varieties has been changed into adaptable for transplanted rice with thirst toward water and selection pressure for semi-dwarf architecture resulting in reduced early vigour. Decreasing freshwater availability and rising labour cost drives the search for a suitable alternative management system to enhance grain yield productivity for the burgeoning world population. In view of these issues, much attention has been focused on dry direct-seeded rice, because it demands low input. A rice cultivar with a strong seedling vigour trait is desirable in case of direct seeding. However, seedling vigour has not been selected in crop improvement programmes in conventional breeding due to its complex nature and quantitative inheritance. Molecular markers have been proven effective in increasing selection efficiency, particularly for quantitative traits that are simply inherited. Marker-assisted selection approach has facilitated efficient and precise transfer of genes/QTL(s) into many crop species and suggests a speedy and efficient technique over conventional breeding and selection methods. In this review, we present the findings and investigations in the field of seedling vigour in rice that includes the nature of inheritance of physio-morphological and biochemical traits and QTLs to assist plant breeders who work for direct-seeded rice.

Carbohydrate: !enhances! Seedling vigour
Amylase: !enhances! Seedling vigour
Growth hormones: !enhances! Seedling vigour
Antioxidant enzymes: !enhances! Seedling vigour
Ascorbic acid: !enhances! Seedling vigour
QTLs: !facilitate! Marker-assisted selection