Integrative studies of plant growth require spatially and temporally resolved information from high-throughput imaging systems. However, analysis and interpretation of conventional two-dimensional images is complicated by the three-dimensional nature of shoot architecture and by changes in leaf position over time, termed hyponasty. To solve this problem, Phytotyping(4D) uses a light-field camera that simultaneously provides a focus image and a depth image, which contains distance information about the object surface. Our automated pipeline segments the focus images, integrates depth information to reconstruct the three-dimensional architecture, and analyses time series to provide information about the relative expansion rate, the timing of leaf appearance, hyponastic movement, and shape for individual leaves and the whole rosette. Phytotyping(4D) was calibrated and validated using discs of known sizes, and plants tilted at various orientations. Information from this analysis was integrated into the pipeline to allow error assessment during routine operation. To illustrate the utility of Phytotyping(4D) , we compare diurnal changes in Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type Col-0 and the starchless pgm mutant. Compared to Col-0, pgm showed very low relative expansion rate in the second half of the night, a transiently increased relative expansion rate at the onset of light period, and smaller hyponastic movement including delayed movement after dusk, both at the level of the rosette and individual leaves. Our study introduces light-field camera systems as a tool to accurately measure morphological and growth-related features in plants.

Light-field camera: !provides! Focus image and depth image
Pipeline: !segments! Focus images
Pipeline: !integrates! Depth information
Pipeline: !analyses! Time series
Calibration/Validation: !uses! Discs of known sizes
Phytotyping(4D): !compares! Diurnal changes in Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type Col-0 and the starchless pgm mutant
pgm Mutant: !shows! Low relative expansion rate in second half of night, transiently increased relative expansion rate at onset of light period, smaller hyponastic movement