['25810095', "Maturation of chloroplast ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) comprises several  endoribonucleolytic and exoribonucleolytic processing steps. However, little is  known about the specific enzymes involved and the cleavage steps they catalyze.  Here, we report the functional characterization of the single Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) gene encoding a putative YbeY endoribonuclease. AtYbeY  null mutants are seedling lethal, indicating that AtYbeY function is essential  for plant growth. Knockdown plants display slow growth and show pale-green  leaves. Physiological and ultrastructural analyses of atybeY mutants revealed  impaired photosynthesis and defective chloroplast development. Fluorescent  microcopy analysis showed that, when fused with the green fluorescence protein,  AtYbeY is localized in chloroplasts. Immunoblot and RNA gel-blot assays revealed  that the levels of chloroplast-encoded subunits of photosynthetic complexes are  reduced in atybeY mutants, but the corresponding transcripts accumulate normally.  In addition, atybeY mutants display defective maturation of both the 5' and 3'  ends of 16S, 23S, and 4.5S rRNAs as well as decreased accumulation of mature  transcripts from the transfer RNA genes contained in the chloroplast rRNA operon.  Consequently, mutant plants show a severe deficiency in ribosome biogenesis,  which, in turn, results in impaired plastid translational activity. Furthermore,  biochemical assays show that recombinant AtYbeY is able to cleave chloroplast  rRNAs as well as messenger RNAs and transfer RNAs in vitro. Taken together, our  findings indicate that AtYbeY is a chloroplast-localized endoribonuclease that is  required for chloroplast rRNA processing and thus for normal growth and  development.", '2015 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.255000', 'ORCID:']

AtYbeY: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
AtYbeY: !enhances! photosynthesis 
AtYbeY: !synthesizes! chloroplast-encoded subunits of photosynthetic complexes 
AtYbeY: !represses! maturation of 5' and 3' ends of 16S, 23S, and 4.5S rRNAs 
AtYbeY: !cleaves! chloroplast rRNAs, messenger RNAs, and transfer RNAs in vitro