Ethylene and abscisic acid (ABA) act synergistically or antagonistically to regulate plant growth and development. ABA is derived from the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway. Here, we analyzed the interplay among ethylene, carotenoid biogenesis, and ABA in rice (Oryza sativa) using the rice ethylene response mutant mhz5, which displays a reduced ethylene response in roots but an enhanced ethylene response in coleoptiles. We found that MHZ5 encodes a carotenoid isomerase and that the mutation in mhz5 blocks carotenoid biosynthesis, reduces ABA accumulation, and promotes ethylene production in etiolated seedlings. ABA can largely rescue the ethylene response of the mhz5 mutant. Ethylene induces MHZ5 expression, the production of neoxanthin, an ABA biosynthesis precursor, and ABA accumulation in roots. MHZ5 overexpression results in enhanced ethylene sensitivity in roots and reduced ethylene sensitivity in coleoptiles. Mutation or overexpression of MHZ5 also alters the expression of ethylene-responsive genes. Genetic studies revealed that the MHZ5-mediated ABA pathway acts downstream of ethylene signaling to inhibit root growth. The MHZ5-mediated ABA pathway likely acts upstream but negatively regulates ethylene signaling to control coleoptile growth. Our study reveals novel interactions among ethylene, carotenogenesis, and ABA and provides insight into improvements in agronomic traits and adaptive growth through the manipulation of these pathways in rice.

Ethylene: !induces! MHZ5
MHZ5: !encodes! carotenoid isomerase
Mutation: !blocks! carotenoid biosynthesis
Mutation: !reduces! ABA accumulation
Mutation: !promotes! ethylene production
ABA: !rescues! ethylene response of mhz5 mutant
MHZ5: !overexpression! enhances ethylene sensitivity in roots
MHZ5: !overexpression! reduces ethylene sensitivity in coleoptiles
MHZ5: !alters! expression of ethylene-responsive genes
MHZ5-mediated ABA pathway: !acts downstream of! ethylene signaling
MHZ5-mediated ABA pathway: !acts upstream and negatively regulates! ethylene signaling