['25862728', 'Programmed cell death is essential for plant development and stress adaptation. A  detailed understanding of the signal transduction pathways that regulate plant  programmed cell death requires identification of the underpinning protein  networks. Here, we have used a protagonist and antagonist of programmed cell  death triggered by fumonisin B1 as probes to identify key cell death regulatory  proteins in Arabidopsis. Our hypothesis was that changes in the abundance of cell  death-regulatory proteins induced by the protagonist should be blocked or  attenuated by concurrent treatment with the antagonist. We focused on proteins  present in the mobile phase of the extracellular matrix on the basis that they  are important for cell-cell communications during growth and stress-adaptive  responses. Salicylic acid, a plant hormone that promotes programmed cell death,  and exogenous ATP, which can block fumonisin B1-induced cell death, were used to  treat Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures prior to isobaric-tagged relative and  absolute quantitation analysis of secreted proteins. A total of 33 proteins,  whose response to salicylic acid was suppressed by ATP, were identified as  putative cell death-regulatory proteins. Among these was CYCLASE1, which was  selected for further analysis using reverse genetics. Plants in which CYCLASE1  gene expression was knocked out by insertion of a transfer-DNA sequence  manifested dramatically increased cell death when exposed to fumonisin B1 or a  bacterial pathogen that triggers the defensive hypersensitive cell death.  Although pathogen inoculation altered CYCLASE1 gene expression, multiplication of  bacterial pathogens was indistinguishable between wild type and CYCLASE1 knockout  plants. However, remarkably severe chlorosis symptoms developed on gene knockout  plants in response to inoculation with either a virulent bacterial pathogen or a  disabled mutant that is incapable of causing disease in wild type plants. These  results show that CYCLASE1, which had no known function hitherto, is a negative  regulator of cell death and regulates pathogen-induced symptom development in  Arabidopsis.', '2015 Jun', 'Mol Cell Proteomics', '10.1074/mcp.M114.045054', 'Chivasa']

Salicylic acid: !promotes! programmed cell death 
ATP: !blocks! fumonisin B1-induced cell death 
CYCLASE1: !regulates! cell death 
CYCLASE1: !regulates! symptom development 
Pathogen: !triggers! defensive hypersensitive cell death 
Pathogen: !alters! CYCLASE1 gene expression