Somatic embryogenesis receptor-like kinases (SERKs) are leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases involved in several, seemingly unrelated, plant-signaling pathways. In Arabidopsis thaliana, functional and genetic analysis of four SERK proteins has indicated that they are only partly redundant; their functions overlap but each performs a specific subset of signaling roles. The molecular basis for the functional specificity within this highly homologous protein family is currently not known. Sequence analysis of SERK proteins from different plant species indicates that the SERKs are a highly conserved protein family present in monocots, dicots, and non-vascular plants. Residues in the extracellular domain that are important for interaction with other receptor kinases are highly conserved, even among SERK members without a function in the corresponding pathways. SERK2, for instance, does not function in the brassinosteroid pathway, does not interact with BRI1, but is conserved in its BRI1-interacting domain. Further sequence analysis indicates that SERK3/BAK1 and SERK4/BKK1 have diverged from the original SERK protein in both their extracellular and cytoplasmic domains. Functional analysis of chimeric SERK proteins shows that different domains provide the SERK proteins with different functional specificity. For instance, the SERK1 or SERK2 extracellular domains are essential for SERK function in male sporogenesis, while the SERK3 extracellular and cytoplasmic domains are essential for SERK3 activity in brassinosteroid and flagellin signaling. The emerging picture is that SERKs are ancient genes, whose products have been recruited as co-receptors in the newly evolved signaling pathways. The SERK ligand-binding and protein-protein interaction domains are highly conserved, allowing all SERKs to form complexes, albeit with different affinity. However, specific functional residues must have been altered, in both the extracellular and intracellular domains, to allow for the observed differences in functionality.

SERKs: !are involved in! plant-signaling pathways
SERKs: !have functional specificity! within protein family
SERK2: !does not interact with! BRI1
SERK3/BAK1: !have diverged from! SERK protein
SERK1/SERK2: !require extracellular domains for! male sporogenesis
SERK3: !require extracellular and cytoplasmic domains for! brassinosteroid and flagellin signaling
SERKs: !form complexes! with different affinity