['25862457', 'Precursor proteins containing mitochondrial peptide signals are cleaved after  import by a mitochondrial processing peptidase. In yeast (Saccharomyces  cerevisiae) and human (Homo sapiens), intermediate cleavage peptidase55 (ICP55)  plays a role in stabilizing mitochondrial proteins by the removal of single amino  acids from mitochondrial processing peptidase-processed proteins. We have  investigated the role of a metallopeptidase (At1g09300) from Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) that has sequence similarity to yeast ICP55. We identified  this protein in mitochondria by mass spectrometry and have studied its function  in a transfer DNA insertion line (icp55). Monitoring of amino-terminal peptides  showed that Arabidopsis ICP55 was responsible for the removal of single amino  acids, and its action explained the -3 arginine processing motif of a number of  mitochondrial proteins. ICP55 also removed single amino acids from mitochondrial  proteins known to be cleaved at nonconserved arginine sites, a subset of  mitochondrial proteins specific to plants. Faster mitochondrial protein  degradation rates not only for ICP55 cleaved protein but also for some non-ICP55  cleaved proteins were observed in Arabidopsis mitochondrial samples isolated from  icp55 than from the wild type, indicating that a complicated protease degradation  network has been affected. The lower protein stability of isolated mitochondria  and the lack of processing of target proteins in icp55 were complemented by  transformation with the full-length ICP55. Analysis of in vitro degradation rates  and protein turnover rates in vivo of specific proteins indicated that serine  hydroxymethyltransferase was affected in icp55. The maturation of serine  hydroxymethyltransferase by ICP55 is unusual, as it involves breaking an  amino-terminal diserine that is not known as an ICP55 substrate in other  organisms and that is typically considered a sequence that stabilizes rather than  destabilizes a protein.', '2015 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.00300', 'ORCID:']

Precursor proteins: !cleaved by! mitochondrial processing peptidase 
ICP55: !stabilizes! mitochondrial proteins 
At1g09300: !localizes to! mitochondria 
At1g09300: !removes single amino acids from! mitochondrial proteins 
ICP55: !affects! protein degradation network 
icp55: !observes! faster mitochondrial protein degradation rates 
ICP55: !complements! lower protein stability of isolated mitochondria 
ICP55: !matures! serine hydroxymethyltransferase