Growth in plants results from the interaction between genetic and signalling networks and the mechanical properties of cells and tissues. There has been a recent resurgence in research directed at understanding the mechanical aspects of growth, and their feedback on genetic regulation. This has been driven in part by the development of new micro-indentation techniques to measure the mechanical properties of plant cells in vivo. However, the interpretation of indentation experiments remains a challenge, since the force measures results from a combination of turgor pressure, cell wall stiffness, and cell and indenter geometry. In order to interpret the measurements, an accurate mechanical model of the experiment is required. Here, we used a plant cell system with a simple geometry, Nicotiana tabacum Bright Yellow-2 (BY-2) cells, to examine the sensitivity of micro-indentation to a variety of mechanical and experimental parameters. Using a finite-element mechanical model, we found that, for indentations of a few microns on turgid cells, the measurements were mostly sensitive to turgor pressure and the radius of the cell, and not to the exact indenter shape or elastic properties of the cell wall. By complementing indentation experiments with osmotic experiments to measure the elastic strain in turgid cells, we could fit the model to both turgor pressure and cell wall elasticity. This allowed us to interpret apparent stiffness values in terms of meaningful physical parameters that are relevant for morphogenesis.

Gene: !affects! Growth 
Signalling networks: !interact with! Genetic networks 
Micro-indentation techniques: !measure! Mechanical properties of plant cells 
Finite-element mechanical model: !examines! Sensitivity of micro-indentation 
Turgor pressure: !influences! Measurements 
Radius of cell: !influences! Measurements 
Indenter shape: !not influences! Measurements 
Cell wall elasticity: !not influences! Measurements 
Osmotic experiments: !measure! Elastic strain in turgid cells 
Model: !fits to! Turgor pressure and cell wall elasticity