We demonstrate here that the reduction of InsP 3 , the key component of the phosphoinositol pathway, results in changes in ROS-scavenging machinery and, subsequently, increases the tolerance of tomato plants to light stress. Different plant stress signaling pathways share similar elements and, therefore, 'cross-talk' between the various pathways can exist. Links between the phosphoinositol signaling pathway and light signaling were recently found. Tomato plants expressing InsP 5-ptase and exhibiting reduction in the level of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (InsP3) demonstrated enhanced tolerance to stress caused by continuous light exposure. To understand the molecular basis of observed stress tolerance in tomato lines with decreased amount of InsP3, we monitored the expression of enzymatic antioxidants as well as important factors in light signaling associated with non-enzymatic antioxidants (secondary metabolites). Here, we demonstrated that InsP 5-ptase transgenic plants accumulate less hydroxide peroxide and maintain higher chlorophyll content during stress caused by continuous light exposure. This observation can be explained by documented activation of multiple enzymatic antioxidants (LeAPX1, SICAT2, LeSOD) at levels of gene expression and enzymatic activities during continuous light exposure. In addition, we noticed the up-regulation of photoreceptors LePHYB and LeCHS1, key enzymes in flavonoid biosynthesis pathway, transcription factors LeHY5, SIMYB12, and early light-inducible protein (LeELIP) genes in transgenic tomato seedlings exposed to blue or red light. Our study confirmed the existence of a correlation between phosphoinositol signaling pathway modification, increased tolerance to stress caused by continuous light exposure, activation of ROS-scavenging enzymes, and up-regulation of molecular activators of non-enzymatic antioxidants in InsP 5-ptase expressing tomato lines.

InsP 5-ptase: !reduces! InsP 3 
InsP 3 : !affects! ROS-scavenging machinery
ROS-scavenging machinery: !increases! tolerance to light stress
LeAPX1, SICAT2, LeSOD: !activated by! continuous light exposure
LePHYB, LeCHS1: !upregulated by! blue/red light
LeHY5, SIMYB12, LeELIP: !upregulated by! blue/red light