Provide an evolutionary and an empirical molecular genetic foundation of the Sus gene family in tobacco and will be beneficial for further investigations of Sus gene functions Sucrose synthase (Sus) has been well characterized as the key enzyme participating in sucrose metabolism, and the gene family encoding different Sus isozymes has been cloned and characterized in several plant species. However, scant information about this gene family is available to date in tobacco. Here, we identified 14, 6, and 7 Sus genes in the genomes of Nicotiana tabacum, N. sylvestris and N. tomentosiformis, respectively. These tobacco Sus family members shared high levels of similarity in their nucleotide and amino acid sequences. Phylogenetic analysis revealed distinct evolutionary paths for the tobacco Sus genes. Sus1-4, Sus5, and Sus6-7 originated from three Sus precursors, respectively, which were generated by duplication before the split of monocots and eudicots. There were two additional duplications, before and after the differentiation of the Solanaceae, which separately gave rise to Sus3/4 and Sus1/2. Gene exon/intron structure analysis showed that the tobacco Sus genes contain varying numbers of conserved introns, resulting from intron loss under different selection pressures during the course of evolution. The expression patterns of the NtSus genes differed from each other in various tobacco tissues. Transcripts of Ntab0259170 and Ntab0259180 were detected in leaves at all tested developmental stages, suggesting that these two genes play a predominant role in sucrose metabolism during leaf development. Expression of Ntab0288750 and Ntab0234340 were conspicuously induced by low temperature and virus treatment, indicating that these two isozymes are important in meeting the increased glycolytic demand that occurs during abiotic stress. Our results provide an evolutionary and an empirical molecular genetic foundation of the Sus gene family in tobacco, and will be beneficial for further investigations of Sus gene functions in the processes of tobacco leaf development and tobacco resistance to environmental stresses.

Sus: !evolved from! 3 precursors
Sus: !generated by! duplication
Sus: !differs in! expression patterns
Sus: !plays role in! sucrose metabolism
Sus: !induced by! low temperature
Sus: !induced by! virus treatment