['25901327', 'Tetrapyrroles such as chlorophyll, heme, and bacteriochlorophyll play fundamental  roles in the energy absorption and transduction of all photosynthetic organisms.  They are synthesized via a complex pathway taking place in chloroplasts.  Chlorophyll biosynthesis in angiosperms involves 16 steps of which only one is  light-requiring and driven by the NADPH:protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (POR).  Three POR isoforms have been identified in Arabidopsis thaliana--designated PORA,  PORB, and PORC--that are differentially expressed in etiolated, light-exposed,  and light-adapted plants. All three isoforms are encoded by nuclear genes, are  synthesized as larger precursors in the cytosol (pPORs), and are imported  posttranslationally into the plastid compartment. Import of the precursor to the  dark-specific isoform PORA (pPORA) is protochlorophyllide (Pchlide)-dependent and  due to the operation of a unique translocon complex dubbed PTC (Pchlide-dependent  translocon complex) in the plastid envelope. Here, we identified a  approximately 30-kDa  protein that participates in pPORA import. The  approximately 30-kDa protein is identical to  the previously identified CELL GROWTH DEFECT FACTOR 1 (CDF1) in Arabidopsis that  is conserved in higher plants and Synechocystis. CDF1 operates in pPORA import  and stabilization and hereby acts as a chaperone for PORA protein translocation.  CDF1 permits tight interactions between Pchlide synthesized in the plastid  envelope and the importing PORA polypeptide chain such that no photoexcitative  damage occurs through the generation of singlet oxygen operating as a cell death  inducer. Together, our results identify an ancient mechanism dating back to the  endosymbiotic origin of chloroplasts as a key element of Pchlide-dependent pPORA  import.', '2015 May 5', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1506339112', 'Reinbothe']

POR: !synthesizes! Tetrapyrroles 
PORA: !encoded by! nuclear genes 
pPORA: !imported by! PTC 
CDF1: !participates in! pPORA import 
CDF1: !stabilizes! PORA protein 
Pchlide: !synthesized in! plastid envelope 
Pchlide: !interacts with! importing PORA polypeptide