In oleaginous seeds, lipids--stored in organelles called oil bodies (OBs)--are degraded post-germinatively to provide carbon and energy for seedling growth. To date, little is known about how OB coat proteins, known as oleosins, control OB dynamics during seed germination. Here, we demonstrated that the sequential proteolysis of the five Arabidopsis thaliana oleosins OLE1-OLE5 begins just prior to lipid degradation. Several post-translational modifications (e.g. phosphorylation and ubiquination) of oleosins were concomitant with oleosin degradation. Phosphorylation occurred only on the minor OLE5 and on an 8 kDa proteolytic fragment of OLE2. A combination of immunochemical and proteomic approaches revealed ubiquitination of the four oleosins OLE1-OLE4 at the onset of OB mobilization. Ubiquitination topology was surprisingly complex. OLE1 and OLE2 were modified by three distinct and predominantly exclusive motifs: monoubiquitin, K48-linked diubiquitin (K48Ub(2)) and K63-linked diubiquitin. Ubiquitinated oleosins may be channeled towards specific degradation pathways according to ubiquitination type. One of these pathways was identified as the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. A proteasome inhibitor (MG132) reduced oleosin degradation and induced cytosolic accumulation of K48Ub(2)-oleosin aggregates. These results indicate that K48Ub(2)-modified oleosins are selectively extracted from OB coat and degraded by the proteasome. Proteasome inhibition also reduced lipid hydrolysis, providing in vivo evidence that oleosin degradation is required for lipid mobilization.

OLE1-OLE5: !degraded! post-germinatively 
OLE1-OLE5: !modified by! phosphorylation 
OLE1-OLE4: !modified by! ubiquitination 
K48Ub(2)-oleosins: !channeled towards! specific degradation pathways 
K48Ub(2)-oleosins: !extracted from! OB coat 
K48Ub(2)-oleosins: !degraded by! proteasome 
Proteasome inhibitor: !reduces! oleosin degradation 
Proteasome inhibitor: !induces! K48Ub(2)-oleosin aggregates 
Proteasome inhibitor: !reduces! lipid hydrolysis