['25929516', 'BACKGROUND: Sugar plays a central role as a source of carbon metabolism and  energy production and a signaling molecule in diverse growth and developmental  processes and environmental adaptation in plants. It is known that sugar  metabolism and allocation between different physiological functions is intimately  associated with flowering transition in many plant species. The INDETERMINATE  DOMAIN (IDD)-containing transcription factor IDD8 regulates flowering time by  modulating sugar metabolism and transport under sugar-limiting conditions in  Arabidopsis. Meanwhile, it has been reported that SUCROSE NONFERMENTING-1-RELATED  PROTEIN KINASE 1 (SnRK1), which acts as a sensor of cellular energy metabolism,  is activated by sugar deprivation. Notably, SnRK1-overexpressing plants and  IDD8-deficient mutants exhibit similar phenotypes, including delayed flowering,  suggesting that SnRK1 is involved in the IDD8-mediated metabolic control of  flowering. RESULTS: We examined whether the sugar deprivation-sensing SnRK1 is  functionally associated with IDD8 in flowering time control through biochemical  and molecular genetic approaches. Overproduction of AKIN10, the catalytic subunit  of SnRK1, delayed flowering in Arabidopsis, as was observed in IDD8-deficient  idd8-3 mutant. We found that AKIN10 interacts with IDD8 in the nucleus.  Consequently, AKIN10 phosphorylates IDD8 primarily at two serine (Ser) residues,  Ser-178 and Ser-182, which reside in the fourth zinc finger (ZF) domain that  mediates DNA binding and protein-protein interactions. AKIN10-mediated  phosphorylation did not affect the subcellular localization and DNA-binding  property of IDD8. Instead, the transcriptional activation activity of the  phosphorylated IDD8 was significantly reduced. Together, these observations  indicate that AKIN10 antagonizes the IDD8 function in flowering time control, a  notion that is consistent with the delayed flowering phenotypes of  AKIN10-overexpressing plants and idd8-3 mutant. CONCLUSION: Our data show that  SnRK1 and its substrate IDD8 constitute a sugar metabolic pathway that mediates  the timing of flowering under sugar deprivation conditions. In this signaling  scheme, the SnRK1 signals are directly integrated into the IDD8-mediated gene  regulatory network that governs flowering transition in response to fluctuations  in sugar metabolism, further supporting the metabolic control of flowering.', '2015 May 1', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-015-0503-8', 'Park']

SnRK1: !activates! AKIN10
AKIN10: !phosphorylates! IDD8
IDD8: !regulates! flowering time
SnRK1: !interacts with! IDD8
AKIN10: !antagonizes! IDD8 function