Reproductive isolation in plants occurs through multiple barriers that restrict gene flow between populations, but their origins remain uncertain. Work in the past decade has shown that postpollination barriers, such as the failure to form hybrid seeds or sterility of hybrid offspring, are often less strong than prepollination barriers. Evidence implicates multiple evolutionary forces in the origins of reproductive barriers, including mutation, stochastic processes and natural selection. Although adaptation to different environments is a common element of reproductive isolation, genomic conflicts also play a role, including female meiotic drive. The genetic basis of some reproductive barriers, particularly flower colour influencing pollinator behaviour, is well understood in some species, but the genetic changes underlying many other barriers, especially pollen-stylar interactions, are largely unknown. Postpollination barriers appear to accumulate at a faster rate in annuals compared with perennials, due in part to chromosomal rearrangements. Chromosomal changes can be important isolating barriers in themselves but may also reduce the recombination of genes contributing to isolation. Important questions for the next decade include identifying the evolutionary forces responsible for chromosomal rearrangements, determining how often prezygotic barriers arise due to selection against hybrids, and establishing the relative importance of genomic conflicts in speciation.

Mutation: !causes! Postpollination barriers
Stochastic processes: !cause! Postpollination barriers
Natural selection: !causes! Postpollination barriers
Female meiotic drive: !contributes to! Reproductive isolation
Flower colour: !influences! Pollinator behaviour
Pollen-stylar interactions: !underlie! Many reproductive barriers
Chromosomal rearrangements: !accumulate faster in! Annuals
Chromosomal changes: !reduce! Recombination of genes
Selection against hybrids: !causes! Prezygotic barriers
Genomic conflicts: !play a role in! Speciation