WHIRLY1 is largely targeted to plastids, where it is a major constituent of the nucleoids. To explore WHIRLY1 functions in barley (Hordeum vulgare), RNA interference-knockdown lines (W1-1, W1-7, and W1-9) that have very low levels of HvWHIRLY1 transcripts were characterized in plants grown under optimal and stress conditions. The WHIRLY1-1 (W1-1), W1-7, and W1-9 plants were phenotypically similar to the wild type but produced fewer tillers and seeds. Photosynthesis rates were similar in all lines, but W1-1, W1-7, and W1-9 leaves had significantly more chlorophyll and less sucrose than the wild type. Transcripts encoding specific subsets of chloroplast-localized proteins, such as ribosomal proteins, subunits of the RNA polymerase, and thylakoid nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reduced) and cytochrome b6/f complexes, were much more abundant in the W1-7 leaves than the wild type. Although susceptibility of aphid (Myzus persicae) infestation was similar in all lines, the WHIRLY1-deficient plants showed altered responses to nitrogen deficiency, maintaining higher photosynthetic CO2 assimilation rates than the wild type under limiting nitrogen. Although all lines showed globally similar low nitrogen-dependent changes in transcripts and metabolites, the increased abundance of FAR-RED IMPAIRED RESPONSE1-like transcripts in nitrogen-deficient W1-7 leaves infers that WHIRLY1 has a role in communication between plastid and nuclear genes encoding photosynthetic proteins during abiotic stress.

WHIRLY1: !localizes to! plastids 
W1-1, W1-7, W1-9: !have low levels of! HvWHIRLY1 transcripts 
W1-1, W1-7, W1-9: !produce fewer! tillers and seeds 
W1-1, W1-7, W1-9: !have more! chlorophyll and less sucrose 
ribosomal proteins, RNA polymerase, thylakoid nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reduced) and cytochrome b6/f complexes: !are more abundant in! W1-7 leaves 
WHIRLY1-deficient plants: !maintain higher! photosynthetic CO2 assimilation rates 
FAR-RED IMPAIRED RESPONSE1-like transcripts: !increase in abundance in! nitrogen-deficient W1-7 leaves 
WHIRLY1: !has a role in! communication between plastid and nuclear genes encoding photosynthetic proteins during abiotic stress