Despite the ecological and socioeconomic importance of wild Capsicum annuum L., few investigations have been carried out to study basic characteristics. The peninsula of Baja California has a unique characteristic that it provides a high degree of isolation for the development of unique highly diverse endemic populations. The objective of this study was to evaluate for the first time the growth type, associated vegetation, morphometric traits in plants, in fruits and mineral content of roots, stems and leaves of three wild populations of Capsicum in Baja California, Mexico, near biosphere reserves. The results showed that the majority of plants of wild Capsicum annuum have a shrub growth type and were associated with communities consisting of 43 species of 20 families the most representative being Fabaceae, Cactaceae and Euphorbiaceae. Significant differences between populations were found in plant height, main stem diameter, beginning of canopy, leaf area, leaf average and maximum width, stems and roots dry weights. Coverage, leaf length and dry weight did not show differences. Potassium, sodium and zinc showed significant differences between populations in their roots, stems and leaves, while magnesium and manganese showed significant differences only in roots and stems, iron in stems and leaves, calcium in roots and leaves and phosphorus did not show differences. Average fruit weight, length, 100 fruits dry weight, 100 fruits pulp dry weight and pulp/seeds ratio showed significant differences between populations, while fruit number, average fruit fresh weight, peduncle length, fruit width, seeds per fruit and seed dry weight, did not show differences. We concluded that this study of traits of wild Capsicum, provides useful information of morphometric variation between wild populations that will be of value for future decision processes involved in the management and preservation of germplasm and genetic resources.

Capsicum annuum: !has! shrub growth type 
Capsicum annuum: !associated with! 43 species of 20 families 
Capsicum annuum: !showed differences in! plant height, main stem diameter, beginning of canopy, leaf area, leaf average and maximum width, stems and roots dry weights 
Capsicum annuum: !showed differences in! potassium, sodium and zinc in their roots, stems and leaves 
Capsicum annuum: !showed differences in! magnesium and manganese in roots and stems 
Capsicum annuum: !showed differences in! iron in stems and leaves 
Capsicum annuum: !showed differences in! calcium in roots and leaves 
Capsicum annuum: !showed differences in! average fruit weight, length, 100 fruits dry weight, 100 fruits pulp dry weight and pulp/seeds ratio 
Capsicum annuum: !did not show differences in! coverage, leaf length and dry weight, fruit number, average fruit fresh weight, peduncle length, fruit width, seeds per fruit and seed dry weight