['25954280', 'Members of the P4 subfamily of P-type ATPases are thought to create and maintain  lipid asymmetry in biological membranes by flipping specific lipids between  membrane leaflets. In Arabidopsis, 7 of the 12 Aminophospholipid ATPase (ALA)  family members are expressed in pollen. Here we show that double knockout of ALA6  and ALA7 (ala6/7) results in siliques with a ~2-fold reduction in seed set with a  high frequency of empty seed positions near the bottom. Seed set was reduced to  near zero when plants were grown under a hot/cold temperature stress. Reciprocal  crosses indicate that the ala6/7 reproductive deficiencies are due to a defect  related to pollen transmission. In-vitro growth assays provide evidence that  ala6/7 pollen tubes are short and slow, with ~2-fold reductions in both maximal  growth rate and overall length relative to wild-type. Outcrosses show that when  ala6/7 pollen are in competition with wild-type pollen, they have a near 0%  success rate in fertilizing ovules near the bottom of the pistil, consistent with  ala6/7 pollen having short and slow growth defects. The ala6/7 phenotypes were  rescued by the expression of either an ALA6-YFP or GFP-ALA6 fusion protein, which  showed localization to both the plasma membrane and highly-mobile endomembrane  structures. A mass spectrometry analysis of mature pollen grains revealed  significant differences between ala6/7 and wild-type, both in the relative  abundance of lipid classes and in the average number of double bonds present in  acyl side chains. A change in the properties of the ala6/7 plasma membrane was  also indicated by a ~10-fold reduction of labeling by lipophilic FM-dyes relative  to wild-type. Together, these results indicate that ALA6 and ALA7 provide  redundant activities that function to directly or indirectly change the  distribution and abundance of lipids in pollen, and support a model in which ALA6  and ALA7 are critical for pollen fitness under normal and temperature-stress  conditions.', '2015', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2015.00197', 'Harper']

ALA6: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
ALA6: !enhances! pollen fitness 
ALA7: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
ALA7: !enhances! pollen fitness 
ALA6/7: !reduces! seed set 
ALA6/7: !represses! pollen tube growth 
ALA6/7: !alters! lipid abundance in pollen