Acylsugars are insecticidal specialized metabolites produced in the glandular trichomes of plants in the Solanaceae family. In the tomato clade of the Solanum genus, acylsugars consist of aliphatic acids of different chain lengths esterified to sucrose, or less frequently to glucose. Through liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry screening of introgression lines, we previously identified a region of chromosome 8 in the Solanum pennellii LA0716 genome (IL8-1/8-1-1) that causes the cultivated tomato Solanum lycopersicum to shift from producing acylsucroses with abundant 3-methylbutanoic acid acyl chains derived from leucine metabolism to 2-methylpropanoic acid acyl chains derived from valine metabolism. We describe multiple lines of evidence implicating a trichome-expressed gene from this region as playing a role in this shift. S. lycopersicum M82 SlIPMS3 (Solyc08g014230) encodes a functional end product inhibition-insensitive version of the committing enzyme of leucine biosynthesis, isopropylmalate synthase, missing the carboxyl-terminal 160 amino acids. In contrast, the S. pennellii LA0716 IPMS3 allele found in IL8-1/8-1-1 encodes a nonfunctional truncated IPMS protein. M82 transformed with an SlIPMS3 RNA interference construct exhibited an acylsugar profile similar to that of IL8-1-1, whereas the expression of SlIPMS3 in IL8-1-1 partially restored the M82 acylsugar phenotype. These IPMS3 alleles are polymorphic in 14 S. pennellii accessions spread throughout the geographical range of occurrence for this species and are associated with acylsugars containing varying amounts of 2-methylpropanoic acid and 3-methylbutanoic acid acyl chains.

IPMS3: !encodes! functional end product inhibition-insensitive version of isopropylmalate synthase
IPMS3: !associated with! acylsugars containing varying amounts of 2-methylpropanoic acid and 3-methylbutanoic acid acyl chains
SlIPMS3: !encodes! nonfunctional truncated IPMS protein
SlIPMS3: !causes! cultivated tomato Solanum lycopersicum to shift from producing acylsucroses with abundant 3-methylbutanoic acid acyl chains
SlIPMS3 RNA interference construct: !exhibited! acylsugar profile similar to that of IL8-1-1
IL8-1/8-1-1: !contains! SlIPMS3 allele
M82 transformed with SlIPMS3 RNA interference construct: !showed! acylsugar profile similar to that of IL8-1-1