['25985302', 'Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) play important roles in the protection of cells  against toxins and oxidative damage where one Arabidopsis member, GSTF8, has  become a commonly used marker gene for early stress and defense responses. A  GSTF8 promoter fragment fused to the luciferase reporter gene was used in a  forward genetic screen for Arabidopsis mutants with up-regulated GSTF8 promoter  activity. This identified the esr1-1 (enhanced stress response 1) mutant which  also conferred increased resistance to the fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum.  Through positional cloning, the ESR1 gene was found to encode a KH-domain  containing RNA-binding protein (At5g53060). Whole transcriptome sequencing of  esr1-1 identified altered expression of genes involved in responses to biotic and  abiotic stimuli, hormone signaling pathways and developmental processes. In  particular was an overall significant enrichment for jasmonic acid (JA) mediated  processes in the esr1-1 down-regulated dataset. A subset of these genes were  tested for MeJA inducibility and we found the expression of some but not all were  reduced in esr1-1. The esr1-1 mutant was not impaired in other aspects of  JA-signalling such as JA- sensitivity or development, suggesting ESR1 functions  in specific components of the JA-signaling pathway. Examination of salicylic acid  (SA) regulated marker genes in esr1-1 showed no increase in basal or SA induced  expression suggesting repression of JA-regulated genes is not due to antagonistic  SA-JA crosstalk. These results define new roles for KH-domain containing proteins  with ESR1 unlinking JA-mediated growth and defense responses.', '2015', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0126978', 'Singh']

GSTF8: !marker gene for! early stress and defense responses
ESR1: !encodes! KH-domain containing RNA-binding protein
esr1-1: !confers increased resistance to! Fusarium oxysporum
esr1-1: !alters expression of! genes involved in responses to biotic and abiotic stimuli
esr1-1: !enriched for! JA mediated processes
esr1-1: !represses! JA-regulated genes
esr1-1: !not impaired in! other aspects of JA-signalling
ESR1: !unlinks! JA-mediated growth and defense responses