Majority of the Asian people depend on rice for nutritional energy. Rice cultivation and yield are severely affected by soil salinity stress worldwide. Marker assisted breeding is a rapid and efficient way to develop improved variety for salinity stress tolerance. Genomic microsatellite markers are an elite group of markers, but there is possible uncertainty of linkage with the important genes. In contrast, there are better possibilities of linkage detection with important genes if SSRs are developed from candidate genes. To the best of our knowledge, there is no such report on SSR markers development from candidate gene sequences in rice. So the present study was aimed to identify and analyse SSRs from salt responsive candidate genes of rice. In the present study, based on the comprehensive literature survey, we selected 220 different salt responsive genes of rice. Out of them, 106 genes were found to contain 180 microsatellite loci with, tri-nucleotide motifs (56%) being most abundant, followed by di-(41%) and tetra nucleotide (2.8%) motifs. Maximum loci were found in the coding sequences (37.2%), followed by in 5'UTR (26%), intron (21.6%) and 3'UTR (15%). For validation, 19 primer sets were evaluated to detect polymorphism in diversity analysis among the two panels consisting of 17 salt tolerant and 17 susceptible rice genotypes. Except one, all primer sets exhibited polymorphic nature with an average of 21.8 alleles/primer and with a mean PIC value of 0.28. Calculated genetic similarity among genotypes was ranged from 19%-89%. The generated dendrogram showed 3 clusters of which one contained entire 17 susceptible genotypes and another two clusters contained all tolerant genotypes. The present study represents the potential of salt responsive candidate gene based SSR (cgSSR) markers to be utilized as novel and remarkable candidate for diversity analysis among rice genotypes differing in salinity response.

Gene: !affects! Rice cultivation and yield 
Gene: !contains! Microsatellite loci 
Gene: !localizes to! Coding sequences 
Gene: !validated by! 19 primer sets 
Gene: !generates! Dendrogram 
Gene: !utilized as! Novel candidate for diversity analysis