Phosphate (Pi) deficiency alters root hair length and frequency as a means of increasing the absorptive surface area of roots. Three partly redundant single R3 MYB proteins, CAPRICE (CPC), ENHANCER OF TRY AND CPC1 (ETC1) and TRIPTYCHON (TRY), positively regulate the root hair cell fate by participating in a lateral inhibition mechanism. To identify putative targets and processes that are controlled by these three transcription factors (TFs), we conducted transcriptional profiling of roots from Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type plants, and cpc, etc1 and try mutants grown under Pi-replete and Pi-deficient conditions using RNA-seq. The data show that in an intricate interplay between the three MYBs regulate several developmental, physiological and metabolic processes that are putatively located in different tissues. When grown on media with a low Pi concentration, all three TFs acquire additional functions that are related to the Pi starvation response, including transition metal transport, membrane lipid remodelling, and the acquisition, uptake and storage of Pi. Control of gene activity is partly mediated through the regulation of potential antisense transcripts. The current dataset extends the known functions of R3 MYB proteins, provides a suite of novel candidates with critical function in root hair development under both control and Pi-deficient conditions, and challenges the definition of genetic redundancy by demonstrating that environmental perturbations may confer specific functions to orthologous proteins that could have similar roles under control conditions.

CPC: !regulates! root hair cell fate
ETC1: !regulates! root hair cell fate
TRY: !regulates! root hair cell fate
Pi-deficiency: !alters! root hair length and frequency
CPC, ETC1, TRY: !participate in! lateral inhibition mechanism
CPC, ETC1, TRY: !regulate! developmental, physiological and metabolic processes
CPC, ETC1, TRY: !acquire additional functions! related to Pi starvation response
CPC, ETC1, TRY: !control gene activity! through regulation of potential antisense transcripts