In rice (Oryza sativa) roots, lysigenous aerenchyma, which is created by programmed cell death and lysis of cortical cells, is constitutively formed under aerobic conditions, and its formation is further induced under oxygen-deficient conditions. Ethylene is involved in the induction of aerenchyma formation. reduced culm number1 (rcn1) is a rice mutant in which the gene encoding the ATP-binding cassette transporter RCN1/OsABCG5 is defective. Here, we report that the induction of aerenchyma formation was reduced in roots of rcn1 grown in stagnant deoxygenated nutrient solution (i.e. under stagnant conditions, which mimic oxygen-deficient conditions in waterlogged soils). 1-Aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid synthase (ACS) is a key enzyme in ethylene biosynthesis. Stagnant conditions hardly induced the expression of ACS1 in rcn1 roots, resulting in low ethylene production in the roots. Accumulation of saturated very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) of 24, 26, and 28 carbons was reduced in rcn1 roots. Exogenously supplied VLCFA (26 carbons) increased the expression level of ACS1 and induced aerenchyma formation in rcn1 roots. Moreover, in rice lines in which the gene encoding a fatty acid elongase, CUT1-LIKE (CUT1L; a homolog of the gene encoding Arabidopsis CUT1, which is required for cuticular wax production), was silenced, both ACS1 expression and aerenchyma formation were reduced. Interestingly, the expression of ACS1, CUT1L, and RCN1/OsABCG5 was induced predominantly in the outer part of roots under stagnant conditions. These results suggest that, in rice under oxygen-deficient conditions, VLCFAs increase ethylene production by promoting 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid biosynthesis in the outer part of roots, which, in turn, induces aerenchyma formation in the root cortex.

RCN1/OsABCG5: !affects! aerenchyma formation
ACS1: !synthesizes! ethylene
VLCFAs: !enhance! ACS1 expression
CUT1L: !represses! aerenchyma formation
Stagnant conditions: !induce! ACS1 expression
VLCFA (26 carbons): !increases! ACS1 expression