Brassinosteroid (BR) and glucose (Glc) regulate many common responses in plants. Here, we demonstrate that under etiolated growth conditions, extensive interdependence/overlap occurs between BR- and Glc-regulated gene expression as well as physiological responses. Glc could regulate the transcript level of 72% of BR-regulated genes at the whole-genome level, of which 58% of genes were affected synergistically and 42% of genes were regulated antagonistically. Presence of Glc along with BR in medium could affect BR induction/repression of 85% of BR-regulated genes. Glc could also regulate several genes involved in BR metabolism and signaling. Both BR and Glc coregulate a large number of genes involved in abiotic/biotic stress responses and growth and development. Physiologically, Glc and BR interact to regulate hypocotyl elongation growth of etiolated Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings in a dose-dependent manner. Glc may interact with BR via a hexokinase1 (HXK1)-mediated pathway to regulate etiolated hypocotyl elongation. Brassinosteroid insensitive1 (BRI1) is epistatic to HXK1, as the Glc insensitive2bri1-6 double mutant displayed severe defects in hypocotyl elongation growth similar to its bri1-6 parent. Analysis of Glc and BR sensitivity in mutants defective in auxin response/signaling further suggested that Glc and BR signals may converge at S-phase kinase-associated protein1-Cullin-F-box-transport inhibitor response1/auxin-related f-box-auxin/indole-3-acetic acid-mediated auxin-signaling machinery to regulate etiolated hypocotyl elongation growth in Arabidopsis.

Glc: !regulates! BR-regulated genes
Glc: !interacts with! BR
Glc: !synergistically affects! 58% of BR-regulated genes
Glc: !antagonistically affects! 42% of BR-regulated genes
Glc: !coregulates! abiotic/biotic stress responses and growth/development
Glc: !interacts with! BR via HXK1 pathway
Glc: !epistatic to! HXK1
Glc: !converges with! BR at S-phase kinase-associated protein1-Cullin-F-box-transport inhibitor response1/auxin-related f-box-auxin/indole-3-acetic acid-mediated auxin-signaling machinery