Only limited public transcriptomics resources are available for durum wheat and its responses to environmental changes. We developed a quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) platform for analysing the expression of primary C and N metabolism genes in durum wheat in leaves (125 genes) and roots (38 genes), based on available bread wheat genes and the identification of orthologs of known genes in other species. We also assessed the expression stability of seven reference genes for qRT-PCR under varying environments. We therefore present a functional qRT-PCR platform for gene expression analysis in durum wheat, and suggest using the ADP-ribosylation factor as a reference gene for qRT-PCR normalization. We investigated the effects of elevated [CO(2)] and temperature at two levels of N supply on C and N metabolism by combining gene expression analysis, using our qRT-PCR platform, with biochemical and physiological parameters in durum wheat grown in field chambers. Elevated CO(2) down-regulated the photosynthetic capacity and led to the loss of N compounds, including Rubisco; this effect was exacerbated at low N. Mechanistically, the reduction in photosynthesis and N levels could be associated with a decreased transcription of the genes involved in photosynthesis and N assimilation. High temperatures increased stomatal conductance, and thus did not inhibit photosynthesis, even though Rubisco protein and activity, soluble protein, leaf N, and gene expression for C fixation and N assimilation were down-regulated. Under a future scenario of climate change, the extent to which C fixation capacity and N assimilation are down-regulated will depend upon the N supply.

Gene: !affects! Photosynthesis
Gene: !affects! N Assimilation
Gene: !represses! C Fixation Capacity
Gene: !represses! N Assimilation
Gene: !enhances! Stomatal Conductance
Gene: !synthesizes! Rubisco
Gene: !localizes to! Leaves
Gene: !localizes to! Roots
Gene: !interacts with! Elevated CO2
Gene: !interacts with! High Temperature
Gene: !interacts with! Low N Supply