Chemical analyses and glycome profiling demonstrate differences in the structures of the xyloglucan, galactomannan, glucuronoxylan, and rhamnogalacturonan I isolated from soybean ( Glycine max ) roots and root hair cell walls. The root hair is a plant cell that extends only at its tip. All other root cells have the ability to grow in different directions (diffuse growth). Although both growth modes require controlled expansion of the cell wall, the types and structures of polysaccharides in the walls of diffuse and tip-growing cells from the same plant have not been determined. Soybean (Glycine max) is one of the few plants whose root hairs can be isolated in amounts sufficient for cell wall chemical characterization. Here, we describe the structural features of rhamnogalacturonan I, rhamnogalacturonan II, xyloglucan, glucomannan, and 4-O-methyl glucuronoxylan present in the cell walls of soybean root hairs and roots stripped of root hairs. Irrespective of cell type, rhamnogalacturonan II exists as a dimer that is cross-linked by a borate ester. Root hair rhamnogalacturonan I contains more neutral oligosaccharide side chains than its root counterpart. At least 90% of the glucuronic acid is 4-O-methylated in root glucuronoxylan. Only 50% of this glycose is 4-O-methylated in the root hair counterpart. Mono O-acetylated fucose-containing subunits account for at least 60% of the neutral xyloglucan from root and root hair walls. By contrast, a galacturonic acid-containing xyloglucan was detected only in root hair cell walls. Soybean homologs of the Arabidopsis xyloglucan-specific galacturonosyltransferase are highly expressed only in root hairs. A mannose-rich polysaccharide was also detected only in root hair cell walls. Our data demonstrate that the walls of tip-growing root hairs cells have structural features that distinguish them from the walls of other roots cells.

Glycine max: !differs in! xyloglucan structure
Glycine max: !differs in! galactomannan structure
Glycine max: !differs in! glucuronoxylan structure
Glycine max: !differs in! rhamnogalacturonan I structure
rhamnogalacturonan II: !exists as! dimer
root hair rhamnogalacturonan I: !contains more! neutral oligosaccharide side chains
glucuronic acid: !4-O-methylated in! root glucuronoxylan
mono O-acetylated fucose-containing subunits: !account for! 60% of xyloglucan
galacturonic acid-containing xyloglucan: !detected only in! root hair cell walls
mannose-rich polysaccharide: !detected only in! root hair cell walls
Arabidopsis xyloglucan-specific galacturonosyltransferase: !highly expressed only in! root hairs