Flavonols are a ubiquitous class of flavonoids that accumulate preferentially in flowers and mature berries. Besides their photo-protective function, they play a fundamental role during winemaking, stabilizing the colour by co-pigmentation with anthocyanins and contributing to organoleptic characteristics. Although the general flavonol pathway has been genetically and biochemically elucidated, the genetic control of flavonol content and composition at harvest is still not clear. To this purpose, the grapes of 170 segregating F1 individuals from a 'Syrah'×'Pinot Noir' population were evaluated at the mature stage for the content of six flavonol aglycons in four seasons. Metabolic data in combination with genetic data enabled the identification of 16 mQTLs (metabolic quantitative trait loci). For the first time, major genetic control by the linkage group 2 (LG 2)/MYBA region on flavonol variation, in particular of tri-hydroxylated flavonols, is demonstrated. Moreover, seven regions specifically associated with the fine control of flavonol biosynthesis are identified. Gene expression profiling of two groups of individuals significantly divergent for their skin flavonol content identified a large set of differentially modulated transcripts. Among these, the transcripts coding for MYB and bZIP transcription factors, methyltranferases, and glucosyltranferases specific for flavonols, proteins, and factors belonging to the UV-B signalling pathway and co-localizing with the QTL regions are proposed as candidate genes for the fine regulation of flavonol content and composition in mature grapes.

Flavonols: !accumulate in! flowers and berries 
Flavonols: !stabilize! colour 
Flavonols: !contribute to! organoleptic characteristics 
Metabolic data: !combined with! genetic data 
mQTLs: !identified by! Metabolic data and genetic data 
LG 2/MYBA region: !controls! flavonol variation 
7 regions: !associated with! fine control of flavonol biosynthesis 
2 groups: !divergent for! skin flavonol content 
Differentially modulated transcripts: !identified by! 2 groups 
MYB and bZIP transcription factors: !modulate! flavonol content 
Methyltranferases and glucosyltranferases: !specific for! flavonols 
UV-B signalling pathway: !co-localizes with! QTL regions