['26093145', 'High salinity has negative impacts on plant growth through altered water uptake  and ion-specific toxicities. Plants have therefore evolved an intricate  regulatory network in which plant hormones play significant roles in modulating  physiological responses to salinity. However, current understanding of the plant  peptides involved in this regulatory network remains limited. Here, we identified  a salt-regulated peptide in Arabidopsis. The peptide was 11 aa and was derived  from the C terminus of a cysteine-rich secretory proteins, antigen 5, and  pathogenesis-related 1 proteins (CAP) superfamily. This peptide was found by  searching homologues in Arabidopsis using the precursor of a tomato CAP-derived  peptide (CAPE) that was initially identified as an immune signal. In searching  for a CAPE involved in salt responses, we screened CAPE precursor genes that  showed salt-responsive expression and found that the PROAtCAPE1 (AT4G33730) gene  was regulated by salinity. We confirmed the endogenous Arabidopsis CAP-derived  peptide 1 (AtCAPE1) by mass spectrometry and found that a key amino acid residue  in PROAtCAPE1 is critical for AtCAPE1 production. Moreover, although PROAtCAPE1  was expressed mainly in the roots, AtCAPE1 was discovered to be upregulated  systemically upon salt treatment. The salt-induced AtCAPE1 negatively regulated  salt tolerance by suppressing several salt-tolerance genes functioning in the  production of osmolytes, detoxification, stomatal closure control, and cell  membrane protection. This discovery demonstrates that AtCAPE1, a homologue of  tomato immune regulator CAPE1, plays an important role in the regulation of salt  stress responses. Our discovery thus suggests that the peptide may function in a  trade-off between pathogen defence and salt tolerance.', '2015 Aug', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erv263', 'ORCID:']

CAPE1: !regulates! salt tolerance 
AtCAPE1: !derived from! PROAtCAPE1 
PROAtCAPE1: !expressed in! roots 
AtCAPE1: !upregulated by! salt treatment 
AtCAPE1: !negatively regulates! salt-tolerance genes 
AtCAPE1: !functions in! trade-off between pathogen defence and salt tolerance