Manganese (Mn) constitutes an essential co-factor in the oxygen-evolving complex of photosystem II (PSII). Consequently, Mn deficiency reduces photosynthetic efficiency and leads to changes in PSII composition. In order to study these changes, multiplexed protein assays are advantageous. Here, we developed a multiplexed antibody-based assay and analysed selected PSII subunits in barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). A selection of antibodies were labelled with specific lanthanides and immunoreacted with thylakoids exposed to Mn deficiency after western blotting. Subsequently, western blot membranes were analysed by laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), which allowed selective and relative quantitative analysis via the different lanthanides. The method was evaluated against established liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) methods, based on data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and selected reaction monitoring (SRM). Manganese deficiency resulted in a general decrease in PSII protein abundances, an effect that was shown to be reversible upon Mn re-supplementation. Specifically, the extrinsic proteins PsbP and PsbQ showed Mn-dependent changes in abundances. Similar trends in the response to Mn deficiency at the protein level were observed when comparing DDA, SRM and LA-ICP-MS results. A biologically important exception to this trend was the loss of PsbO in the SRM analysis, which highlights the necessity of validating protein changes by more than one technique. The developed method enables a higher number of proteins to be multiplexed in comparison to existing immunoassays. Furthermore, multiplexed protein analysis by LA-ICP-MS provides an analytical platform with high throughput appropriate for screening large collections of plants.

Mn: !constitutes! PSII 
Mn deficiency: !reduces! photosynthetic efficiency 
Mn deficiency: !leads to! changes in PSII composition 
Multiplexed antibody-based assay: !analysed! selected PSII subunits 
Antibodies: !labelled with! specific lanthanides 
Thylakoids: !exposed to! Mn deficiency 
Western blot membranes: !analysed by! LA-ICP-MS 
LA-ICP-MS: !allowed! selective and relative quantitative analysis 
Mn deficiency: !resulted in! general decrease in PSII protein abundances 
PsbP and PsbQ: !showed! Mn-dependent changes in abundances 
DDA, SRM and LA-ICP-MS: !compared! response to Mn deficiency 
PsbO: !lost in! SRM analysis 
Multiplexed antibody-based assay: !enables! higher number of proteins to be multiplexed 
LA-ICP-MS: !provides! analytical platform with high throughput