Phloem production and structural development were interlinked with seasonal variation in the primary and secondary metabolites of phloem. Novel microtechniques provided new perspectives on understanding phloem structure and chemistry. To gain new insights into phloem formation in Norway spruce (Picea abies), we monitored phloem cell production and seasonal variation in the primary and secondary metabolites of inner bark (non-structural carbohydrates and phenolic stilbene glucosides) during the 2012 growing season in southern and northern Finland. The structure of developing phloem was visualised in 3D by synchrotron X-ray microtomography. The chemical features of developing phloem tissues isolated by laser microdissection were analysed by chemical microanalysis. Within-year phloem formation was associated with seasonal changes in non-structural carbohydrates and phenolic extractive contents of inner bark. The onset of phloem cell production occurred in early and mid-May in southern and northern Finland, respectively. The maximal rate of phloem production and formation of a tangential band of axial phloem parenchyma occurred in mid-June, when total non-structural carbohydrates peaked (due to the high amount of starch). In contrast, soluble sugar content dropped during the most active growth period and increased in late summer and winter. The 3D visualisation showed that the new axial parenchyma clearly enlarged from June to August. Sub-cellular changes appeared to be associated with accumulation of stilbene glucosides and soluble sugars in the newest phloem. Stilbene glucosides also increased in inner bark during late summer and winter. Our findings may indicate that stilbene biosynthesis in older phloem predominantly occurs after the formation of the new band(s) of axial parenchyma. The complementary use of novel microtechniques provides new perspectives on the formation, structure, and chemistry of phloem.

Phloem production: !interlinked with! seasonal variation
Non-structural carbohydrates: !peaked in! mid-June
Stilbene glucosides: !accumulated in! newest phloem
Stilbene glucosides: !increased in! inner bark
Synchrotron X-ray microtomography: !visualised! 3D structure
Chemical microanalysis: !analysed! chemical features