The aim of this study was to uncover the specific species in grains that might differentiate the wheat genotypes according to their tolerance to oxidative stress. Measurements by EPR and Raman spectroscopy techniques were used to examine whole grains and their parts (embryo, endosperm, seed coat) originating from four wheat genotypes with differing tolerance to drought stress. Raman spectra showed that, in spite of the similar amounts of proteins in whole grains from tolerant and sensitive genotypes, in tolerant ones they were accumulated mainly in embryos. Moreover, in embryos from these grains, a higher content of unsaturated fatty acids was observed. Endosperm of grains from the tolerant genotype, richer with starch than that of sensitive one, exhibited higher content of amylopectin. Detailed analysis of EPR signals and simulation procedures of the spectra allowed the estimation of the nature of interactions of Fe(III) and Mn(II) with organic and inorganic structures of grains and the character of organic stable radicals. Three types of these radicals: carbohydrate, semiquinone and phenoxyl, were identified. The amounts of these radicals were higher in grains of sensitive genotypes, mostly because of differences in carbohydrate radical content in endosperm. Taking into account the level of radical concentration and greater capacity for radical formation in grains from plants of lower tolerance to stress, the content of radicals, especially of a carbohydrate nature, was considered as a marker of the plant resistance to stress conditions.

genotype: !accumulates proteins in! embryo
genotype: !contains higher content of! unsaturated fatty acids
genotype: !richer with starch than! sensitive one
Fe(III): !interacts with! organic and inorganic structures
Mn(II): !interacts with! organic and inorganic structures
radical: !identified as! carbohydrate, semiquinone, phenoxyl
genotype: !differs in radical concentration of! carbohydrate radicals
radical: !considered as marker of! plant resistance