['26124109', 'The endodermis in roots acts as a selectivity filter for nutrient and water  transport essential for growth and development. This selectivity is enabled by  the formation of lignin-based Casparian strips. Casparian strip formation is  initiated by the localization of the Casparian strip domain proteins (CASPs) in  the plasma membrane, at the site where the Casparian strip will form. Localized  CASPs recruit Peroxidase 64 (PER64), a Respiratory Burst Oxidase Homolog F, and  Enhanced Suberin 1 (ESB1), a dirigent-like protein, to assemble the lignin  polymerization machinery. However, the factors that control both expression of  the genes encoding this biosynthetic machinery and its localization to the  Casparian strip formation site remain unknown. Here, we identify the  transcription factor, MYB36, essential for Casparian strip formation. MYB36  directly and positively regulates the expression of the Casparian strip genes  CASP1, PER64, and ESB1. Casparian strips are absent in plants lacking a  functional MYB36 and are replaced by ectopic lignin-like material in the corners  of endodermal cells. The barrier function of Casparian strips in these plants is  also disrupted. Significantly, ectopic expression of MYB36 in the cortex is  sufficient to reprogram these cells to start expressing CASP1-GFP, correctly  localize the CASP1-GFP protein to form a Casparian strip domain, and deposit a  Casparian strip-like structure in the cell wall at this location. These results  demonstrate that MYB36 is controlling expression of the machinery required to  locally polymerize lignin in a fine band in the cell wall for the formation of  the Casparian strip.', '2015 Aug 18', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1507691112', 'Salt']

MYB36: !regulates expression of! CASP1, PER64, ESB1 
CASP1-GFP: !localizes to! Casparian strip domain 
PER64: !assembles! lignin polymerization machinery 
ESB1: !assembles! lignin polymerization machinery 
MYB36: !reprograms! cortex cells 
CASP1-GFP: !forms! Casparian strip domain 
Casparian strip: !provides! barrier function