Coordinated functioning of the cob and florets of the maize ear confers grain yield. The cob is critical for carbon partitioning and assimilated nitrogen (N) supply for grain development. However, molecular recognition of the cob and peripheral florets, characterization of genes mediating translocation of N assimilates, and responses of these two tissues to low N (LN) remain elusive. Transcriptional profiling of the ear of a maize hybrid at silking in the field revealed 1864 differentially expressed genes between the cob and florets, with 1314 genes up-regulated in the cob and 550 genes up-regulated in florets. The cob was characterized by striking enrichment of genes that are involved in carbon/N transport and metabolism, consistent with the physiological role of the cob in carbon/N storage and transfer during ear development. The florets were characterized by enrichment of hormone signalling components and development related genes. We next examined the response of the cob and florets to LN stress. LN caused differential expression of 588 genes in the cob and only 195 genes in the florets, indicating that the cob dominated the response of the ear to LN at the transcriptional level. LN caused comprehensive alterations such as carbon/N metabolism or partitioning, hormone signalling and protein phosphorylation in terms of gene expression in the cob and/or florets. Fourteen genes responsive specifically to LN provided potential molecular markers for N-efficient maize breeding. We further functionally characterized two newly identified broad-spectrum amino acid transporters, ZmAAP4 and ZmVAAT3, that showed distinct expression patterns in the cob and florets and potentially important roles in amino-N mobilization in the ear. While both proteins could transport various amino acids into yeast or Arabidopsis cells, ZmAAP4 appeared to have higher efficiencies than ZmVAAT3 in transporting seven out of 22 examined amino acids.

cob: !enriches! genes involved in carbon/N transport and metabolism
florets: !enriches! hormone signalling components and development related genes
LN: !causes differential expression of! 588 genes in cob, 195 genes in florets
ZmAAP4: !transports! various amino acids into yeast or Arabidopsis cells
ZmVAAT3: !transports! various amino acids into yeast or Arabidopsis cells