Identification of early sulphur (S) deficiency indicators is important for species such as Brassica napus, an S-demanding crop in which yield and the nutritional quality of seeds are negatively affected by S deficiency. Because S is mostly stored as SO4 (2-) in leaf cell vacuoles and can be mobilized during S deficiency, this study investigated the impact of S deprivation on leaf osmotic potential in order to identify compensation processes. Plants were exposed for 28 days to S or to chlorine deprivation in order to differentiate osmotic and metabolic responses. While chlorine deprivation had no significant effects on growth, osmotic potential and nitrogen metabolism, Brassica napus revealed two response periods to S deprivation. The first one occurred during the first 13 days during which plant growth was maintained as a result of vacuolar SO4 (2-) mobilization. In the meantime, leaf osmotic potential of S-deprived plants remained similar to control plants despite a reduction in the SO4 (2-) osmotic contribution, which was fully compensated by an increase in NO3 (-), PO4 (3-) and Cl(-) accumulation. The second response occurred after 13 days of S deprivation with a significant reduction in growth, leaf osmotic potential, NO3 (-) uptake and NO3 (-) reductase activity, whereas amino acids and NO3 (-) were accumulated. This kinetic analysis of S deprivation suggested that a ([Cl(-)]+[NO3 (-)]+[PO4 (3-)]):[SO4 (2-)] ratio could provide a relevant indicator of S deficiency, modified nearly as early as the over-expression of genes encoding SO4 (2-) tonoplastic or plasmalemmal transporters, with the added advantage that it can be easily quantified under field conditions.

S deprivation: !affects! Growth 
S deprivation: !modifies! Leaf osmotic potential 
S deprivation: !mobilizes! Vacuolar SO4 (2-) 
S deprivation: !increases! NO3 (-), PO4 (3-), Cl(-) accumulation 
S deprivation: !reduces! NO3 (-) uptake, NO3 (-) reductase activity 
S deprivation: !accumulates! Amino acids, NO3 (-) 
([Cl(-)]+[NO3 (-)]+[PO4 (3-)]):[SO4 (2-)]: !provides! Indicator of S deficiency 
Genes encoding SO4 (2-) tonoplastic or plasmalemmal transporters: !over-expresses! Early