Plant male sterility has often been associated with mitochondrial dysfunction; however, the mechanism in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) has not been elucidated. This study set out to probe the mechanism of physiological male sterility (PHYMS) induced by the chemical hybridizing agent (CHA)-SQ-1, and cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) of wheat at the proteomic level. A total of 71 differentially expressed mitochondrial proteins were found to be involved in pollen abortion and further identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of fight/time of flight mass spectrometry). These proteins were implicated in different cellular responses and metabolic processes, with obvious functional tendencies toward the tricarboxylic acid cycle, the mitochondrial electron transport chain, protein synthesis and degradation, oxidation stress, the cell division cycle, and epigenetics. Interactions between identified proteins were demonstrated by bioinformatics analysis, enabling a more complete insight into biological pathways involved in anther abortion and pollen defects. Accordingly, a mitochondria-mediated male sterility protein network in wheat is proposed; this network was further confirmed by physiological data, RT-PCR (real-time PCR), and TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labelling) assay. The results provide intriguing insights into the metabolic pathway of anther abortion induced by CHA-SQ-1 and also give useful clues to identify the crucial proteins of PHYMS and CMS in wheat.

Mitochondrial dysfunction: !associated with! Plant male sterility 
MALDI-TOF/TOF MS: !identifies! 71 differentially expressed mitochondrial proteins 
Tricarboxylic acid cycle: !involved in! Pollen abortion 
Mitochondrial electron transport chain: !involved in! Pollen abortion 
Protein synthesis and degradation: !involved in! Pollen abortion 
Oxidation stress: !involved in! Pollen abortion 
Cell division cycle: !involved in! Pollen abortion 
Epigenetics: !involved in! Pollen abortion 
Bioinformatics analysis: !demonstrates interactions between! Identified proteins 
Mitochondria-mediated male sterility protein network: !proposed in! Wheat 
Physiological data: !confirms! Mitochondria-mediated male sterility protein network 
RT-PCR: !confirms! Mitochondria-mediated male sterility protein network 
TUNEL assay: !confirms! Mitochondria-mediated male sterility protein network