Plant non-specific lipid-transfer proteins (nsLTPs) are small, basic proteins present in abundance in higher plants. They are involved in key processes of plant cytology, such as the stablization of membranes, cell wall organization, and signal transduction. nsLTPs are also known to play important roles in resistance to biotic and abiotic stress, and in plant growth and development, such as sexual reproduction, seed development and germination. The structures of plant nsLTPs contain an eight-cysteine residue conserved motif, linked by four disulfide bonds, and an internal hydrophobic cavity, which comprises the lipid-binding site. This structure endows stability and increases the ability to bind and/or carry hydrophobic molecules. There is growing interest in nsLTPs, due to their critical roles, resulting in the need for a comprehensive review of their form and function. Relevant topics include: nsLTP structure and biochemical features, their classification, identification, and characterization across species, sub-cellular localization, lipid binding and transfer ability, expression profiling, functionality, and evolution. We present advances, as well as limitations and trends, relating to the different topics of the nsLTP gene family. This review collates a large body of research pertaining to the role of nsLTPs across the plant kingdom, which has been integrated as an in depth functional analysis of this group of proteins as a whole, and their activities across multiple biochemical pathways, based on a large number of reports. This review will enhance our understanding of nsLTP activity in planta, prompting further work and insights into the roles of this multifaceted protein family in plants.

nsLTP: !involved in! key processes of plant cytology 
nsLTP: !plays important roles in! resistance to biotic and abiotic stress 
nsLTP: !plays important roles in! plant growth and development 
nsLTP: !contains! eight-cysteine residue conserved motif 
nsLTP: !contains! internal hydrophobic cavity 
nsLTP: !endows! stability 
nsLTP: !increases ability to! bind and/or carry hydrophobic molecules 
nsLTP: !classified, identified, and characterized! across species 
nsLTP: !binds and transfers! lipids 
nsLTP: !profiled for! expression 
nsLTP: !analyzed for! functionality 
nsLTP: !evolved! across the plant kingdom