Seed development is an important process of reproductive development and consists of embryo and endosperm development; both comprise several key processes. To determine and investigate the functions of the dynamic DNA methylome during seed development, we profiled the DNA methylation genome wide in a series of developmental stages of rice (Oryza sativa) embryo and endosperm by methylcytosine immunoprecipitation followed by Illumina sequencing. The results showed that embryo is hypermethylated predominantly around non-transposable element (TE) genes, short DNA-TEs, and short interspersed TEs compared with endosperm, and non-TE genes have the most diverse methylation status across seed development. In addition, lowly expressed genes are significantly enriched in hypermethylated genes, but not vice versa, confirming the crucial role of DNA methylation in suppressing gene transcription. Further analysis revealed the significantly decreased methylation at early developing stages (from 2 to 3 d after pollination), indicating a predominant role of demethylation during early endosperm development and that genes with a consistent negative correlation between DNA methylation change and expression change may be potentially directly regulated by DNA methylation. Interestingly, comparative analysis of the DNA methylation profiles revealed that both rice indica and japonica subspecies showed robust fluctuant profiles of DNA methylation levels in embryo and endosperm across seed development, with the highest methylation level at 6 d after pollination (2 d after pollination of endosperm in japonica as well), indicating that a complex and finely controlled methylation pattern is closely associated with seed development regulation. The systemic characterization of the dynamic DNA methylome in developing rice seeds will help us understand the effects and mechanism of epigenetic regulation in seed development.

DNA methylation: !affects! gene transcription
non-TE genes: !have most diverse methylation status! across seed development
lowly expressed genes: !enriched in! hypermethylated genes
early developing stages: !predominant role of! demethylation
DNA methylation profiles: !robust fluctuant! in embryo and endosperm