Immediately following germination, the developing soybean seedling relies on the nutrient reserves stored in the cotyledons to sustain heterotrophic growth. During the seed filling period, developing seeds rely on the transport of nutrients from the trifoliate leaves. In soybean, both cotyledons and leaves develop the capacity for photosynthesis, and subsequently senesce and abscise once their function has ended. Before this occurs, the nutrients they contain are mobilized and transported to other parts of the plant. These processes are carefully orchestrated by genetic regulation throughout the development of the leaf or cotyledon. To identify genes involved in the processes of leaf or cotyledon development and senescence in soybean, we used RNA-seq to profile multiple stages of cotyledon and leaf tissues. Differentially expressed genes between stages of leaf or cotyledon development were determined, major patterns of gene expression were defined, and shared genes were identified. Over 38,000 transcripts were expressed during the course of leaf and cotyledon development. Of those transcripts, 5,000 were expressed in a tissue specific pattern. Of the genes that were differentially expressed between both later stage tissues, 90 % had the same direction of change, suggesting that the mechanisms of senescence are conserved between tissues. Analysis of the enrichment of biological functions within genes sharing common expression profiles highlights the main processes occurring within these defined temporal windows of leaf and cotyledon development. Over 1,000 genes were identified with predicted regulatory functions that may have a role in control of leaf or cotyledon senescence. The process of leaf and cotyledon development can be divided into distinct stages characterized by the expression of specific gene sets. The importance of the WRKY, NAC, and GRAS family transcription factors as major regulators of plant senescence is confirmed for both soybean leaf and cotyledon tissues. These results help validate functional annotation for soybean genes and promoters.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !localizes to! Leaf/Cotyledon
Gene: !interacts with! WRKY, NAC, GRAS
Gene: !enhances! Senescence
Gene: !represses! Development
Gene: !synthesizes! Regulatory Functions