In dicot Arabidopsis thaliana embryos two cotyledons develop largely autonomously from the shoot apical meristem (SAM). Recessive mutations in the Arabidopsis receptor-like kinase RPK1 lead to monocotyledonous seedlings, with low (10 %) penetrance due to complex functional redundancy. In strong rpk1 alleles, about 10 % of these (i. e. 1 % of all homozygotes) did not develop a SAM. We wondered whether RPK1 might also control SAM gene expression and SAM generation in addition to its known stochastic impact on cell division and PINFORMED1 (PIN1) polarity in the epidermis. SAM-less seedlings developed a simple morphology with a straight and continuous hypocotyl-cotyledon structure lacking a recognizable epicotyl. According to rpk1's auxin-related PIN1 defect, the seedlings displayed defects in the vascular tissue. Surprisingly, SAM-less seedlings variably expressed essential SAM specific genes along the hypocotyl-cotyledon structure up into the cotyledon lamina. Few were even capable of developing an ectopic shoot meristem (eSM) on top of the cotyledon. The results highlight the developmental autonomy of the SAM vs. cotyledons and suggest that the primary rpk1 defect does not lie in the seedling's ability to express SAM genes or to develop a shoot meristem. Rather, rpk1's known defects in cell division and auxin homeostasis, by disturbed PIN1 polarity, impact on SAM and organ generation. In early embryo stages this failure generates a simplified monocotyledonous morphology. Once generated, this likely entails a loss of positional information that in turn affects the spatiotemporal development of the SAM. SAM-bearing and SAM-less monocotyledonous phenotypes show morphological similarities either to real monocots or to dicot species, which only develop one cotyledon. The specific cotyledon defect in rpk1 mutants thus sheds light upon the developmental implications of the transition from two cotyledons to one.

RPK1: !affects! Cell division 
RPK1: !impacts! PIN1 polarity 
RPK1: !affects! SAM and organ generation 
RPK1: !generates! Simplified monocotyledonous morphology 
SAM: !develops autonomously from! Shoot apical meristem 
SAM: !expresses! Essential SAM specific genes 
SAM: !develops! Ectopic shoot meristem 
Cotyledons: !varies in expression of! Essential SAM specific genes 
Cotyledons: !displays! Defects in vascular tissue 
Transition: !implicates! Developmental implications