['26163700', 'The molecular mechanisms of abscisic acid (ABA) signalling have been studied for  many years; however, how mitochondria-localized proteins play roles in ABA  signalling remains unclear. Here an Arabidopsis mitochondria-localized protein  RRL (RETARDED ROOT GROWTH-LIKE) was shown to function in ABA signalling. A  previous study had revealed that the Arabidopsis mitochondria-localized protein  RRG (RETARDED ROOT GROWTH) is required for cell division in the root meristem.  RRL shares 54% and 57% identity at the nucleotide and amino acid sequences,  respectively, with RRG; nevertheless, RRL shows a different function in  Arabidopsis. In this study, disruption of RRL decreased ABA sensitivity whereas  overexpression of RRL increased ABA sensitivity during seed germination and  seedling growth. High expression levels of RRL were found in germinating seeds  and developing seedlings, as revealed by beta-glucuronidase (GUS) staining of  ProRRL-GUS transgenic lines. The analyses of the structure and function of  mitochondria in the knockout rrl mutant showed that the disruption of RRL causes  extensively internally vacuolated mitochondria and reduced ABA-stimulated  reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Previous studies have revealed that the  expression of alternative oxidase (AOX) in the alternative respiratory pathway is  increased by mitochondrial retrograde regulation to regain ROS levels when the  mitochondrial electron transport chain is impaired. The APETALA2 (AP2)-type  transcription factor ABI4 is a regulator of ALTERNATIVE OXIDASE1a (AOX1a) in  mitochondrial retrograde signalling. This study showed that ABA-induced AOX1a and  ABI4 expression was inhibited in the rrl mutant, suggesting that RRL is probably  involved in ABI4-mediated mitochondrial retrograde signalling. Furthermore, the  results revealed that ABI4 is a downstream regulatory factor in RRL-mediated ABA  signalling in seed germination and seedling growth.', '2015 Oct', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erv356', 'Liu']

RRL: !localizes to! mitochondria 
RRL: !affects! ABA sensitivity 
RRL: !interacts with! RRG 
RRL: !enhances! AOX1a expression 
ABI4: !regulates! mitochondrial retrograde signalling 
ABI4: !is downstream of! RRL-mediated ABA signalling