['26175513', 'The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) controls growth and development and  regulates plant water status through an established signaling pathway. In the  presence of ABA, pyrabactin resistance/regulatory component of ABA receptor  proteins inhibit type 2C protein phosphatases (PP2Cs). This, in turn, enables the  activation of Sucrose Nonfermenting1-Related Protein Kinases2 (SnRK2). Open  Stomata1 (OST1)/SnRK2.6/SRK2E is a major SnRK2-type protein kinase responsible  for mediating ABA responses. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) expressing an  epitope-tagged OST1 in the recessive ost1-3 mutant background was used for the  copurification and identification of OST1-interacting proteins after osmotic  stress and ABA treatments. These analyses, which were confirmed using bimolecular  fluorescence complementation and coimmunoprecipitation, unexpectedly revealed  homo- and heteromerization of OST1 with SnRK2.2, SnRK2.3, OST1, and SnRK2.8.  Furthermore, several OST1-complexed proteins were identified as type 2A protein  phosphatase (PP2A) subunits and as proteins involved in lipid and galactolipid  metabolism. More detailed analyses suggested an interaction network between  ABA-activated SnRK2-type protein kinases and several PP2A-type protein  phosphatase regulatory subunits. pp2a double mutants exhibited a reduced  sensitivity to ABA during seed germination and stomatal closure and an enhanced  ABA sensitivity in root growth regulation. These analyses add PP2A-type protein  phosphatases as another class of protein phosphatases to the interaction network  of SnRK2-type protein kinases.', '2015 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.00575', 'Schroeder']

ABA: !controls! growth and development 
ABA: !regulates! plant water status 
pyrabactin resistance/regulatory component of ABA receptor proteins: !inhibits! type 2C protein phosphatases 
type 2C protein phosphatases: !inhibited by! pyrabactin resistance/regulatory component of ABA receptor proteins 
Sucrose Nonfermenting1-Related Protein Kinases2 (SnRK2): !activated by! pyrabactin resistance/regulatory component of ABA receptor proteins 
Open Stomata1 (OST1)/SnRK2.6/SRK2E: !major SnRK2-type protein kinase responsible for mediating ABA responses! 
OST1: !homo- and heteromerizes with! SnRK2.2, SnRK2.3, OST1, and SnRK2.8 
OST1: !interacts with! PP2A subunits and proteins involved in lipid and galactolipid metabolism 
PP2A: !forms interaction network with! SnRK2-type protein kinases 
pp