SbMYB15, R2R3-type MYB was induced by the different stresses, and conferred stress tolerance in transgenic tobacco by regulating the expression of stress-responsive genes. MYBs are the master regulators of various metabolic processes and stress responses in plants. In this study, we functionally characterised a R2R3-type SbMYB15 transcription factor (TF) from the extreme halophyte Salicornia brachiata. The SbMYB15 acts as a transcriptional activator. Transcriptional analysis showed that SbMYB15 transcript was strongly upregulated in red shoots and was also induced by different stresses; however, its expression remained unchanged with ABA. Overexpression of SbMYB15 in tobacco significantly improved salinity and dehydration tolerance. The enhanced tolerance of the transgenic plants was defined by the changes in chlorophyll, malondialdehyde (MDA), proline, total soluble sugar and total amino acid contents. The transgenic plants exhibited a higher membrane stability and reduced electrolyte leakage, H2O2 and O 2 (-) content compared to the wild type (WT). With ionic stress, transgenics showed a low Na(+) and a high K(+) content. In the transgenic plants, the expression of stress-responsive genes such as LEA5, ERD10D, PLC3, LTP1, HSF2, ADC, P5CS, SOD and CAT was enhanced in the presence of salinity, dehydration and heat. Exposure to gradual salinity and dehydration resulted in an increased stomatal conductance, water use efficiency, photosynthesis rate, photochemical quenching and reduced transpiration rate. Thus, SbMYB15 served as an important mediator of stress responses regulating different stress signalling pathways, leading to enhanced stress tolerance.

SbMYB15: !induces! stress-responsive genes
SbMYB15: !enhances! stress tolerance
SbMYB15: !regulates! metabolic processes
SbMYB15: !mediates! stress responses
LEA5: !induced by! SbMYB15
ERD10D: !induced by! SbMYB15
PLC3: !induced by! SbMYB15
LTP1: !induced by! SbMYB15
HSF2: !induced by! SbMYB15
ADC: !induced by! SbMYB15
P5CS: !induced by! SbMYB15
SOD: !induced by! SbMYB15
CAT: !induced by! SbMYB15