['26220953', 'Plants invest a lot of their resources into the production of an extracellular  matrix built of polysaccharides. While the composition of the cell wall is  relatively well characterized, the functions of the individual polymers and the  enzymes that catalyze their biosynthesis remain poorly understood. We exploited  the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seed coat epidermis (SCE) to study cell  wall synthesis. SCE cells produce mucilage, a specialized secondary wall that is  rich in pectin, at a precise stage of development. A coexpression search for  MUCILAGE-RELATED (MUCI) genes identified MUCI10 as a key determinant of mucilage  properties. MUCI10 is closely related to a fenugreek (Trigonella foenumgraecum)  enzyme that has in vitro galactomannan alpha-1,6-galactosyltransferase activity. Our  detailed analysis of the muci10 mutants demonstrates that mucilage contains  highly branched galactoglucomannan (GGM) rather than unbranched glucomannan.  MUCI10 likely decorates glucomannan, synthesized by CELLULOSE SYNTHASE-LIKE A2,  with galactose residues in vivo. The degree of galactosylation is essential for  the synthesis of the GGM backbone, the structure of cellulose, mucilage density,  as well as the adherence of pectin. We propose that GGM scaffolds control  mucilage architecture along with cellulosic rays and show that Arabidopsis SCE  cells represent an excellent model in which to study the synthesis and function  of GGM. Arabidopsis natural varieties with defects similar to muci10 mutants may  reveal additional genes involved in GGM synthesis. Since GGM is the most abundant  hemicellulose in the secondary walls of gymnosperms, understanding its  biosynthesis may facilitate improvements in the production of valuable  commodities from softwoods.', '2015 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.00851', 'Gunl']

MUCI10: !synthesizes! GGM 
MUCI10: !decorates! glucomannan 
CELLULOSE SYNTHASE-LIKE A2: !synthesizes! glucomannan 
GGM: !controls! mucilage architecture 
GGM: !affects! cellulose structure 
GGM: !influences! mucilage density 
GGM: !regulates! pectin adherence