This paper reviews the importance, prospective and development of synthetic promoters reported in planta. A review of the synthetic promoters developed in planta would help researchers utilize the available resources and design new promoters to benefit fundamental research and agricultural applications. The demand for promoters for the improvement and application of transgenic techniques in research and agricultural production is increasing. Native/naturally occurring promoters have some limitations in terms of their induction conditions, transcription efficiency and size. The strength and specificity of native promoter can be tailored by manipulating its 'cis-architecture' by the use of several recombinant DNA technologies. Newly derived chimeric promoters with specific attributes are emerging as an efficient tool for plant molecular biology. In the last three decades, synthetic promoters have been used to regulate plant gene expression. To better understand synthetic promoters, in this article, we reviewed promoter structure, the scope of cis-engineering, strategies for their development, their importance in plant biology and the total number of such promoters (188) developed in planta to date; we then categorized them under different functional regimes as biotic stress-inducible, abiotic stress-inducible, light-responsive, chemical-inducible, hormone-inducible, constitutive and tissue-specific. Furthermore, we identified a set of 36 synthetic promoters that control multiple types of expression in planta. Additionally, we illustrated the differences between native and synthetic promoters and among different synthetic promoter in each group, especially in terms of efficiency and induction conditions. As a prospective of this review, the use of ideal synthetic promoters is one of the prime requirements for generating transgenic plants suitable for promoting sustainable agriculture and plant molecular farming.

Native/naturally occurring promoters: !have limitations! Transcription efficiency
Synthetic promoters: !tailor strength and specificity! 'Cis-architecture'
Synthetic promoters: !regulate! Plant gene expression
Biotic stress-inducible promoters: !induce! Expression
Abiotic stress-inducible promoters: !induce! Expression
Light-responsive promoters: !induce! Expression
Chemical-inducible promoters: !induce! Expression
Hormone-inducible promoters: !induce! Expression
Constitutive promoters: !constantly express! Genes
Tissue-specific promoters: !express! Genes in specific tissues