['26269546', 'Flavones are a major group of flavonoids with diverse functions and are  extensively distributed in land plants. There are two different classes of  FLAVONE SYNTHASE (FNS) enzymes that catalyze the conversion of the flavanones  into flavones. The FNSI class comprises soluble Fe(2+)/2-oxoglutarate-dependent  dioxygenases, and FNSII enzymes are oxygen- and NADPH-dependent cytochrome P450  membrane-bound monooxygenases. Here, we describe the identification and  characterization of FNSI enzymes from maize (Zea mays) and Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana). In maize, ZmFNSI-1 is expressed at significantly higher  levels in silks and pericarps expressing the 3-deoxy flavonoid R2R3-MYB regulator  P1, suggesting that ZmFNSI-1 could be the main enzyme for the synthesis of  flavone O-glycosides. We also show here that DOWNY MILDEW RESISTANT6 (AtDMR6),  the Arabidopsis homologous enzyme to ZmFNSI-1, has FNSI activity. While dmr6  mutants show loss of susceptibility to Pseudomonas syringae, transgenic dmr6  plants expressing ZmFNSI-1 show similar susceptibility to wild-type plants,  demonstrating that ZmFNSI-1 can complement the mutant phenotype. AtDMR6  expression analysis showed a tissue- and developmental stage-dependent pattern,  with high expression in cauline and senescing leaves. Finally, we show that  Arabidopsis cauline and senescing leaves accumulate apigenin, demonstrating that  Arabidopsis plants have an FNSI activity involved in the biosynthesis of  flavones. The results presented here also suggest cross talk between the flavone  and salicylic acid pathways in Arabidopsis; in this way, pathogens would induce  flavones to decrease salicylic acid and, hence, increase susceptibility.', '2015 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.00515', 'ORCID:']

Flavones: !synthesized by! FNS enzymes 
FNSI: !catalyzes conversion of! flavanones 
ZmFNSI-1: !expressed in! silks and pericarps 
AtDMR6: !homologous to! ZmFNSI-1 
AtDMR6: !complements! mutant phenotype 
AtDMR6: !expressed in! cauline and senescing leaves 
Arabidopsis: !accumulates! apigenin 
Flavone/Salicylic Acid Pathways: !cross talk between! pathogens and susceptibility