The susceptibility of soybean genotype to Agrobacterium infection is a key factor for the high level of genetic transformation efficiency. The objective of this study is to evaluate the plant factors related to transformation in cotyledonary nodes during the Agrobacterium infection process. This study selected three genotypes (Williams 82, Shennong 9 and Bert) with high transformation efficiency, which presented better susceptibility to Agrobacterium infection, and three low transformation efficiency genotypes (General, Liaodou 16 and Kottman), which showed a relatively weak susceptibility. Gibberellin (GA) levels and soybean GA20ox2 and CYP707A2 transcripts of high-efficiency genotypes increased and were higher than those of low-efficiency genotypes; however, the opposite performance was shown in abscisic acid (ABA). Higher zeatin riboside (ZR) content and DNA quantity, and relatively higher expression of soybean IPT5, CYCD3 and CYCA3 were obtained in high-efficiency genotypes. High-efficiency genotypes had low methyl jasmonate (MeJA) content, polyphenol oxidase (PPO) and peroxidase (POD) activity, and relatively lower expression of soybean OPR3, PPO1 and PRX71. GA and ZR were positive plant factors for Agrobacterium-mediated soybean transformation by facilitating germination and growth, and increasing the number of cells in DNA synthesis cycle, respectively; MeJA, PPO, POD and ABA were negative plant factors by inducing defence reactions and repressing germination and growth, respectively.

GA20ox2: !increases! Transformation Efficiency
CYP707A2: !increases! Transformation Efficiency
IPT5: !increases! Transformation Efficiency
CYCD3: !increases! Transformation Efficiency
CYCA3: !increases! Transformation Efficiency
ZR: !enhances! Agrobacterium-mediated Transformation
DNA: !increases! Transformation Efficiency
MeJA: !represses! Transformation Efficiency
PPO: !represses! Transformation Efficiency
POD: !represses! Transformation Efficiency
OPR3: !represses! Transformation Efficiency
PPO1: !represses! Transformation Efficiency
PRX71: !represses! Transformation Efficiency
GA: !enhances! Agrobacterium-mediated Transformation
ABA: !represses! Transformation Efficiency