We review the literature on host resistance of ash to emerald ash borer (EAB, Agrilus planipennis), an invasive species that causes widespread mortality of ash. Manchurian ash (Fraxinus mandshurica), which coevolved with EAB, is more resistant than evolutionarily naïve North American and European congeners. Manchurian ash was less preferred for adult feeding and oviposition than susceptible hosts, more resistant to larval feeding, had higher constitutive concentrations of bark lignans, coumarins, proline, tyramine and defensive proteins, and was characterized by faster oxidation of phenolics. Consistent with EAB being a secondary colonizer of coevolved hosts, drought stress decreased the resistance of Manchurian ash, but had no effect on constitutive bark phenolics, suggesting that they do not contribute to increased susceptibility in response to drought stress. The induced resistance of North American species to EAB in response to the exogenous application of methyl jasmonate was associated with increased bark concentrations of verbascoside, lignin and/or trypsin inhibitors, which decreased larval survival and/or growth in bioassays. This finding suggests that these inherently susceptible species possess latent defenses that are not induced naturally by larval colonization, perhaps because they fail to recognize larval cues or respond quickly enough. Finally, we propose future research directions that would address some critical knowledge gaps.

Manchurian ash: !coevolved with! EAB 
Manchurian ash: !more resistant than! North American/European congeners 
Manchurian ash: !less preferred for! adult feeding/oviposition 
Manchurian ash: !higher constitutive concentrations of! bark lignans/coumarins/proline/tyramine/defensive proteins 
Manchurian ash: !faster oxidation of! phenolics 
Drought stress: !decreased resistance of! Manchurian ash 
Methyl jasmonate: !induced resistance of! North American species 
North American species: !increased bark concentrations of! verbascoside/lignin/trypsin inhibitors