Adverse environmental conditions such as high temperature and drought stress greatly limit the growth and production of crops worldwide. Several NAC (NAM, ATAF1/2, and CUC2) proteins have been documented as important regulators in stress responses, but the molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, a stress-responsive NAC gene, SNAC3 (ONAC003, LOC_Os01g09550), conferring drought and heat tolerance in rice is reported. SNAC3 was ubiquitously expressed and its transcript level was induced by drought, high temperature, salinity stress, and abscisic acid (ABA) treatment. Overexpression (OE) of SNAC3 in rice resulted in enhanced tolerance to high temperature, drought, and oxidative stress caused by methyl viologen (MV), whereas suppression of SNAC3 by RNAi resulted in increased sensitivity to these stresses. The SNAC3-OE transgenic plants exhibited significantly lower levels of H2O2, malondiadehyde (MDA), and relative electrolyte leakage than the wild-type control under heat stress conditions, implying that SNAC3 may confer stress tolerance by modulating reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis. Quantitative PCR experiments showed that the expression of a large number of ROS-scavenging genes was dramatically increased in the SNAC3-OE plants, but significantly decreased in the SNAC3-RNAi transgenic plants. Five ROS-associated genes which were up-regulated in SNAC3-OE plants showed co-expression patterns with SNAC3, and three of the co-expressed ROS-associated enzyme genes were verified to be direct target genes of SNAC3. These results suggest that SNAC3 plays important roles in stress responses, and it is likely to be useful for engineering crops with improved tolerance to heat and drought stress.

SNAC3: !confers! drought and heat tolerance 
SNAC3: !induces! transcript level 
SNAC3: !enhances! tolerance to high temperature, drought, and oxidative stress 
SNAC3: !represses! sensitivity to these stresses 
SNAC3: !modulates! ROS homeostasis 
SNAC3: !up-regulates! ROS-scavenging genes 
ROS-associated genes: !co-express! with SNAC3 
ROS-associated enzyme genes: !directly target! SNAC3