['26304849', 'The nucleus-encoded mitochondria-targeted proteins, multiple organellar RNA  editing factors (MORF3, MORF5, and MORF6), interact with Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) PURPLE ACID PHOSPHATASE2 (AtPAP2) located on the chloroplast and  mitochondrial outer membranes in a presequence-dependent manner. Phosphorylation  of the presequence of the precursor MORF3 (pMORF3) by endogenous kinases in wheat  germ translation lysate, leaf extracts, or STY kinases, but not in rabbit  reticulocyte translation lysate, resulted in the inhibition of protein import  into mitochondria. This inhibition of import could be overcome by altering  threonine/serine residues to alanine on the presequence, thus preventing  phosphorylation. Phosphorylated pMORF3, but not the phosphorylation-deficient  pMORF3, can form a complex with 14-3-3 proteins and HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN70. The  phosphorylation-deficient mutant of pMORF3 also displayed faster rates of import  when translated in wheat germ lysates. Mitochondria isolated from plants with  altered amounts of AtPAP2 displayed altered protein import kinetics. The import  rate of pMORF3 synthesized in wheat germ translation lysate into pap2  mitochondria was slower than that into wild-type mitochondria, and this rate  disparity was not seen for pMORF3 synthesized in rabbit reticulocyte translation  lysate, the latter translation lysate largely deficient in kinase activity. Taken  together, these results support a role for the phosphorylation and  dephosphorylation of pMORF3 during the import into plant mitochondria. These  results suggest that kinases, possibly STY kinases, and AtPAP2 are involved in  the import of protein into both mitochondria and chloroplasts and provide a  mechanism by which the import of proteins into both organelles may be  coordinated.', '2015 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.01115', 'ORCID:']

MORF3: !interacts with! AtPAP2
pMORF3: !phosphorylated by! endogenous kinases
pMORF3: !forms complex with! 14-3-3 proteins and HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN70
AtPAP2: !alters! protein import kinetics
STY kinases: !involved in! import of proteins into mitochondria and chloroplasts