The role of mannitol differs from that of glucose, fructose and sucrose in sepal cell expansion associated with flower opening in Delphinium × belladonna. Sepals of Delphinium × belladonna are colored and much larger than the petals. To determine whether the role of mannitol in sepal growth associated with flower opening differs from those of ubiquitous metabolic sugars including glucose, fructose and sucrose, we investigated changes in cell number, subcellular concentrations of soluble carbohydrates, and osmotic potential in sepals during flower opening in Delphinium × belladonna cv. Bellamosum. The number of epidermal cells in the sepals did not increase from the stage when sepal pigmentation started, whereas the cell area increased during flower opening, indicating that petal growth during flower opening depends on cell expansion. Mannitol concentrations in the vacuole at three different stages were approximately 100 mM, which were much higher than the other carbohydrate concentrations, but they decreased slightly at open stage. In contrast, mannitol concentration in the cytoplasm was 56 mM at bud stage, but it increased to 104 mM at open stage. Glucose and fructose concentrations in the vacuole at open stage increased to 45 and 56 mM, respectively. Total osmotic potential in apoplast and symplast, which was partially due to soluble carbohydrates, was almost constant during flower opening. Therefore, mannitol may be acting constitutively as the main osmoticum in the vacuole where it may contribute to the maintenance of the osmotic balance between the cytoplasm and vacuole in open flowers. The role of mannitol differs from those of glucose, fructose, and sucrose in sepal cell expansion in Delphinium × belladonna.

mannitol: !acts as! main osmoticum
mannitol: !differs from! glucose, fructose, sucrose
glucose, fructose: !increase in! vacuole
mannitol: !decreases in! vacuole
mannitol: !increases in! cytoplasm
osmotic potential: !remains constant in! apoplast, symplast