PpDof 5 is a regulator of the expression of glutamine synthetase (GS; EC 6.3.1.2) genes in photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic tissues of maritime pine. We have used Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system to study PpDof 5 function in planta, generating transgenic lines overexpressing the pine transcription factor. The overexpression of PpDof 5 resulted in a substantial increase of lignin content with a simultaneous regulation of carbon and nitrogen key genes. In addition, partitioning in carbon and nitrogen compounds was spread via various secondary metabolic pathways. These results suggest pleiotropic effects of PpDof 5 expression on various metabolic pathways of carbon and nitrogen metabolism. Plants overexpressing PpDof 5 exhibited upregulation of genes encoding enzymes for sucrose and starch biosynthesis, with a parallel increase in the content of soluble sugars. When the plants were grown under nitrate as the sole nitrogen source, they exhibited a significant regulation of the expression of genes involved mainly in signaling, but similar growth rates to wild-type plants. However, plants grown under ammonium exhibited major induction of the expression of photosynthetic genes and differential expression of ammonium and nitrate transporters. All these data suggest that in addition to controlling ammonium assimilation, PpDof 5 could be also involved in the regulation of other pathways in carbon and nitrogen metabolism in pine trees.

PpDof 5: !regulates! expression of glutamine synthetase genes 
PpDof 5: !increases! lignin content 
PpDof 5: !regulates! carbon and nitrogen key genes 
PpDof 5: !regulates! secondary metabolic pathways 
PpDof 5: !upregulates! genes encoding enzymes for sucrose and starch biosynthesis 
PpDof 5: !regulates! expression of genes involved in signaling 
PpDof 5: !induces! expression of photosynthetic genes 
PpDof 5: !differentially regulates! ammonium and nitrate transporters 
PpDof 5: !controls! ammonium assimilation 
PpDof 5: !regulates! other pathways in carbon and nitrogen metabolism