Two different thiol redox systems exist in plant chloroplasts, the ferredoxin-thioredoxin (Trx) system, which depends on ferredoxin reduced by the photosynthetic electron transport chain and, thus, on light, and the NADPH-dependent Trx reductase C (NTRC) system, which relies on NADPH and thus may be linked to sugar metabolism in the dark. Previous studies suggested, therefore, that the two different systems may have different functions in plants. We now report that there is a previously unrecognized functional redundancy of Trx f1 and NTRC in regulating photosynthetic metabolism and growth. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutants, combined, but not single, deficiencies of Trx f1 and NTRC led to severe growth inhibition and perturbed light acclimation, accompanied by strong impairments of Calvin-Benson cycle activity and starch accumulation. Light activation of key enzymes of these pathways, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase and ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase, was almost completely abolished. The subsequent increase in NADPH-NADP(+) and ATP-ADP ratios led to increased nitrogen assimilation, NADP-malate dehydrogenase activation, and light vulnerability of photosystem I core proteins. In an additional approach, reporter studies show that Trx f1 and NTRC proteins are both colocalized in the same chloroplast substructure. Results provide genetic evidence that light- and NADPH-dependent thiol redox systems interact at the level of Trx f1 and NTRC to coordinately participate in the regulation of the Calvin-Benson cycle, starch metabolism, and growth in response to varying light conditions.

Ferredoxin-thioredoxin system: !depends on! Photosynthetic electron transport chain 
NADPH-dependent Trx reductase C system: !relies on! NADPH 
Trx f1 and NTRC: !have functional redundancy in! Regulating photosynthetic metabolism and growth 
Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase and ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !are light activated by! Trx f1 and NTRC 
NADPH-NADP(+) and ATP-ADP ratios: !increase due to! Trx f1 and NTRC deficiencies 
NADP-malate dehydrogenase: !is activated by! Increased NADPH-NADP(+) and ATP-ADP ratios 
Photosystem I core proteins: !become light vulnerable due to! Increased NADPH-NADP(+) and ATP-ADP ratios 
Trx f1 and NTRC: !are colocalized in! Same chloroplast substructure