['26348709', 'Meiosis produces haploid cells essential for sexual reproduction. In yeast, entry  into meiosis activates transcription factors which trigger a transcriptional  cascade that results in sequential co-expression of early, middle and late  meiotic genes. However, these factors are not conserved, and the factors and  regulatory mechanisms that ensure proper meiotic gene expression in multicellular  eukaryotes are poorly understood. Here, we report that DUET/MMD1, a PHD finger  protein essential for Arabidopsis male meiosis, functions as a transcriptional  regulator in plant meiosis. We find that DUET-PHD binds H3K4me2 in vitro, and  show that this interaction is critical for function during meiosis. We also show  that DUET is required for proper microtubule organization during meiosis II,  independently of its function in meiosis I. Remarkably, DUET protein shows  stage-specific expression, confined to diplotene. We identify two genes TDM1 and  JAS with critical functions in cell cycle transitions and spindle organization in  male meiosis, as DUET targets, with TDM1 being a direct target. Thus, DUET is  required to regulate microtubule organization and cell cycle transitions during  male meiosis, and functions as a direct transcription activator of the meiotic  gene TDM1. Expression profiling showed reduced expression of a subset comprising  about 12% of a known set of meiosis preferred genes in the duet mutant. Our  results reveal the action of DUET as a transcriptional regulator during male  meiosis in plants, and suggest that transcription of meiotic genes is under  stagewise control in plants as in yeast.', '2015 Sep', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1005396', 'Siddiqi']

DUET/MMD1: !activates! Transcription Factors 
Transcription Factors: !trigger! Transcriptional Cascade 
DUET-PHD: !binds! H3K4me2 
DUET: !regulates! Microtubule Organization 
DUET: !regulates! Cell Cycle Transitions 
DUET: !activates! TDM1 
TDM1: !regulates! Spindle Organization 
DUET: !reduces expression of! Meiotic Genes