This is a first report of an Ala-205-Phe substitution in acetolactate synthase conferring resistance to imidazolinone, sulfonylurea, triazolopyrimidines, sulfonylamino-carbonyl-triazolinones, and pyrimidinyl (thio) benzoate herbicides. Resistance to acetolactate synthase (ALS) and photosystem II inhibiting herbicides was confirmed in a population of allotetraploid annual bluegrass (Poa annua L.; POAAN-R3) selected from golf course turf in Tennessee. Genetic sequencing revealed that seven of eight POAAN-R3 plants had a point mutation in the psbA gene resulting in a known Ser-264-Gly substitution on the D1 protein. Whole plant testing confirmed that this substitution conferred resistance to simazine in POAAN-R3. Two homeologous forms of the ALS gene (ALSa and ALSb) were detected and expressed in all POAAN-R3 plants sequenced. The seven plants possessing the Ser-264-Gly mutation conferring resistance to simazine also had a homozygous Ala-205-Phe substitution on ALSb, caused by two nucleic acid substitutions in one codon. In vitro ALS activity assays with recombinant protein and whole plant testing confirmed that this Ala-205-Phe substitution conferred resistance to imidazolinone, sulfonylurea, triazolopyrimidines, sulfonylamino-carbonyl- triazolinones, and pyrimidinyl (thio) benzoate herbicides. This is the first report of Ala-205-Phe mutation conferring wide spectrum resistance to ALS inhibiting herbicides.

ALS: !confers resistance to! imidazolinone
ALS: !confers resistance to! sulfonylurea
ALS: !confers resistance to! triazolopyrimidines
ALS: !confers resistance to! sulfonylamino-carbonyl-triazolinones
ALS: !confers resistance to! pyrimidinyl (thio) benzoate herbicides
psbA: !contains! Ser-264-Gly substitution
ALSb: !contains! Ala-205-Phe substitution
ALSb: !confers resistance to! imidazolinone
ALSb: !confers resistance to! sulfonylurea
ALSb: !confers resistance to! triazolopyrimidines
ALSb: !confers resistance to! sulfonylamino-carbonyl-triazolinones
ALSb: !confers resistance to! pyrimidinyl (thio) benzoate herbicides