['26352477', 'Thousands of putative biosynthetic genes in Arabidopsis thaliana have no known  function, which suggests that there are numerous molecules contributing to plant  fitness that have not yet been discovered. Prime among these uncharacterized  genes are cytochromes P450 upregulated in response to pathogens. Here we start  with a single pathogen-induced P450 (ref. 5), CYP82C2, and use a combination of  untargeted metabolomics and coexpression analysis to uncover the complete  biosynthetic pathway to 4-hydroxyindole-3-carbonyl nitrile (4-OH-ICN), a  previously unknown Arabidopsis metabolite. This metabolite harbours cyanogenic  functionality that is unprecedented in plants and exceedingly rare in nature;  furthermore, the aryl cyanohydrin intermediate in the 4-OH-ICN pathway reveals a  latent capacity for cyanogenic glucoside biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. By  expressing 4-OH-ICN biosynthetic enzymes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and  Nicotiana benthamiana, we reconstitute the complete pathway in vitro and in vivo  and validate the functions of its enzymes. Arabidopsis 4-OH-ICN pathway mutants  show increased susceptibility to the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae,  consistent with a role in inducible pathogen defence. Arabidopsis has been the  pre-eminent model system for studying the role of small molecules in plant innate  immunity; our results uncover a new branch of indole metabolism distinct from the  canonical camalexin pathway, and support a role for this pathway in the  Arabidopsis defence response. These results establish a more complete framework  for understanding how the model plant Arabidopsis uses small molecules in  pathogen defence.', '2015 Sep 17', 'Nature', '10.1038/nature14907', 'Sattely']

CYP82C2: !induces! 4-OH-ICN
4-OH-ICN: !harbours! cyanogenic functionality
4-OH-ICN pathway: !reveals! latent capacity for cyanogenic glucoside biosynthesis
4-OH-ICN biosynthetic enzymes: !express in! Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Nicotiana benthamiana
4-OH-ICN pathway mutants: !show increased susceptibility to! Pseudomonas syringae
Arabidopsis: !uses! small molecules in pathogen defence