['26362606', 'The lipodystrophy protein SEIPIN is important for lipid droplet (LD) biogenesis  in human and yeast cells. In contrast with the single SEIPIN genes in humans and  yeast, there are three SEIPIN homologs in Arabidopsis thaliana, designated  SEIPIN1, SEIPIN2, and SEIPIN3. Essentially nothing is known about the functions  of SEIPIN homologs in plants. Here, a yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) SEIPIN  deletion mutant strain and a plant (Nicotiana benthamiana) transient expression  system were used to test the ability of Arabidopsis SEIPINs to influence LD  morphology. In both species, expression of SEIPIN1 promoted accumulation of  large-sized lipid droplets, while expression of SEIPIN2 and especially SEIPIN3  promoted small LDs. Arabidopsis SEIPINs increased triacylglycerol levels and  altered composition. In tobacco, endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized SEIPINs  reorganized the normal, reticulated ER structure into discrete ER domains that  colocalized with LDs. N-terminal deletions and swapping experiments of SEIPIN1  and 3 revealed that this region of SEIPIN determines LD size. Ectopic  overexpression of SEIPIN1 in Arabidopsis resulted in increased numbers of large  LDs in leaves, as well as in seeds, and increased seed oil content by up to 10%  over wild-type seeds. By contrast, RNAi suppression of SEIPIN1 resulted in  smaller seeds and, as a consequence, a reduction in the amount of oil per seed  compared with the wild type. Overall, our results indicate that Arabidopsis  SEIPINs are part of a conserved LD biogenesis machinery in eukaryotes and that in  plants these proteins may have evolved specialized roles in the storage of  neutral lipids by differentially modulating the number and sizes of lipid  droplets.', '2015 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.15.00588', 'ORCID:']

SEIPIN1: !promotes! large-sized lipid droplets 
SEIPIN2/3: !promotes! small LDs 
SEIPINs: !increase! triacylglycerol levels 
SEIPINs: !alter! composition 
SEIPINs: !reorganize! ER structure 
SEIPIN1: !determines! LD size 
SEIPIN1: !increases! numbers of large LDs 
SEIPIN1: !increases! seed oil content 
SEIPIN1: !reduces! amount of oil per seed