Currently, Tectona grandis is one of the most valuable trees in the world and no transcript dataset related to secondary xylem is available. Considering how important the secondary xylem and sapwood transition from young to mature trees is, little is known about the expression differences between those successional processes and which transcription factors could regulate lignin biosynthesis in this tropical tree. Although MYB transcription factors are one of the largest superfamilies in plants related to secondary metabolism, it has not yet been characterized in teak. These results will open new perspectives for studies of diversity, ecology, breeding and genomic programs aiming to understand deeply the biology of this species. We present a widely expressed gene catalog for T. grandis using Illumina technology and the de novo assembly. A total of 462,260 transcripts were obtained, with 1,502 and 931 genes differentially expressed for stem and branch secondary xylem, respectively, during age transition. Analysis of stem and branch secondary xylem indicates substantial similarity in gene ontologies including carbohydrate enzymes, response to stress, protein binding, and allowed us to find transcription factors and heat-shock proteins differentially expressed. TgMYB1 displays a MYB domain and a predicted coiled-coil (CC) domain, while TgMYB2, TgMYB3 and TgMYB4 showed R2R3-MYB domain and grouped with MYBs from several gymnosperms and flowering plants. TgMYB1, TgMYB4 and TgCES presented higher expression in mature secondary xylem, in contrast with TgMYB2, TgHsp1, TgHsp2, TgHsp3, and TgBi whose expression is higher in young lignified tissues. TgMYB3 is expressed at lower level in secondary xylem. Expression patterns of MYB transcription factors and heat-shock proteins in lignified tissues are dissimilar when tree development was evaluated, obtaining more expression of TgMYB1 and TgMYB4 in lignified tissues of 60-year-old trees, and more expression in TgHsp1, TgHsp2, TgHsp3 and TgBi in stem secondary xylem of 12-year-old trees. We are opening a door for further functional characterization by reverse genetics and marker-assisted selection with those genes. Investigation of some of the key regulators of lignin biosynthesis in teak, however, could be a valuable step towards understanding how rigidity of teak wood and extractives content are different from most other woods. The obtained transcriptome data represents new sequences of T. grandis deposited in public databases, representing an unprecedented opportunity to discover several related-genes associated with secondary xylem such as transcription factors and stress-related genes in a tropical tree.

Tectona grandis: !has! 462,260 transcripts 
Transcription factors: !regulate! lignin biosynthesis 
MYB transcription factors: !group with! MYBs from several gymnosperms and flowering plants 
TgMYB1: !displays! MYB domain and CC domain 
TgMYB2, TgMYB3, TgMYB4: !show! R2R3-MYB domain 
TgMYB1, TgMYB4, TgCES: !express higher in! mature secondary xylem 
TgMYB2, TgHsp1, TgHsp2, TgHsp3, TgBi: !express higher in! young lignified tissues 
TgMYB3: !expresses at lower level in! secondary xylem 
TgMYB1, TgMYB4: !express more in! 60-year-old trees 
TgHsp1, TgHsp2, TgHsp3, TgBi: !express more in! 12-year-old trees