Cytokinins are known to play an important role in fruit set and early fruit growth, but their involvement in later stages of fruit development is less well understood. Recent reports of greatly increased cytokinin concentrations in the flesh of ripening kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa (A. Chev.) C.F. Liang & A.R. Ferguson) and grapes (Vitis vinifera L.) have suggested that these hormones are implicated in the control of ripening-related processes. A similar pattern of isopentenyladenine (iP) accumulation was observed in the ripening fruit of several grapevine cultivars, strawberry (Fragaria ananassa Duch.) and tomato (Solanum lycopersicum Mill.), suggesting a common, ripening-related role for this cytokinin. Significant differences in maximal iP concentrations between grapevine cultivars and between fruit species might reflect varying degrees of relevance or functional adaptations of this hormone in the ripening process. Grapevine orthologues of five Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana L.) gene families involved in cytokinin metabolism and signalling were identified and analysed for their expression in developing grape berries and a range of other grapevine tissues. Members of each gene family were characterised by distinct expression profiles during berry development and in different grapevine organs, suggesting a complex regulation of cellular cytokinin activities throughout the plant. The post-veraison-specific expression of a set of biosynthesis, activation, perception and signalling genes together with a lack of expression of degradation-related genes during the ripening phase were indicative of a local control of berry iP concentrations leading to the observed accumulation of iP in ripening grapes. The transcriptional analysis of grapevine genes involved in cytokinin production, degradation and response has provided a possible explanation for the ripening-associated accumulation of iP in grapes and other fruit. The pre- and post-veraison-specific expression of different members from each of five gene families suggests a highly complex and finely-tuned regulation of cytokinin concentrations and response to different cytokinin species at particular stages of fruit development. The same complexity and specialisation is also reflected in the distinct expression profiles of cytokinin-related genes in other grapevine organs.

Cytokinin: !plays important role in! fruit set and early growth
Cytokinin: !implicated in control of! ripening-related processes
iP: !accumulated in! ripening fruit of several species
Grapevine gene families: !involved in! cytokinin metabolism and signalling
Grapevine genes: !characterised by distinct expression profiles during berry development and in different grapevine organs
Grapevine genes: !indicative of local control of berry iP concentrations! leading to iP accumulation
Grapevine genes: !provide explanation for! ripening-associated iP accumulation
Grapevine genes: !reflect complexity and specialisation in! distinct expression profiles