['26378127', 'Growing plant cells need to rigorously coordinate external signals with internal  processes. For instance, the maintenance of cell wall (CW) integrity requires the  coordination of CW sensing with CW remodeling and biosynthesis to avoid growth  arrest or integrity loss. Despite the involvement of receptor-like kinases (RLKs)  of the Catharanthus roseus RLK1-like (CrRLK1L) subfamily and the reactive oxygen  species-producing NADPH oxidases, it remains largely unknown how this  coordination is achieved. ANXUR1 (ANX1) and ANX2, two redundant members of the  CrRLK1L subfamily, are required for tip growth of the pollen tube (PT), and their  closest homolog, FERONIA, controls root-hair tip growth. Previously, we showed  that ANX1 overexpression mildly inhibits PT growth by oversecretion of CW  material, whereas pollen tubes of anx1 anx2 double mutants burst spontaneously  after germination. Here, we report the identification of suppressor mutants with  improved fertility caused by the rescue of anx1 anx2 pollen tube bursting.  Mapping of one these mutants revealed an R240C nonsynonymous substitution in the  activation loop of a receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase (RLCK), which we named  MARIS (MRI). We show that MRI is a plasma membrane-localized member of the  RLCK-VIII subfamily and is preferentially expressed in both PTs and root hairs.  Interestingly, mri-knockout mutants display spontaneous PT and root-hair  bursting. Moreover, expression of the MRI(R240C) mutant, but not its wild-type  form, partially rescues the bursting phenotypes of anx1 anx2 PTs and fer root  hairs but strongly inhibits wild-type tip growth. Thus, our findings identify a  novel positive component of the CrRLK1L-dependent signaling cascade that  coordinates CW integrity and tip growth.', '2015 Sep 29', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1512375112', 'Grossniklaus']

CrRLK1L: !coordinates! CW integrity 
ANXUR1/2: !require! tip growth 
FERONIA: !controls! root-hair tip growth 
MARIS: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
MARIS: !enhances! CrRLK1L-dependent signaling cascade