Numerous studies have found that sucrose (Suc) metabolism plays a crucial role in the environmental stress response of many plant species. The majority of Suc metabolism-associated reports refer to acid invertases (Ac-Invs). However, alkaline/neutral Invs (A/N-Invs) have been poorly studied. In this study, a wheat A/N-Inv gene, Ta-A/N-Inv1, with three copies located on chromosomes 4A, 4B, and 4D, was cloned from a wheat-Puccinia striiformis f. sp. tritici (Pst) interaction cDNA library. Transcripts of the three Ta-A/N-Inv1 copies were up-regulated in wheat leaves that were infected by Pst or had experienced certain abiotic treatments. Furthermore, the expression of Ta-A/N-Inv1 was decreased by treatment with exogenous hormones. Heterologous mutant complementation and subcellular localization revealed that Ta-A/N-Inv1 is a cytoplasmic invertase. Knocking down all three copies of Ta-A/N-Inv1 using the barley stripe mosaic virus-induced gene silencing system reduced the susceptibility of wheat to the Pst virulent pathotype CYR31, which is associated with pathogen-induced H2O2 accumulation and enhanced necrosis. Interestingly, 48h dark treatment of the Ta-A/N-Inv1-knockdown plants immediately after inoculation abrogated their enhanced resistance, suggesting that H2O2 production and its associated cell death and resistance in the Ta-A/N-Inv1-silenced plants require light. Consistent with this observation, photosynthesis and reactive oxygen species (ROS)-related genes were significantly up-regulated in the Ta-A/N-Inv1-knockdown plants infected by CYR31 under light exposure. These results suggest that Ta-A/N-Inv1 might act as a negative regulator in wheat disease resistance to Pst by increasing cytoplasmic hexose accumulation and downregulating photosynthesis of the leaves to avoid cell death due to excessive ROS production.

Ta-A/N-Inv1: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
Ta-A/N-Inv1: !represses! wheat disease resistance 
Ta-A/N-Inv1: !enhances! cytoplasmic hexose accumulation 
Ta-A/N-Inv1: !downregulates! photosynthesis 
Photosynthesis: !produces! ROS 
ROS: !induces! cell death