['26390296', 'Shoot organ primordia are initiated from the shoot apical meristem and develop  into leaves during the vegetative stage, and into flowers during the reproductive  phase. Between the meristem and the newly formed organ primordia, a boundary with  specialized cells is formed that separates meristematic activity from determinate  organ growth. Despite interactions that have been found between boundary  regulators with genes controlling meristem maintenance or primordial development,  most boundary studies were performed during embryogenesis or vegetative growth,  hence little is known about whether and how boundaries communicate with meristem  and organ primordia during the reproductive stage. We combined genetic, molecular  and biochemical tools to explore interactions between the boundary gene HANABA  TARANU (HAN) and two meristem regulators BREVIPEDICELLUS (BP) and PINHEAD (PNH),  and three primordia-specific genes PETAL LOSS (PTL), JAGGED (JAG) and  BLADE-ON-PETIOLE (BOP) during flower development. We demonstrated the key role of  HAN in determining petal number, as part of a set of complex genetic  interactions. HAN and PNH transcriptionally promote each other, and biochemically  interact to regulate meristem organization. HAN physically interacts with JAG,  and directly stimulates the expression of JAG and BOP2 to regulate floral organ  development. Further, HAN directly binds to the promoter and intron of CYTOKININ  OXIDASE 3 (CKX3) to modulate cytokinin homeostasis in the boundary. Our data  suggest that boundary-expressing HAN communicates with the meristem through the  PNH, regulates floral organ development via JAG and BOP2, and maintains boundary  morphology through CKX3 during flower development in Arabidopsis.', '2015 Sep', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1005479', 'Zhang']

HAN: !transcriptionally promotes! PNH 
HAN: !biochemically interacts with! PNH 
HAN: !physically interacts with! JAG 
HAN: !directly stimulates expression of! JAG 
HAN: !directly stimulates expression of! BOP2 
HAN: !directly binds to promoter and intron of! CKX3