['26417008', 'The oxylipins, a large family of oxygenated lipid derivatives, regulate plant  development and immunity. Two members of the 9-lipoxygenase (9-LOX) oxylipin  pathway, 9-hydroxyoctadecatrienoic acid and 9-ketooctadecatrienoic acid, control  root development and plant defense. Studies in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  using a series of 9-hydroxyoctadecatrienoic acid- and 9-ketooctadecatrienoic  acid-insensitive nonresponding to oxylipins (noxy) mutants showed the importance  of the cell wall as a 9-LOX-induced defense component and the participation of  NOXY proteins in signaling cell wall damage. Here, we examined 9-LOX signaling  using the mutants lox1lox5, which lacks 9-LOX activity, and noxy2-2, which shows  oxylipin insensitivity and mitochondrial dysfunction. Mutants in brassinosteroids  (BRs), a class of plant hormones necessary for normal plant growth and the  control of cell wall integrity, were also analyzed. Several lines of evidence  indicated that 9-LOX-derived oxylipins induce BR synthesis and signaling to  activate cell wall-based responses such as callose deposition and that  constitutive activation of BR signaling in bri1-EMS-suppressor 1-D (bes1-D)  plants enhances this response. We found that constitutive BR signaling in bes1-D  and brassinolide-resistant 1-1D (bzr1-1D) mutants conferred resistance to  Pseudomonas syringae. bes1-D and bzr1-1D showed increased resistance to  Golovinomyces cichoracearum, an obligate biotrophic fungus that penetrates the  cell wall for successful infection, whereas susceptibility was enhanced in  lox1lox5 and noxy2-2. Our results indicate a sequential action of 9-LOX and BR  signaling in activating cell wall-based defense, and this response prevents  pathogen infection. These results show interaction between the 9-LOX and BR  pathways and help to clarify their role in modulating plant defense.', '2015 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.00992', 'ORCID:']

9-LOX: !induces! BR synthesis 
BRs: !activate! cell wall-based responses 
9-LOX: !enhances! resistance to P. syringae 
BRs: !enhances! resistance to G. cichoracearum 
9-LOX: !interacts with! BR pathways 
NOXY: !participates in! signaling cell wall damage