Translational control is a key regulatory step in the expression of genes as proteins. In plant cells, the translational efficiency of mRNAs differs for different mRNA species, and the efficiency dynamically changes in various conditions. To gain a global view of translational control throughout growth and development, we performed genome-wide analysis of polysome association of mRNA during growth and leaf development in Arabidopsis thaliana by subjecting the mRNAs in polysomes to DNA microarray. This analysis revealed that the degree of polysome association of mRNA was different depending on the mRNA species, and the polysome association changed greatly throughout growth and development for each. In the growth stage, transcripts showed varying changes in polysome association from strongly depressed to unchanged, with the majority of transcripts showing dissociation from ribosomes. On the other hand, during leaf development, the polysome association of transcripts showed a normal distribution from repressed to activated mRNAs when comparing expanding and expanded leaves. In addition, functional category analysis of the microarray data suggested that translational control has a physiological significance in the plant growth and development process, especially in the categories of signaling and protein synthesis. In addition to this, we compared changes in polysome association of mRNAs between various conditions and characterized translational controls in each. This result suggested that mRNA translation might be controlled by complicated mechanisms for response to each condition. Our results highlight the importance of dynamic changes in mRNA translation in plant development and growth.

mRNA: !differs in! translational efficiency 
mRNA: !associates with! polysomes 
polysomes: !vary in! association with mRNA 
growth stage: !causes! dissociation of transcripts from ribosomes 
leaf development: !results in! normal distribution of polysome association 
signaling/protein synthesis: !influenced by! translational control 
condition: !regulates! mRNA translation