First observation that chemical spray can induce limited-transpiration rate under high vapor pressure deficit. It appears that acibenzolar may be key in inducing this water conservation trait. Irrigation and water use have become major issues in management of turfgrasses. Plant health products that have been introduced into the turfgrass market have been observed to improve plant performance in water stress conditions. In this study, we evaluated whether a selection of common plant health products alter the ability of creeping bentgrass (Agrostis stolonifera L.) to control transpiration under high vapor pressure deficit (VPD). The plant health treatments--Daconil Action, Insignia, and Signature--were applied to plots on golf course putting greens located in Raleigh NC and in Scottsdale, AZ. Using intact cores removed from the putting greens, transpiration rates were measured over a range of VPDs in controlled conditions. In all cases stretching over a 3-year period, bentgrass cores from field plots treated with Daconil-Action limited transpiration under high VPD conditions, while check treatments with water, and others treated with Insignia or Signature did not. Transpiration control became engaged when VPDs reached values ranging from 1.39 to 2.50 kPa, and was not strongly influenced by the field temperature at which the bentgrass was growing. Because all plots in NC had been treated with chlorothalonil-the key ingredient in Daconil Action to control diseases-it was concluded that the likely chemical ingredient in Daconil Action triggering the transpiration control response was acibenzolar. This is the first evidence that the limited-transpiration trait can be induced by a chemical application, and it implies significant potential for ameliorating drought vulnerability in cool-season turfgrasses, and likely other plant species.

acibenzolar: !induces! limited-transpiration rate 
Daconil Action: !contains! acibenzolar 
chlorothalonil: !ingredient in! Daconil Action 
VPD: !triggers! transpiration control response 
Daconil Action: !ameliorates! drought vulnerability