['26432875', 'Receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases (RLCKs) are a subset of plant receptor-like  kinases lacking both extracellular and transmembrane domains. Some of the 46  members in the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) RLCK subfamily VII have been  linked to plant innate immunity; however, most remain uncharacterized. Thus,  multiple subfamily VII members are expected to be involved in plant immune  signaling. Here, we investigate the role of AvrPphB SUSCEPTIBLE1-LIKE13 (PBL13),  a subfamily VII RLCK with unique domain architecture. Unlike other characterized  RLCKs, PBL13 transfer DNA insertion lines exhibit enhanced disease resistance  after inoculation with virulent Pseudomonas syringae. The pbl13-2 knockout also  exhibits elevated basal-level expression of the PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENE1  defense marker gene, enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS) burst in response to  perception of bacterial microbial patterns, and accelerated flagellin-induced  activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Recombinant PBL13 is an active  kinase, and its primary autophosphorylated sites map to a 15-amino acid repeat  motif unique to PBL13. Complementation of pbl13-2 with PBL13-3xFLAG converts the  enhanced resistance and elevated ROS phenotypes back to wild-type levels. In  contrast, kinase-dead PBL13(K111A)-3xFLAG was unable to rescue pbl13-2 disease  phenotypes. Consistent with the enhanced ROS burst in the pbl13-2 knockout, PBL13  is able to associate with the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate,  reduced oxidase RESPIRATORY BURST OXIDASE HOMOLOG PROTEIN D (RBOHD) by  split-luciferase complementation assay, and this association is disrupted by  flagellin treatment. We conclude that the PBL13 kinase negatively regulates plant  innate immunity to pathogenic bacteria and can associate with RBOHD before  pathogen perception. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that PBL13  acts to prevent inappropriate activation of defense responses in the absence of  pathogen challenge.', '2015 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.01391', 'ORCID:']

RLCKs: !affect! Plant innate immunity 
PBL13: !enhances! Disease resistance 
PBL13: !induces! ROS burst 
PBL13: !activates! MAPKs 
PBL13: !associates with! RBOHD 
PBL13: !regulates! Defense responses