['26444389', 'BACKGROUND: Adenine nucleotide/phosphate carriers (APCs) from mammals and yeast  are commonly known to adapt the mitochondrial adenine nucleotide pool in  accordance to cellular demands. They catalyze adenine nucleotide--particularly  ATP-Mg--and phosphate exchange and their activity is regulated by calcium. Our  current knowledge about corresponding proteins from plants is comparably limited.  Recently, the three putative APCs from Arabidopsis thaliana were shown to restore  the specific growth phenotype of APC yeast loss-of-function mutants and to  interact with calcium via their N-terminal EF--hand motifs in vitro. In this  study, we performed biochemical characterization of all three APC isoforms from  A. thaliana to gain further insights into their functional properties. RESULTS:  Recombinant plant APCs were functionally reconstituted into liposomes and their  biochemical characteristics were determined by transport measurements using  radiolabeled substrates. All three plant APCs were capable of ATP, ADP and  phosphate exchange, however, high preference for ATP-Mg, as shown for orthologous  carriers, was not detectable. By contrast, the obtained data suggest that in the  liposomal system the plant APCs rather favor ATP-Ca as substrate. Moreover,  investigation of a representative mutant APC protein revealed that the observed  calcium effects on ATP transport did not primarily/essentially involve  Ca(2+)-binding to the EF-hand motifs in the N-terminal domain of the carrier.  CONCLUSION: Biochemical characteristics suggest that plant APCs can mediate net  transport of adenine nucleotides and hence, like their pendants from animals and  yeast, might be involved in the alteration of the mitochondrial adenine  nucleotide pool. Although, ATP-Ca was identified as an apparent import substrate  of plant APCs in vitro it is arguable whether ATP-Ca formation and thus the  corresponding transport can take place in vivo.', '2015 Oct 6', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-015-0616-0', 'Haferkamp']

APC: !catalyzes! adenine nucleotide exchange 
APC: !interacts with! calcium 
APC: !favors! ATP-Ca 
APC: !mediates! net transport of adenine nucleotides