['26443677', 'Initial pollen-pistil interactions in the Brassicaceae are regulated by rapid  communication between pollen grains and stigmatic papillae and are fundamentally  important, as they are the first step toward successful fertilization. The goal  of this study was to examine the requirement of exocyst subunits, which function  in docking secretory vesicles to sites of polarized secretion, in the context of  pollen-pistil interactions. One of the exocyst subunit genes, EXO70A1, was  previously identified as an essential factor in the stigma for the acceptance of  compatible pollen in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and Brassica napus. We  hypothesized that EXO70A1, along with other exocyst subunits, functions in the  Brassicaceae dry stigma to deliver cargo-bearing secretory vesicles to the  stigmatic papillar plasma membrane, under the pollen attachment site, for pollen  hydration and pollen tube entry. Here, we investigated the functions of exocyst  complex genes encoding the remaining seven subunits, SECRETORY3 (SEC3), SEC5,  SEC6, SEC8, SEC10, SEC15, and EXO84, in Arabidopsis stigmas following compatible  pollinations. Stigma-specific RNA-silencing constructs were used to suppress the  expression of each exocyst subunit individually. The early postpollination stages  of pollen grain adhesion, pollen hydration, pollen tube penetration, seed set,  and overall fertility were analyzed in the transgenic lines to evaluate the  requirement of each exocyst subunit. Our findings provide comprehensive evidence  that all eight exocyst subunits are necessary in the stigma for the acceptance of  compatible pollen. Thus, this work implicates a fully functional exocyst complex  as a component of the compatible pollen response pathway to promote pollen  acceptance.', '2015 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.00635', 'ORCID:']

EXO70A1: !affects! Pollen-pistil interactions 
SEC3: !affects! Pollen-pistil interactions 
SEC5: !affects! Pollen-pistil interactions 
SEC6: !affects! Pollen-pistil interactions 
SEC8: !affects! Pollen-pistil interactions 
SEC10: !affects! Pollen-pistil interactions 
SEC15: !affects! Pollen-pistil interactions 
EXO84: !affects! Pollen-pistil interactions 
Exocyst complex: !promotes! Pollen acceptance