Polyamines are important in protecting plants against various environmental stresses, including protection against photodamage to the photosynthetic apparatus. The molecular mechanism of this latter effect is not completely understood. Here, we have investigated the effects of salinity-alkalinity stress and spermidine (Spd) on tomato seedlings at both physiological and transcriptional levels. Salinity-alkalinity stress decreased leaf area, net photosynthetic rate, maximum net photosynthetic rate, light saturation point, apparent quantum efficiency, total chlorophyll, chlorophyll a and chlorophyll a:chlorophyll b relative to the control. The amount of D1 protein, an important component of photosystem II, was reduced compared with the control, as was the expression of psbA, which codes for D1. Expression of the chlorophyll biosynthesis gene porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) was reduced following salinity-alkalinity stress, whereas the expression of Chlase, which codes for chlorophyllase, was increased. These negative physiological effects of salinity-alkalinity stress were alleviated by exogenous Spd. Expression of PBGD and psbA were enhanced, whereas the expression of Chlase was reduced, when exogenous Spd was included in the stress treatment compared with when it was not. The protective effect of Spd on chlorophyll and D1 protein content during stress may maintain the photosynthetic apparatus, permitting continued photosynthesis and growth of tomato seedlings (Solanum lycopersicum cv. Jinpengchaoguan) under salinity-alkalinity stress.

Salinity-alkalinity stress: !decreases! Leaf area
Salinity-alkalinity stress: !reduces! D1 protein
Salinity-alkalinity stress: !lowers! Expression of psbA
Salinity-alkalinity stress: !lowers! Expression of PBGD
Salinity-alkalinity stress: !increases! Expression of Chlase
Spermidine (Spd): !alleviates! Negative physiological effects of salinity-alkalinity stress
Spermidine (Spd): !enhances! Expression of PBGD
Spermidine (Spd): !enhances! Expression of psbA
Spermidine (Spd): !reduces! Expression of Chlase