['26482889', 'All cells of terrestrial plants are fortified by walls composed of crystalline  cellulose microfibrils and a variety of matrix polymers. Xylans are the second  most abundant type of polysaccharides on Earth. Previous studies of Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) irregular xylem (irx) mutants, with collapsed xylem  vessels and dwarfed stature, highlighted the importance of this cell wall  component and revealed multiple players required for its synthesis. Nevertheless,  xylan elongation and substitution are complex processes that remain poorly  understood. Recently, seed coat epidermal cells were shown to provide an  excellent system for deciphering hemicellulose production. Using a coexpression  and sequence-based strategy, we predicted several MUCILAGE-RELATED (MUCI) genes  that encode glycosyltransferases (GTs) involved in the production of xylan. We  now show that MUCI21, a member of an uncharacterized clade of the GT61 family,  and IRX14 (GT43 protein) are essential for the synthesis of highly branched xylan  in seed coat epidermal cells. Our results reveal that xylan is the most abundant  xylose-rich component in Arabidopsis seed mucilage and is required to maintain  its architecture. Characterization of muci21 and irx14 single and double mutants  indicates that MUCI21 is a Golgi-localized protein that likely facilitates the  addition of xylose residues directly to the xylan backbone. These unique branches  seem to be necessary for pectin attachment to the seed surface, while the xylan  backbone maintains cellulose distribution. Evaluation of muci21 and irx14  alongside mutants that disrupt other wall components suggests that mucilage  adherence is maintained by complex interactions between several polymers:  cellulose, xylans, pectins, and glycoproteins.', '2015 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.01441', 'Usadel']

MUCI21: !localizes to! Golgi 
MUCI21: !synthesizes! highly branched xylan 
IRX14: !synthesizes! xylan 
xylan: !maintains! cellulose distribution 
xylan: !attaches to! pectin 
cellulose: !interacts with! xylans 
pectins: !interacts with! xylans 
glycoproteins: !interacts with! xylans