['26538092', 'BACKGROUND: DNA replication and transcription are dynamic processes regulating  plant development that are dependent on the chromatin accessibility. Proteins  belonging to the Agenet/Tudor domain family are known as histone modification  "readers" and classified as chromatin remodeling proteins. Histone modifications  and chromatin remodeling have profound effects on gene expression as well as on  DNA replication, but how these processes are integrated has not been completely  elucidated. It is clear that members of the Agenet/Tudor family are important  regulators of development playing roles not well known in plants. METHODS:  Bioinformatics and phylogenetic analyses of the Agenet/Tudor Family domain in the  plant kingdom were carried out with sequences from available complete genomes  databases. 3D structure predictions of Agenet/Tudor domains were calculated by  I-TASSER server. Protein interactions were tested in two-hybrid, GST pulldown,  semi-in vivo pulldown and Tandem Affinity Purification assays. Gene function was  studied in a T-DNA insertion GABI-line. RESULTS: In the present work we analyzed  the family of Agenet/Tudor domain proteins in the plant kingdom and we mapped the  organization of this family throughout plant evolution. Furthermore, we  characterized a member from Arabidopsis thaliana named AIP1 that harbors  Agenet/Tudor and DUF724 domains. AIP1 interacts with ABAP1, a plant regulator of  DNA replication licensing and gene transcription, with a plant histone  modification "reader" (LHP1) and with non modified histones. AIP1 is expressed in  reproductive tissues and its down-regulation delays flower development timing.  Also, expression of ABAP1 and LHP1 target genes were repressed in flower buds of  plants with reduced levels of AIP1. CONCLUSIONS: AIP1 is a novel Agenet/Tudor  domain protein in plants that could act as a link between DNA replication,  transcription and chromatin remodeling during flower development.', '2015 Nov 4', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-015-0641-z', 'Hemerly']

AIP1: !interacts with! ABAP1 
AIP1: !interacts with! LHP1 
AIP1: !interacts with! non-modified histones 
AIP1: !enhances! flower development timing 
ABAP1: !represses! AIP1 target genes 
LHP1: !represses! AIP1 target genes