['26537562', "Mitochondrial translation involves a complex interplay of ancient bacteria-like  features and host-derived functionalities. Although the basic components of the  mitochondrial translation apparatus have been recognized, very few protein  factors aiding in recruiting ribosomes on mitochondria-encoded messenger RNA  (mRNAs) have been identified in higher plants. In this study, we describe the  identification of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) MITOCHONDRIAL  TRANSLATION FACTOR1 (MTL1) protein, a new member of the Pentatricopeptide Repeat  family, and show that it is essential for the translation of the mitochondrial  NADH dehydrogenase subunit7 (nad7) mRNA. We demonstrate that mtl1 mutant plants  fail to accumulate the Nad7 protein, even though the nad7 mature mRNA is produced  and bears the same 5' and 3' extremities as in wild-type plants. We next observed  that polysome association of nad7 mature mRNA is specifically disrupted in mtl1  mutants, indicating that the absence of Nad7 results from a lack of translation  of nad7 mRNA. These findings illustrate that mitochondrial translation requires  the intervention of gene-specific nucleus-encoded PPR trans-factors and that  their action does not necessarily involve the 5' processing of their target mRNA,  as observed previously. Interestingly, a partial decrease in nad7 intron 2  splicing was also detected in mtl1 mutants, suggesting that MTL1 is also involved  in group II intron splicing. However, this second function appears to be less  essential for nad7 expression than its role in translation. MTL1 will be  instrumental to understand the multifunctionality of PPR proteins and the  mechanisms governing mRNA translation and intron splicing in plant mitochondria.", '2016 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.01591', 'ORCID:']

MTL1: !essential for! translation of nad7 mRNA 
MTL1: !involved in! group II intron splicing 
nad7 mRNA: !polysome associated with! MTL1 
nad7 mRNA: !5' and 3' extremities same as! wild-type plants