['26537563', 'The Asp-His-His-Cys-Cys-rich domain-containing Protein S-Acyl Transferases (PATs)  are multipass transmembrane proteins that catalyze S-acylation (commonly known as  S-palmitoylation), the reversible posttranslational lipid modification of  proteins. Palmitoylation enhances the hydrophobicity of proteins, contributes to  their membrane association, and plays roles in protein trafficking and signaling.  In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), there are at least 24 PATs; previous  studies on two PATs established important roles in growth, development, and  stress responses. In this study, we identified a, to our knowledge, novel PAT,  AtPAT14, in Arabidopsis. Complementation studies in yeast (Saccharomyces  cerevisiae) and Arabidopsis demonstrate that AtPAT14 possesses PAT enzyme  activity. Disruption of AtPAT14 by T-DNA insertion resulted in an accelerated  senescence phenotype. This coincided with increased transcript levels of some  senescence-specific and pathogen-resistant marker genes. We show that early  senescence of pat14 does not involve the signaling molecules jasmonic acid and  abscisic acid, or autophagy, but associates with salicylic acid homeostasis and  signaling. This strongly suggests that AtPAT14 plays a pivotal role in regulating  senescence via salicylic acid pathways. Senescence is a complex process required  for normal plant growth and development and requires the coordination of many  genes and signaling pathways. However, precocious senescence results in loss of  biomass and seed production. The negative regulation of leaf senescence by  AtPAT14 in Arabidopsis highlights, to our knowledge for the first time, a  specific role for palmitoylation in leaf senescence.', '2016 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.00448', 'ORCID:']

AtPAT14: !catalyzes! S-acylation 
AtPAT14: !regulates! senescence 
senescence: !involves! many genes 
senescence: !requires! coordination of signaling pathways 
palmitoylation: !enhances! hydrophobicity of proteins 
palmitoylation: !contributes to! membrane association 
AtPAT14: !plays a pivotal role in! regulating senescence via salicylic acid pathways 
AtPAT14: !negatively regulates! leaf senescence