DNA methylation, one of the best-studied types of chromatin modification, suppresses the expression of transposable elements, pseudogenes, repetitive sequences, and individual genes. However, the extent and variation of genome-wide DNA methylation in natural populations of plants remain relatively unknown. To investigate variation in DNA methylation and whether this variation associates with important plant traits, including leaf shape and photosynthesis, 20 413 DNA methylation sites were examined in a poplar association population (505 individuals) using methylation-sensitive amplification polymorphism (MSAP) technology. Calculation of epi-population structure and kinships assigned individuals into subsets (K=3), revealing that the natural population of P. simonii consists of three subpopulations. Population epigenetic distance and geographic distance showed a significant correlation (r=0.4688, P<0.001), suggesting that environmental factors may affect epigenetics. Single-marker approaches were also used to identify significant marker-trait associations, which found 1087 high-confidence DNA methylation markers associated with different phenotypic traits explaining ~5-15% of the phenotypic variance. Among these loci, 147 differentially methylated fragments were obtained by sequencing, representing 130 candidate genes. Expression analysis of six candidate genes indicated that these genes might play important roles in leaf development and regulation of photosynthesis. This study provides association analysis to study the effects of DNA methylation on plant development and these data indicate that epigenetics bridges environmental and genetic factors in affecting plant growth and development.

DNA methylation: !suppresses! expression of transposable elements
DNA methylation: !associates with! important plant traits
Population epigenetic distance: !correlates with! geographic distance
DNA methylation markers: !associated with! phenotypic traits
Differentially methylated fragments: !represent! candidate genes
Candidate genes: !play roles in! leaf development
Candidate genes: !regulate! photosynthesis