['26554016', 'Inorganic phosphate (Pi) is stored in the vacuole, allowing plants to adapt to  variable Pi availability in the soil. The transporters that mediate Pi  sequestration into vacuole remain unknown, however. Here we report the functional  characterization of Vacuolar Phosphate Transporter 1 (VPT1), an SPX domain  protein that transports Pi into the vacuole in Arabidopsis. The vpt1 mutant  plants were stunted and consistently retained less Pi than wild type plants,  especially when grown in medium containing high levels of Pi. In seedlings, VPT1  was expressed primarily in younger tissues under normal conditions, but was  strongly induced by high-Pi conditions in older tissues, suggesting that VPT1  functions in Pi storage in young tissues and in detoxification of high Pi in  older tissues. As a result, disruption of VPT1 rendered plants hypersensitive to  both low-Pi and high-Pi conditions, reducing the adaptability of plants to  changing Pi availability. Patch-clamp analysis of isolated vacuoles showed that  the Pi influx current was severely reduced in vpt1 compared with wild type  plants. When ectopically expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana mesophyll cells, VPT1  mediates vacuolar influx of anions, including Pi, SO4(2-), NO3(-), Cl(-), and  malate with Pi as that preferred anion. The VPT1-mediated Pi current amplitude  was dependent on cytosolic phosphate concentration. Single-channel analysis  showed that the open probability of VPT1 was increased with the increase in  transtonoplast potential. We conclude that VPT1 is a transporter responsible for  vacuolar Pi storage and is essential for Pi adaptation in Arabidopsis.', '2015 Nov 24', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1514598112', 'Luan']

VPT1: !mediates! Pi sequestration into vacuole 
VPT1: !induces! high-Pi conditions in older tissues 
vpt1 mutant plants: !retain less! Pi than wild type plants 
VPT1: !functions in! Pi storage in young tissues 
VPT1: !detoxifies! high Pi in older tissues 
VPT1: !mediates! vacuolar influx of anions 
VPT1: !prefers! Pi as anion 
VPT1: !dependent on! cytosolic phosphate concentration 
VPT1: !open probability increased with! transtonoplast potential