['26561564', 'Precise cell-cycle control is critical for plant development and responses to  pathogen invasion. Two homologous cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor genes,  SIAMESE (SIM) and SIM-RELATED 1 (SMR1), were recently shown to regulate  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) defense based on phenotypes conferred by a sim  smr1 double mutant. However, whether these two genes play differential roles in  cell-cycle and defense control is unknown. In this report, we show that while  acting synergistically to promote endoreplication, SIM and SMR1 play different  roles in affecting the ploidy of trichome and leaf cells, respectively. In  addition, we found that the smr1-1 mutant, but not sim-1, was more susceptible to  a virulent Pseudomonas syringae strain, and this susceptibility could be rescued  by activating salicylic acid (SA)-mediated defense. Consistent with these  results, smr1-1 partially suppressed the dwarfism, high SA levels, and cell death  phenotypes in acd6-1, a mutant used to gauge the change of defense levels. Thus,  SMR1 functions partly through SA in defense control. The differential roles of  SIM and SMR1 are due to differences in temporal and spatial expression of these  two genes in Arabidopsis tissues and in response to P. syringae infection. In  addition, flow-cytometry analysis of plants with altered SA signaling revealed  that SA is necessary, but not sufficient, to change cell-cycle progression. We  further found that a mutant with three CYCD3 genes disrupted also compromised  disease resistance to P. syringae. Together, this study reveals differential  roles of two homologous cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors in regulating  cell-cycle progression and innate immunity in Arabidopsis and provides insights  into the importance of cell-cycle control during host-pathogen interactions.', '2016 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.01466', 'ORCID:']

SIM: !promotes! endoreplication
SMR1: !promotes! endoreplication
smr1-1: !more susceptible to! virulent Pseudomonas syringae strain
SA: !rescues! smr1-1 susceptibility
SA: !necessary for! cell-cycle progression
CYCD3: !disrupts! disease resistance