['26601823', "A candidate gene for phenylcoumaran benzylic ether reductase in Arabidopsis  thaliana encodes a peptide with predicted functional activity and plays a crucial  role in secondary metabolism. Phenylcoumaran benzylic ether reductase (PCBER) is  thought to be an enzyme crucial in the biosynthesis of 8-5'-linked neolignans.  Genes of the enzyme have been isolated and characterized in several plant  species. In this study, we cloned cDNA and the 5'-untranslated region of one  PCBER candidate gene (At4g39230, designated AtPCBER1) from Arabidopsis thaliana.  At the amino acid level, AtPCBER1 shows high sequence identity (64-71 %) with  PCBERs identified from other plant species. Expression analyses of AtPCBER1 by  reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and histochemical analysis of  transgenic plants harboring the 5'-untranslated region of AtPCBER1 linked with  gus coding sequence indicate that expression is induced by wounding and is  expressed in most tissues, including flower, stem, leaf, and root. Catalytic  analysis of recombinant AtPCBER1 with neolignan and lignans in the presence of  NADPH suggests that the protein can reduce not only the 8-5'-linked neolignan,  dehydrodiconiferyl alcohol, but also 8-8' linked lignans, pinoresinol, and  lariciresinol, with lower activities. To investigate further, we performed  metabolomic analyses of transgenic plants in which the target gene was up- or  down-regulated. Our results indicate no significant effects of AtPCBER1 gene  regulation on plant growth and development; however, levels of some secondary  metabolites, including lignans, flavonoids, and glucosinolates, differ between  wild-type and transgenic plants. Taken together, our findings indicate that  AtPCBER1 encodes a polypeptide with PCBER activity and has a critical role in the  biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in A. thaliana.", '2016 Mar', 'Plant Cell Rep', '10.1007/s00299-015-1899-1', 'Kajita']

AtPCBER1: !encodes! peptide 
peptide: !has! PCBER activity 
AtPCBER1: !expressed in! most tissues 
AtPCBER1: !reduces! 8-5'-linked neolignan 
AtPCBER1: !reduces! 8-8' linked lignans 
AtPCBER1: !regulates! secondary metabolites 
AtPCBER1: !plays crucial role in! secondary metabolism