['26628011', 'Essential amino acids cannot be synthesized by humans and animals. They often are  limiting in plant-derived foods and determine the nutritional value of a given  diet. Seeds and fruits often represent the harvestable portion of plants. In  order to improve the amino acid composition of these tissues, it is indispensable  to understand how these substrates are transported within the plant. Amino acids  result from nitrogen assimilation, which often occurs in leaves, the source  tissue. They are transported via the vasculature, the xylem, and the phloem into  the seeds, the so-called sink tissue, where they are stored or consumed. In  seeds, several tissues are symplasmically isolated, i.e., not connected by  plasmodesmata, channels in the cell walls that enable a cytoplasmic continuum in  plants. Consequently, amino acids must be exported from cells into the apoplast  and re-imported many times to support seed development. Several amino acid  importers are known, but exporters remained elusive. Here, we characterize four  members of the plant-specific UmamiT transporter family from Arabidopsis, related  to the amino acid facilitator SIAR1 and the vacuolar auxin transporter WAT1. We  show that the proteins transport amino acids along their (electro)chemical  potential across the plasma membrane. In seeds, they are found in tissues from  which amino acids are exported. Loss-of-function mutants accumulate high levels  of free amino acids in fruits and produce smaller seeds. Our results strongly  suggest a crucial role for the UmamiTs in amino acid export and possibly a means  to improve yield quality.', '2015 Dec 7', 'Curr Biol', '10.1016/j.cub.2015.10.038', 'Hammes']

Essential amino acids: !cannot be synthesized by! humans and animals 
Nitrogen assimilation: !occurs in! leaves 
Amino acids: !transported via! vasculature, xylem, phloem 
Apoplast: !not connected to! symplasmically isolated cells 
UmamiT transporter family: !related to! SIAR1 and WAT1 
UmamiTs: !transport! amino acids across plasma membrane 
UmamiTs: !found in! tissues from which amino acids are exported 
Loss-of-function mutants: !accumulate! high levels of free amino acids 
UmamiTs: !suggested to play a role in! amino acid export