['26634999', 'During waterlogging and the associated oxygen deprivation stress, plants respond  by the induction of adaptive programs, including the redirected expression of  gene networks toward the synthesis of core hypoxia-response proteins. Among these  core response proteins in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) is the calcium  sensor CML38, a protein related to regulator of gene silencing calmodulin-like  proteins (rgsCaMs). CML38 transcripts are up-regulated more than 300-fold in  roots within 6 h of hypoxia treatment. Transfer DNA insertional mutants of CML38  show an enhanced sensitivity to hypoxia stress, with lowered survival and more  severe inhibition of root and shoot growth. By using yellow fluorescent protein  (YFP) translational fusions, CML38 protein was found to be localized to cytosolic  granule structures similar in morphology to hypoxia-induced stress granules.  Immunoprecipitation of CML38 from the roots of hypoxia-challenged transgenic  plants harboring CML38pro::CML38:YFP followed by liquid chromatography-tandem  mass spectrometry analysis revealed the presence of protein targets associated  with messenger RNA ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) complexes including stress granules,  which are known to accumulate as messenger RNA storage and triage centers during  hypoxia. This finding is further supported by the colocalization of CML38 with  the mRNP stress granule marker RNA Binding Protein 47 (RBP47) upon cotransfection  of Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. Ruthenium Red treatment results in the loss of  CML38 signal in cytosolic granules, suggesting that calcium is necessary for  stress granule association. These results confirm that CML38 is a core hypoxia  response calcium sensor protein and suggest that it serves as a potential calcium  signaling target within stress granules and other mRNPs that accumulate during  flooding stress responses.', '2016 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.01407', 'ORCID:']

CML38: !up-regulated! during hypoxia
CML38: !localized to! cytosolic granules
CML38: !interacts with! mRNP complexes
CML38: !colocalizes with! RBP47
CML38: !requires! calcium for association