['26635862', "Ethylene regulates many aspects of plant growth and development including seed  germination, leaf senescence, and fruit ripening, and of plant responses to  environmental stimuli including both biotic and abiotic stresses. Ethylene  response factors (ERFs) are plant-specific transcription factors and are a  subfamily of the AP2 (APETALA2)/ERF transcription factor family. The function of  many members in this large gene family remains largely unknown. ERF96, a member  of the Group IX ERF family transcription factors, has recently been shown to be a  transcriptional activator that is involved in plant defense response in  Arabidopsis. Here we provide evidence that ERF96 is a positive regulator of  abscisic acid (ABA) responses. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that there are a  total four small ERFs in Arabidopsis including ERF95, ERF96, ERF97, and ERF98,  and that ERF96 forms a cluster with ERF95 and ERF97. By using quantitative  RT-PCR, we found that ERF96 is expressed in all tissues and organs examined  except roots, with relatively high expression in flowers and seeds. Results from  the protoplast transfection assay indicated that the EDLL motif-containing  C-terminal domain is responsible for ERF96's transcriptional activity. Although  loss-of-function mutant of ERF96 was morphologically similar to wild type plants,  transgenic plants overexpressing ERF96 had smaller rosette size and were delayed  in flowering time. In ABA sensitivity assays, we found that ERF96 overexpression  plants were hypersensitive to ABA in terms of ABA inhibition of seed germination,  early seedling development and root elongation. Consistent with these  observations, elevated transcript levels of some ABA-responsive genes including  RD29A, ABI5, ABF3, ABF4, P5CS, and COR15A were observed in the transgenic plants  in the presence of ABA. However, in the absence of ABA treatment, the transcript  levels of these ABA-responsive genes remained largely unchanged. Our experiments  also showed that water loss in ERF96 overexpression plants was slower than that  in Col wild type plants. Stomatal closure assays indicated that ERF96  overexpression plants had reduced stomatal aperture in the presence of ABA. Taken  together, our results suggest that ERF96 positively regulates ABA responses in  Arabidopsis.", '2015', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2015.01064', 'Chen']

ERF96: !regulates! ABA responses 
ERF96: !forms a cluster with! ERF95 and ERF97 
ERF96: !expresses in! all tissues and organs 
ERF96: !activates! transcriptional activity 
ERF96: !overexpression causes! smaller rosette size, delayed flowering time 
ERF96: !overexpression increases! ABA sensitivity 
ERF96: !overexpression elevates! transcript levels of ABA-responsive genes 
ERF96: !overexpression slows! water loss 
ERF96: !overexpression reduces! stomatal aperture