['26642436', 'The Polycomb group (PcG) and trithorax group (trxG) genes play crucial roles in  development by regulating expression of homeotic and other genes controlling cell  fate. Both groups catalyse modifications of chromatin, particularly histone  methylation, leading to epigenetic changes that affect gene activity. The trxG  antagonizes the function of PcG genes by activating PcG target genes, and  consequently trxG mutants suppress PcG mutant phenotypes. We previously  identified the ANTAGONIST OF LIKE HETEROCHROMATIN PROTEIN1 (ALP1) gene as a  genetic suppressor of mutants in the Arabidopsis PcG gene LIKE HETEROCHROMATIN  PROTEIN1 (LHP1). Here, we show that ALP1 interacts genetically with several other  PcG and trxG components and that it antagonizes PcG silencing. Transcriptional  profiling reveals that when PcG activity is compromised numerous target genes are  hyper-activated in seedlings and that in most cases this requires ALP1.  Furthermore, when PcG activity is present ALP1 is needed for full activation of  several floral homeotic genes that are repressed by the PcG. Strikingly, ALP1  does not encode a known chromatin protein but rather a protein related to  PIF/Harbinger class transposases. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that ALP1 is  broadly conserved in land plants and likely lost transposase activity and  acquired a novel function during angiosperm evolution. Consistent with this,  immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry (IP-MS) show that ALP1 associates, in  vivo, with core components of POLYCOMB REPRESSIVE COMPLEX 2 (PRC2), a widely  conserved PcG protein complex which functions as a H3K27me3 histone  methyltransferase. Furthermore, in reciprocal pulldowns using the histone  methyltransferase CURLY LEAF (CLF), we identify not only ALP1 and the core PRC2  components but also plant-specific accessory components including EMBRYONIC  FLOWER 1 (EMF1), a transcriptional repressor previously associated with PRC1-like  complexes. Taken together our data suggest that ALP1 inhibits PcG silencing by  blocking the interaction of the core PRC2 with accessory components that promote  its HMTase activity or its role in inhibiting transcription. ALP1 is the first  example of a domesticated transposase acquiring a novel function as a PcG  component. The antagonistic interaction of a modified transposase with the PcG  machinery is novel and may have arisen as a means for the cognate transposon to  evade host surveillance or for the host to exploit features of the transposition  machinery beneficial for epigenetic regulation of gene activity.', '2015 Dec', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1005660', 'Goodrich']

PcG: !regulates! homeotic and other genes
trxG: !antagonizes! PcG
ALP1: !interacts genetically with! PcG and trxG components
ALP1: !antagonizes! PcG silencing
ALP1: !associates with! PRC2
CLF: !identifies! ALP1, PRC2, EMF1