['26668333', 'Iron (Fe) deficiency is a widespread nutritional disorder on calcareous soils. To  identify genes involved in the Fe deficiency response, Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) transfer DNA insertion lines were screened on a high-pH medium with low  Fe availability. This approach identified METAL TOLERANCE PROTEIN8 (MTP8), a  member of the Cation Diffusion Facilitator family, as a critical determinant for  the tolerance to Fe deficiency-induced chlorosis, also on soil substrate.  Subcellular localization to the tonoplast, complementation of a manganese  (Mn)-sensitive Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast strain, and Mn sensitivity of mtp8  knockout mutants characterized the protein as a vacuolar Mn transporter suitable  to prevent plant cells from Mn toxicity. MTP8 expression was strongly induced on  low-Fe as well as high-Mn medium, which were both strictly dependent on the  transcription factor FIT, indicating that high-Mn stress induces Fe deficiency.  mtp8 mutants were only hypersensitive to Fe deficiency when Mn was present in the  medium, which further suggested an Mn-specific role of MTP8 during Fe limitation.  Under those conditions, mtp8 mutants not only translocated more Mn to the shoot  than did wild-type plants but suffered in particular from critically low Fe  concentrations and, hence, Fe chlorosis, although the transcriptional Fe  deficiency response was up-regulated more strongly in mtp8. The diminished uptake  of Fe from Mn-containing low-Fe medium by mtp8 mutants was caused by an impaired  ability to boost the ferric chelate reductase activity, which is an essential  process in Fe acquisition. These findings provide a mechanistic explanation for  the long-known interference of Mn in Fe nutrition and define the molecular  processes by which plants alleviate this antagonism.', '2016 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.01194', 'ORCID:']

MTP8: !localizes to! tonoplast 
MTP8: !complements! Mn-sensitive Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast strain 
MTP8: !enhances! tolerance to Fe deficiency-induced chlorosis 
MTP8: !induces! FIT transcription factor 
MTP8: !represses! Fe uptake from Mn-containing low-Fe medium 
MTP8: !synthesizes! ferric chelate reductase activity