['26663076', 'The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains four genes that were originally  annotated as potentially encoding DNA gyrase: ATGYRA, ATGYRB1, ATGYRB2, and  ATGYRB3. Although we subsequently showed that ATGYRB3 does not encode a gyrase  subunit, the other three genes potentially encode subunits of a plant gyrase. We  also showed evidence for the existence of supercoiling activity in A. thaliana  and that the plant is sensitive to quinolone and aminocoumarin antibiotics,  compounds that target DNA gyrase in bacteria. However, it was not possible at  that time to show whether the A. thaliana genes encoded an active gyrase enzyme,  nor whether that enzyme is indeed the target for the quinolone and aminocoumarin  antibiotics. Here we show that an A. thaliana mutant resistant to the quinolone  drug ciprofloxacin has a point mutation in ATGYRA. Moreover we show that, as in  bacteria, the quinolone-sensitive (wild-type) allele is dominant to the resistant  gene. Further we have heterologously expressed ATGYRA and ATGYRB2 in a  baculovirus expression system and shown supercoiling activity of the partially  purified enzyme. Expression/purification of the quinolone-resistant A. thaliana  gyrase yields active enzyme that is resistant to ciprofloxacin. Taken together  these experiments now show unequivocally that A. thaliana encodes an  organelle-targeted DNA gyrase that is the target of the quinolone drug  ciprofloxacin; this has important consequences for plant physiology and the  development of herbicides.', '2016 Feb 12', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M115.689554', 'Maxwell']

ATGYRA: !encodes! DNA gyrase subunit 
ATGYRB1: !encodes! DNA gyrase subunit 
ATGYRB2: !encodes! DNA gyrase subunit 
A. thaliana: !contains! four genes 
A. thaliana: !sensitive to! quinolone and aminocoumarin antibiotics 
A. thaliana mutant: !resistant to! ciprofloxacin 
ATGYRA: !mutated in! A. thaliana mutant 
ATGYRA: !dominant to! quinolone-resistant gene 
ATGYRA/ATGYRB2: !heterologously expressed! in baculovirus expression system 
ATGYRA/ATGYRB2: !show! supercoiling activity 
A. thaliana gyrase: !expressed/purified! yields active enzyme 
A. thaliana gyrase: !target of! quinolone drug ciprofloxacin