Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events were initiated in wheat scab resistance. The putative FHB-responsive phosphoproteins are mainly involved in three functional groups and contain at least one tyrosine, serine, or threonine phosphorylation site. Fusarium head blight (FHB), caused by Fusarium graminearum, is a severe disease in wheat. Protein phosphorylation plays an important role in plant-pathogen interactions, however, a global analysis of protein phosphorylation in response to FHB infection remains to be explored. To study the effect of FHB on the phosphorylation state of wheat proteins, proteins extracted from spikes of a resistant wheat cultivar after 6 h of inoculation with F. graminearum or sterile H2O were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and then the immunodetection of putative phosphoproteins was conducted by Western blotting using specific anti-phosphotyrosine antibody, anti-phosphothreonine antibody and anti-phosphoserine antibody. A total of 35 phosphorylated signals was detected and protein identities of 28 spots were determined. Functional categorization showed that the putative FHB-responsive phosphoproteins were mainly involved in defense/stress response, signal transduction, and metabolism. The phosphorylation status of proteins associated with signaling pathways mediated by salicylic acid, calcium ions, small GTPase, as well as with detoxification, reactive oxygen species scavenging, antimicrobial compound synthesis, and cell wall fortification was regulated in wheat spikes in response to F. graminearum infection. The present study reveals dynamics of wheat phosphoproteome in response to F. graminearum infection and suggests an important role of protein Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation in fundamental mechanisms of wheat scab resistance.

FHB: !initiates! Phosphorylation/Dephosphorylation events
Proteins: !involved in! Defense/Stress Response, Signal Transduction, Metabolism
Signaling Pathways: !mediated by! Salicylic Acid, Calcium Ions, Small GTPase
Detoxification: !regulated by! Protein Phosphorylation
Reactive Oxygen Species Scavenging: !regulated by! Protein Phosphorylation
Antimicrobial Compound Synthesis: !regulated by! Protein Phosphorylation
Cell Wall Fortification: !regulated by! Protein Phosphorylation