Salinity severely affects the growth/productivity of rice, which is utilized as major staple food crop worldwide. PDH45 (pea DNA helicase 45), a member of the DEAD-box helicase family, actively provides salinity stress tolerance, but the mechanism behind this is not well known. Therefore, in order to understand the mechanism of stress tolerance, sodium ion (Na(+)), reactive oxygen species (ROS), cytosolic calcium [Ca(2+)]cyt and cell viability were analyzed in roots of PDH45 transgenic-IR64 rice lines along with wild-type (WT) IR64 rice under salinity stress (100mM and 200 mM NaCl). In addition, the roots of salinity-tolerant (FL478) and susceptible (Pusa-44) rice varieties were also analyzed under salinity stress for comparative analysis. The results reveal that, under salinity stress (100mM and 200 mM NaCl), roots of PDH45 transgenic lines accumulate lower levels of Na(+), ROS and maintain [Ca(2+)]cyt and exhibit higher cell viability as compared with roots of WT (IR64) plants. Similar results were also obtained in the salinity-tolerant FL478 rice. However, the roots of WT and salinity-susceptible Pusa-44 rice accumulated higher levels of Na(+), ROS and [Ca(2+)]cyt imbalance and lower cell viability during salinity stress, which is in contrast to the overexpressing PDH45 transgenic lines and salinity-tolerant FL478 rice. Further, to understand the mechanism of PDH45 at molecular level, comparative expression profiling of 12 cation transporters/genes was also conducted in roots of WT (IR64) and overexpressing PDH45 transgenic lines (L1 and L2) under salt stress (24h of 200 mM NaCl). The expression analysis results show altered and differential gene expression of cation transporters/genes in salt-stressed roots of WT (IR64) and overexpressing transgenic lines (L1 and L2). These observations collectively suggest that, under salinity stress conditions, PDH45 is involved in the regulation of Na(+) level, ROS production, [Ca(2+)]cyt homeostasis, cell viability and cation transporters in roots of PDH45 transgenic-IR64 rice and consequently provide salinity tolerance. Elucidating the detailed regulatory mechanism of PDH45 will provide a better understanding of salinity stress tolerance and further open new ways to manipulate genome to achieve higher agricultural production under stress.

PDH45: !provides! salinity stress tolerance
Na(+): !accumulates! higher levels in WT IR64 plants
ROS: !accumulates! higher levels in WT IR64 plants
[Ca(2+)]cyt: !imbalanced! in WT IR64 plants
cell viability: !higher! in PDH45 transgenic-IR64 rice lines
cation transporters/genes: !differentially expressed! in WT and PDH45 transgenic-IR64 rice lines