['26690932', 'BACKGROUND: Arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) are ubiquitous components of cell  walls throughout the plant kingdom and are extensively post translationally  modified by conversion of proline to hydroxyproline (Hyp) and by addition of  arabinogalactan polysaccharides (AG) to Hyp residues. AGPs are implicated to  function in various aspects of plant growth and development, but the functional  contributions of AGP glycans remain to be elucidated. Hyp glycosylation is  initiated by the action of a set of Hyp-O-galactosyltransferase (Hyp-O-GALT)  enzymes that remain to be fully characterized. RESULTS: Three members of the GT31  family (GALT3-At3g06440, GALT4-At1g27120, and GALT6-At5g62620) were identified as  Hyp-O-GALT genes by heterologous expression in tobacco leaf epidermal cells and  examined along with two previously characterized Hyp-O-GALT genes, GALT2 and  GALT5. Transcript profiling by real-time PCR of these five Hyp-O-GALTs revealed  overlapping but distinct expression patterns. Transiently expressed GALT3, GALT4  and GALT6 fluorescent protein fusions were localized within Golgi vesicles.  Biochemical analysis of knock-out mutants for the five Hyp-O-GALT genes revealed  significant reductions in both AGP-specific Hyp-O-GALT activity and beta-Gal-Yariv  precipitable AGPs. Further phenotypic analysis of these mutants demonstrated  reduced root hair growth, reduced seed coat mucilage, reduced seed set, and  accelerated leaf senescence. The mutants also displayed several conditional  phenotypes, including impaired root growth, and defective anisotropic growth of  root tips under salt stress, as well as less sensitivity to the growth inhibitory  effects of beta-Gal-Yariv reagent in roots and pollen tubes. CONCLUSIONS: This study  provides evidence that all five Hyp-O-GALT genes encode enzymes that catalyze the  initial steps of AGP galactosylation and that AGP glycans play essential roles in  both vegetative and reproductive plant growth.', '2015 Dec 21', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-015-0670-7', 'Showalter']

GALT3: !localizes to! Golgi vesicles
GALT3: !synthesizes! AGP-specific Hyp-O-GALT activity
GALT4: !localizes to! Golgi vesicles
GALT4: !synthesizes! AGP-specific Hyp-O-GALT activity
GALT6: !localizes to! Golgi vesicles
GALT6: !synthesizes! AGP-specific Hyp-O-GALT activity
GALT2: !synthesizes! AGP-specific Hyp-O-GALT activity
GALT5: !synthesizes! AGP-specific Hyp-O-GALT activity
AGPs: !affects! Plant growth and development
AGPs: !enhances! Root hair growth
AGPs: !enhances! Seed coat mucilage
AGPs: !enhances! Seed set
AGPs: !represses! Leaf senescence
AGPs: !affects! Root growth
AGPs: !affects! Anisotropic growth of root tips
AGPs: !affects! Pollen tube growth