['26704640', 'In plants, photoreceptors transfer light signals to phytochrome-interacting  factors (PIFs), inducing the rapid phosphorylation and degradation of PIFs to  promote photomorphogenesis. However, the phosphatase responsible for PIF  dephosphorylation remains unknown. In this study, we identified a type 1 protein  phosphatase, TOPP4, that is essential for PIF5 protein stability in Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana). Compared with the wild type, the dominant-negative  mutant, topp4-1, displayed reduced hypocotyl length and larger apical hook and  cotyledon opening angle under red light. Overexpression of topp4-1 in the wild  type led to defects that were similar to those in the topp4-1 mutant. Red light  induced phytochrome B (phyB)-dependent TOPP4 expression in hypocotyls. The  topp4-1 mutation weakened the closed cotyledon angle of phyB-9 and phyA-211  phyB-9, while overexpression of TOPP4 significantly repressed the short  hypocotyls of phyB-green fluorescent protein seedlings, indicating that TOPP4 and  phyB function in an antagonistic way during photomorphogenesis. Protein  interaction assays and phosphorylation studies demonstrate that TOPP4 interacts  directly with PIF5 and dephosphorylates it. Furthermore, TOPP4 inhibits the red  light-induced ubiquitination and degradation of PIF5. These findings demonstrate  that dephosphorylation of PIF5 by TOPP4 inhibits its ubiquitin-mediated  degradation during photomorphogenesis. These data outline a novel phytochrome  signaling mechanism by which TOPP4-mediated dephosphorylation of PIF5 attenuates  phytochrome-dependent light responses.', '2016 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.15.01729', 'Hou']

Photoreceptors: !transfer! light signals 
light signals: !induce! PIFs phosphorylation 
TOPP4: !stabilizes! PIF5 
TOPP4: !interacts with! PIF5 
TOPP4: !dephosphorylates! PIF5 
TOPP4: !inhibits! PIF5 degradation 
phyB: !induces! TOPP4 expression 
TOPP4: !antagonizes! phyB 
phyB: !functions in! photomorphogenesis 
TOPP4: !attenuates! phytochrome-dependent light responses