Modular proteins are an evolutionary answer to optimize performance of proteins that physically interact with each other for functionality. Using a combination of genetic and biochemical experiments, we characterized the rice protein OsJAC1, which consists of a jacalin-related lectin (JRL) domain predicted to bind mannose-containing oligosaccharides, and a dirigent domain which might function in stereoselective coupling of monolignols. Transgenic overexpression of OsJAC1 in rice resulted in quantitative broad-spectrum resistance against different pathogens including bacteria, oomycetes, and fungi. Overexpression of this gene or its wheat ortholog TAJA1 in barley enhanced resistance against the powdery mildew fungus. Both protein domains of OsJAC1 are required to establish resistance as indicated by single or combined transient expression of individual domains. Expression of artificially separated and fluorescence-tagged protein domains showed that the JRL domain is sufficient for targeting the powdery mildew penetration site. Nevertheless, co-localization of the lectin and the dirigent domain occurred. Phylogenetic analyses revealed orthologs of OsJAC1 exclusively within the Poaceae plant family. Dicots, by contrast, only contain proteins with either JRL or dirigent domain(s). Altogether, our results identify OsJAC1 as a representative of a novel type of resistance protein derived from a plant lineage-specific gene fusion event for better function in local pathogen defense.

OsJAC1: !consists of! JRL domain 
OsJAC1: !consists of! dirigent domain 
OsJAC1: !overexpression in rice! results in resistance against pathogens 
OsJAC1: !overexpression in barley! enhances resistance against powdery mildew fungus 
OsJAC1: !both domains required! to establish resistance 
OsJAC1: !JRL domain sufficient! for targeting powdery mildew penetration site 
OsJAC1: !co-localization of domains! occurs 
OsJAC1: !orthologs exclusively! within Poaceae plant family 
OsJAC1: !no orthologs in dicots! with either JRL or dirigent domain(s)