Translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP) is fundamental for the regulation of development and general growth in eukaryotes. Its multiple functions have been deduced from its involvement in several cell pathways, but its potential involvement in symbiotic nodulation of legumes cannot be suggested a priori. In the present work, we identified and characterized from the woody leguminous tree Robinia pseudoacacia a homolog of TCTP, Rpf41, which was up-regulated in the infected roots at 15 days post-inoculation but decreased in the matured nodules. Subcellular location assay showed that Rpf41 protein was located in the plasma membrane, cytoplasm, nucleus, and also maybe in cytoskeleton. Knockdown of Rpf41 via RNA interference (RNAi) resulted in the impaired development of both nodule and root hair. Compared with wild plants, the root and stem length, fresh weight and nodule number per plant was decreased dramatically in Rpf41 RNAi plants. The number of ITs or nodule primordia was also significantly reduced in the Rpf41 RNAi roots. The analyses of nodule ultrastructure showed that the infected cell development in Rpf41 RNAi nodules remained in zone II, which had fewer infected cells. Furthermore, the symbiosomes displayed noticeable shrinkage of bacteroid and peribacteroid space enlargement in the infected cells of Rpf41 RNAi nodules. In the deeper cell layers, a more remarkable aberration of the infected cell ultrastructure was observed, and electron-transparent lesions in the bacteroid cytoplasm were detected. These results identify TCTP as an important regulator of symbiotic nodulation in legume for the first time, and it may be involved in symbiotic cell differentiation and preventing premature aging of the young nodules in R. pseudoacacia.

Translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP): !regulates! Development
Robinia pseudoacacia: !expresses! Rpf41
Rpf41: !localizes to! Plasma membrane, cytoplasm, nucleus, cytoskeleton
Rpf41: !impacts! Root and stem length, fresh weight, nodule number, ITs, infected cell development
Rpf41: !prevents! Premature aging of young nodules