The MYB- basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-WD40 complexes regulating anthocyanin and proanthocyanidin (PA) biosynthesis in plants are not fully understood. Here Medicago truncatula bHLH MtTT8 was characterized as a central component of these ternary complexes that control anthocyanin and PA biosynthesis. Mttt8 mutant seeds have a transparent testa phenotype with reduced PAs and anthocyanins. MtTT8 restores PA and anthocyanin productions in Arabidopsis tt8 mutant. Ectopic expression of MtTT8 restores anthocyanins and PAs in mttt8 plant and hairy roots and further enhances both productions in wild-type hairy roots. Transcriptomic analyses and metabolite profiling of mttt8 mutant seeds and M. truncatula hairy roots (mttt8 mutant, mttt8 mutant complemented with MtTT8, or MtTT8 overexpression lines) indicate that MtTT8 regulates a subset of genes involved in PA and anthocyanin biosynthesis. MtTT8 is genetically regulated by MtLAP1, MtPAR and MtWD40-1. Combinations of MtPAR, MtLAP1, MtTT8 and MtWD40-1 activate MtTT8 promoter in yeast assay. MtTT8 interacts with these transcription factors to form regulatory complexes. MtTT8, MtWD40-1 and an MYB factor, MtPAR or MtLAP1, interacted and activated promoters of anthocyanidin reductase and anthocyanidin synthase to regulate PA and anthocyanin biosynthesis, respectively. Our results provide new insights into the complex regulation of PA and anthocyanin biosynthesis in M. truncatula.

MtTT8: !controls! anthocyanin and proanthocyanidin biosynthesis
MtTT8: !restores! PA and anthocyanin productions in Arabidopsis tt8 mutant
MtTT8: !enhances! PA and anthocyanin productions in wild-type hairy roots
MtTT8: !regulates! subset of genes involved in PA and anthocyanin biosynthesis
MtTT8: !genetically regulated by! MtLAP1, MtPAR and MtWD40-1
MtPAR/MtLAP1: !interact with! MtTT8 and MtWD40-1
MtPAR/MtLAP1: !activate! MtTT8 promoter
MtTT8: !interacts with! MtWD40-1 and an MYB factor, MtPAR or MtLAP1
MtTT8/MtWD40-1/MtPAR/MtLAP1: !activate! promoters of anthocyanidin reductase and anthocyanidin synthase