The latex from Thevetia peruviana is rich in plant defense proteins, including a 120 kDa cysteine peptidase with structural characteristics similar to germin-like proteins. More than 20,000 plant species produce latex, including Apocynaceae, Sapotaceae, Papaveraceae and Euphorbiaceae. To better understand the physiological role played by latex fluids, a proteomic analysis of Thevetia peruviana (Pers.) Schum latex was performed using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. A total of 33 proteins (86 %) were identified, including storage proteins, a peptidase inhibitor, cysteine peptidases, peroxidases and osmotins. An unusual cysteine peptidase, termed peruvianin-I, was purified from the latex by a single chromatographic step involving gel filtration. The enzyme (glycoprotein) was inhibited by E-64 and iodoacetamide and exhibited high specific activity towards azocasein (K m 17.6 µM), with an optimal pH and temperature of 5.0-6.0 and 25-37 °C, respectively. Gel filtration chromatography, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and mass spectrometry revealed that peruvianin-I possesses 120 kDa, pI 4.0, and six subunits (20 kDa). A unique N-terminal amino acid sequence was obtained to oligomer and monomers of peruvianin-I (1ADPGPLQDFCLADLNSPLFINGYPCRNPALAISDDF36). High-resolution images from atomic force microscopy showed the homohexameric structure of peruvianin-I may be organized as a trimer of dimers that form a central channel similar to germin-like proteins. Peruvianin-I exhibited no oxalate oxidase and superoxide dismutase activity or antifungal effects. Peruvianin-I represents the first germin-like protein (GLP) with cysteine peptidase activity, an activity unknown in the GLP family so far.

Thevetia peruviana: !produces! latex
latex: !contains! proteins
proteins: !include! storage proteins, peptidase inhibitor, cysteine peptidases, peroxidases and osmotins
peruvianin-I: !purified from! latex
E-64: !inhibits! peruvianin-I
azocasein: !hydrolyzed by! peruvianin-I
peruvianin-I: !has! 120 kDa, pI 4.0, six subunits
N-terminal amino acid sequence: !unique to! peruvianin-I
atomic force microscopy: !reveals! homohexameric structure of peruvianin-I
peruvianin-I: !lacks! oxalate oxidase and superoxide dismutase activity or antifungal effects
peruvianin-I: !possesses! cysteine peptidase activity