Two TFL1 -like genes, CorfloTFL1 and CorcanTFL1 cloned from Cornus florida and C. canadensis, function in regulating the transition to reproductive development in Arabidopsis. TERMINAL FLOWER 1 (TFL1) is known to regulate inflorescence development in Arabidopsis thaliana and to inhibit the transition from a vegetative to reproductive phase within the shoot apical meristem. Despite the importance, TFL1 homologs have been functionally characterized in only a handful eudicots. Here we report the role of TFL1 homologs of Cornus L. in asterid clade of eudicots. Two TFL1-like genes, CorfloTFL1 and CorcanTFL1, were cloned from Cornus florida (a tree) and C. canadensis (a subshrub), respectively. Both are deduced to encode proteins of 175 amino acids. The amino acid sequences of these two Cornus TFL1 homologs share a high similarity to Arabidopsis TFL1 and phylogenetically more close to TFL1 paralogous copy ATC (Arabidopsis thaliana CENTRORADIALIS homologue). Two genes are overexpressed in wild-type and tfl1 mutant plants of A. thaliana. The over-expression of each gene in wild-type Arabidopsis plants results in delaying flowering time, increase of plant height and cauline and rosette leaf numbers, excessive shoot buds, and secondary inflorescence branches. The over-expression of each gene in the tfl1 mutant rescued developmental defects, such as the early determinate inflorescence development, early flowering time, and other vegetative growth defects, to normal phenotypes of wild-type plants. These transgenic phenotypes are inherited in progenies. All data indicate that CorfloTFL1 and CorcanTFL1 have conserved the ancestral function of TFL1 and CEN regulating flowering time and inflorescence determinacy.

Two TFL1-like genes: !function in regulating! transition to reproductive development in Arabidopsis
CorfloTFL1 and CorcanTFL1: !share high similarity to! Arabidopsis TFL1
CorfloTFL1 and CorcanTFL1: !phylogenetically close to! ATC (Arabidopsis thaliana CENTRORADIALIS homologue)
CorfloTFL1 and CorcanTFL1: !overexpressed in! wild-type and tfl1 mutant plants of A. thaliana
CorfloTFL1 and CorcanTFL1: !delay flowering time, increase plant height and cauline/rosette leaf numbers, excessive shoot buds, and secondary inflorescence branches
CorfloTFL1 and CorcanTFL1: !rescue developmental defects! in tfl1 mutant plants