['26822404', 'BACKGROUND: Calcium, as a second messenger, transduces extracellular signals into  cellular reactions. A rise in cytosolic calcium concentration is one of the first  plant responses after exposure to microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs).  We reported previously the isolation of Arabidopsis thaliana mutants with a  "changed calcium elevation" (cce) response to flg22, a 22-amino-acid MAMP derived  from bacterial flagellin. RESULTS: Here, we characterized the cce2 mutant and its  weaker allelic mutant, cce3. Besides flg22, the mutants respond with a reduced  calcium elevation to several other MAMPs and a plant endogenous peptide that is  proteolytically processed from pre-pro-proteins during wounding. Downstream  defense-related events such flg22-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase  activation, accumulation of reactive oxygen species and growth arrest are also  attenuated in cce2/cce3. By genetic mapping, next-generation sequencing and  allelism assay, CCE2/CCE3 was identified to be ALG3 (Asparagine-linked  glycosylation 3). This encodes the alpha-1,3-mannosyltransferase responsible for the  first step of core oligosaccharide Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 glycan assembly on the  endoplasmic reticulum (ER) luminal side. Complementation assays and glycan  analysis in yeast alg3 mutant confirmed the reduced enzymatic function of the  proteins encoded by the cce2/cce3 alleles - leading to accumulation of M5(ER),  the immature five mannose-containing oligosaccharide structure found in the ER.  Proper protein glycosylation is required for ER/Golgi processing and trafficking  of membrane proteins to the plasma membrane. Endoglycosidase H-insensitivity of  flg22 receptor, FLS2, in the cce2/cce3 mutants suggests altered glycan structures  in the receptor. CONCLUSION: Proper glycosylation of MAMP receptors (or other  exported proteins) is required for optimal responses to MAMPs and is important  for immune signaling of host plants.', '2016 Jan 28', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-016-0718-3', 'Lee']

gene: ALG3 !affects! calcium elevation 
gene: ALG3 !synthesizes! Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 glycan 
gene: ALG3 !enhances! defense-related events 
gene: ALG3 !represses! FLS2 endoglycosidase H-insensitivity