Theauxin efflux carrier PIN1 is a key mediator of polar auxin transport in developing plant tissues. This is why factors that are supposed to be involved in auxin distribution are frequently tested in the regulation of PIN1 expression. As a result, diverse aspects of PIN1 expression are dispersed across dozens of papers entirely devoted to other specific topics related to the auxin pathway. Integration of these puzzle pieces about PIN1 expression revealed that, along with a recurring pattern, some features of PIN1 expression varied from article to article. To determine if this uncertainty is related to the specific foci of articles or has a basis in the variability of PIN1 gene activity, we performed a comprehensive 3D analysis of PIN1 expression patterns in Arabidopsis thaliana roots. We provide here a detailed map of PIN1 expression in the primary root, in the lateral root primordia and at the root-shoot junction. The variability in PIN1 expression pattern observed in individual roots may occur due to differences in auxin distribution between plants. To simulate this effect, we analysed PIN1 expression in the roots from wild type seedlings treated with different IAA concentrations and pin mutants. Most changes in PIN1 expression after exogenous IAA treatment and in pin mutants were also recorded in wild type but with lower frequency and intensity. Comparative studies of exogenous auxin effects on PIN1pro:GUS and PIN1pro:PIN1-GFP plants indicated that a positive auxin effect is explicit at the level of PIN1 promoter activity, whereas the inhibitory effect relates to post-transcriptional regulation. Our results suggest that the PIN1 expression pattern in the root meristem accurately reflects changes in auxin content. This explains the variability of PIN1 expression in the individual roots and makes PIN1 a good marker for studying root meristem activity.

Theauxin efflux carrier PIN1: !mediates! polar auxin transport 
Factors: !involved in! regulation of PIN1 expression 
PIN1 expression: !dispersed across! dozens of papers 
Integration of puzzle pieces: !revealed! recurring pattern 
Variability of PIN1 gene activity: !related to! specific foci of articles 
3D analysis of PIN1 expression: !performed in! Arabidopsis thaliana roots 
PIN1 expression: !mapped in! primary root, lateral root primordia and root-shoot junction 
Variability in PIN1 expression: !occurs due to! differences in auxin distribution 
Exogenous IAA treatment and pin mutants: !analyzed in! wild type seedlings 
Changes in PIN1 expression: !recorded in! wild type with lower frequency and intensity 
Auxin effect: !explicit at! level of PIN1 promoter activity 
Inhibitory effect: !relates to! post-transcriptional regulation 
PIN1 expression pattern: !accurately reflects! changes in auxin content 
PIN1: !makes a good marker for! studying root meristem activity