['26836315', 'Malonyl-CoA is a key intermediate in a number of metabolic processes associated  with its role as a substrate in acylation and condensation reactions. These types  of reactions occur in plastids, the cytosol and mitochondria, and although  carboxylation of acetyl-CoA is the known mechanism for generating the distinct  plastidial and cytosolic pools, the metabolic origin of the mitochondrial  malonyl-CoA pool is still unclear. In this study we demonstrate that malonyl-CoA  synthetase encoded by the Arabidopsis AAE13 (AT3G16170) gene is localized in both  the cytosol and the mitochondria. These isoforms are translated from two types of  transcripts, one that contains and one that does not contain a  mitochondrial-targeting pre-sequence. Whereas the cytosolic AAE13 protein is not  essential, due to the presence of a redundant malonyl-CoA generating system  provided by a cytosolic acetyl-CoA carboxylase, the mitochondrial AAE13 protein  is essential for plant growth. Phenotypes of the aae13-1 mutant are  transgenically reversed only if the mitochondrial pre-sequence is present in the  ectopically expressed AAE13 proteins. The aae13-1 mutant exhibits typical  metabolic phenotypes associated with a deficiency in the mitochondrial fatty acid  synthase system, namely depleted lipoylation of the H subunit of the  photorespiratory enzyme glycine decarboxylase, increased accumulation of glycine  and glycolate and reduced levels of sucrose. Most of these metabolic alterations,  and associated morphological changes, are reversed when the aae13-1 mutant is  grown in a non-photorespiratory condition (i.e. a 1% CO2 atmosphere),  demonstrating that they are a consequence of the deficiency in photorespiration  due to the inability to generate lipoic acid from mitochondrially synthesized  fatty acids.', '2016 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13130', 'Nikolau']

Malonyl-CoA: !synthesizes! AAE13 gene 
AAE13 gene: !localizes to! cytosol & mitochondria 
AAE13 gene: !essential for! plant growth 
aae13-1 mutant: !exhibits! metabolic phenotypes 
metabolic phenotypes: !associated with! deficiency in mitochondrial fatty acid synthase system 
lipoic acid: !generated from! mitochondrially synthesized fatty acids