['26842981', 'Redox regulation plays a central role in the adaptation of chloroplast metabolism  to light. Extensive biochemical analyses in vitro have identified f-type  thioredoxins (Trxs) as the most important catalysts for light-dependent reduction  and activation of the enzymes of the Calvin-Benson cycle. However, the precise  function of type f Trxs in vivo and their impact on plant growth are still poorly  known. To address this issue we have generated an Arabidopsis thaliana double  knock-out mutant, termed trxf1f2, devoid of both f1 and f2 Trxs. Despite the  essential function previously proposed for f-type Trxs, the visible phenotype of  the trxf1f2 double mutant was virtually indistinguishable from the wild type when  grown under a long-day photoperiod. However, the Trx f-deficient plants showed  growth inhibition under a short-day photoperiod which was not rescued at high  light intensity. The absence of f-type Trxs led to significantly lower  photosynthetic electron transport rates and higher levels of non-photochemical  energy quenching. Notably, the Trx f null mutant suffered from a shortage of  photosystem I electron acceptors and delayed activation of carbon dioxide  fixation following a dark-light transition. Two redox-regulated Calvin-Benson  cycle enzymes, fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase) and Rubisco activase, showed  retarded and incomplete reduction in the double mutant upon illumination,  compared with wild-type plants. These results show that the function of f-type  Trxs in the rapid activation of carbon metabolism in response to light is not  entirely compensated for by additional plastid redox systems, and suggest that  these Trxs have an important role in the light adjustment of photosynthetic  metabolism.', '2016 Mar', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erw017', 'ORCID:']

Trx f1: !affects! Photosynthetic electron transport rates
Trx f2: !affects! Photosynthetic electron transport rates
FBPase: !localizes to! Plastid
Rubisco activase: !localizes to! Plastid
Trx f1: !interacts with! FBPase
Trx f2: !interacts with! Rubisco activase
Trx f1: !enhances! Activation of carbon dioxide fixation
Trx f2: !enhances! Activation of carbon dioxide fixation
Trx f1: !represses! Non-photochemical energy quenching
Trx f2: !represses! Non-photochemical energy quenching
Trx f1: !synthesizes! Photosystem I electron acceptors
Trx f2: !synthesizes! Photosystem I electron acceptors