Researchers have been examining the biological function(s) of isoprene in isoprene-emitting (IE) species for two decades. There is overwhelming evidence that leaf-internal isoprene increases the thermotolerance of plants and protects them against oxidative stress, thus mitigating a wide range of abiotic stresses. However, the mechanisms of abiotic stress mitigation by isoprene are still under debate. Here, we assessed the impact of isoprene on the emission of nitric oxide (NO) and the S-nitroso-proteome of IE and non-isoprene-emitting (NE) gray poplar (Populus × canescens) after acute ozone fumigation. The short-term oxidative stress induced a rapid and strong emission of NO in NE compared with IE genotypes. Whereas IE and NE plants exhibited under nonstressful conditions only slight differences in their S-nitrosylation pattern, the in vivo S-nitroso-proteome of the NE genotype was more susceptible to ozone-induced changes compared with the IE plants. The results suggest that the nitrosative pressure (NO burst) is higher in NE plants, underlining the proposed molecular dialogue between isoprene and the free radical NO Proteins belonging to the photosynthetic light and dark reactions, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, protein metabolism, and redox regulation exhibited increased S-nitrosylation in NE samples compared with IE plants upon oxidative stress. Because the posttranslational modification of proteins via S-nitrosylation often impacts enzymatic activities, our data suggest that isoprene indirectly regulates the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) via the control of the S-nitrosylation level of ROS-metabolizing enzymes, thus modulating the extent and velocity at which the ROS and NO signaling molecules are generated within a plant cell.

Gene: !affects! Isoprene emission 
Isoprene: !mitigates! Abiotic stress 
Nitric oxide: !emitted by! Non-isoprene emitting plants 
S-nitroso-proteome: !more susceptible to changes in! Non-isoprene emitting plants 
Photosynthetic light and dark reactions: !exhibit increased S-nitrosylation in! Non-isoprene emitting plants 
Tricarboxylic acid cycle: !exhibit increased S-nitrosylation in! Non-isoprene emitting plants 
Protein metabolism: !exhibit increased S-nitrosylation in! Non-isoprene emitting plants 
Redox regulation: !exhibit increased S-nitrosylation in! Non-isoprene emitting plants 
Isoprene: !regulates! Production of reactive oxygen species 
Reactive oxygen species: !modulated by! Isoprene