The present study showed all the 16 strains isolated and identified from the alfalfa rhizosphere and nodules, and registered in GenBank, to be good candidates for targeted use in studies addressing the rather weak known mechanism of plant growth promotion, including that of Medicago truncatula, a molecular crop model. Based on physiological, biochemical and molecular analysis, the 16 isolates obtained were ascribed to the following five families: Bacillaceae, Rhizobiaceae, Xantomonadaceae, Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonadaceae, within which 9 genera and 16 species were identified. All these bacteria were found to significantly enhance fresh and dry weight of root, shoots and whole 5-week-old seedlings. The bacteria were capable of the in vitro use of tryptophan to produce indolic compounds at various concentrations. The ability of almost all the strains to enhance growth of seedlings and individual roots was positively correlated with the production of the indolic compounds (r = 0.69; P = 0.0001), but not with the 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase (ACCD) activity (no correlation). For some strains, it was difficult to conclude whether the growth promotion was related to the production of indolic compounds or to the ACCD activity. It is likely that promotion of M. truncatula root development involves also root interaction with pseudomonads, known to produce 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG), a secondary metabolite reported to alter the root architecture by interacting with an auxin-dependent signaling pathway. Inoculation of seedlings with Pseudomonas brassicacearum KK 5, a bacterium known for its lowest ability to produce indolic compounds, the highest ACCD activity and the presence of the phlD gene responsible for DAPG precursor synthesis, resulted in a substantial promotion of root development. Inoculation with the strain increased the endogenous IAA level in M. truncatula leaves after inoculation of 5-week-old seedlings. Three other strains examined in this study also increased the IAA level in the leaves upon inoculation. Moreover, several other factors such as mobilization of phosphorus and zinc to make them available to plants, iron sequestration by siderophore production and the ability to ammonia production also contributed substantially to the phytostimulatory biofertilizing potential of isolated strains. There is, thus, evidence that Medicago truncatula growth promotion by rhizobacteria involves more than one mechanism.

Bacteria: !enhances! Growth of root, shoots and seedlings
Bacteria: !produces! Indolic compounds
Bacteria: !interacts with! Auxin-dependent signaling pathway
Bacteria: !synthesizes! DAPG precursor
Bacteria: !increases! Endogenous IAA level
Bacteria: !mobilizes! Phosphorus and zinc
Bacteria: !sequesters! Iron by siderophore production
Bacteria: !produces! Ammonia