Light plays an important role in plant growth and development. In this study, the impact of light on physiology of 20-d-old Arabidopsis leaves was examined through transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic analysis. Since the energy-generating electron transport chains in chloroplasts and mitochondria are encoded by both nuclear and organellar genomes, sequencing total RNA after removal of ribosomal RNAs provides essential information on transcription of organellar genomes. The changes in the levels of ADP, ATP, NADP(+), NADPH and 41 metabolites upon illumination were also quantified. Upon illumination, while the transcription of the genes encoded by the plastid genome did not change significantly, the transcription of nuclear genes encoding different functional complexes in the photosystem are differentially regulated whereas members of the same complex are co-regulated with each other. The abundance of mRNAs and proteins encoded by all three genomes are, however, not always positively correlated. One such example is the negative correlation between mRNA and protein abundances of the photosystem components, which reflects the importance of post-transcriptional regulation in plant physiology. This study provides systems-wide datasets which allow plant researchers to examine the changes in leaf transcriptomes, proteomes and key metabolites upon illumination and to determine whether there are any correlations between changes in transcript and protein abundances of a particular gene or pathway upon illumination. The integration of data of the organelles and the photosystems, Calvin-Benson cycle, carbohydrate metabolism, glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle and respiratory chain, thereby provides a more complete picture to the changes in plant physiology upon illumination than has been attained to date.

Light: !affects! Plant growth and development
Transcription: !of! Organellar genomes
Photosystem components: !co-regulated with! Each other
mRNA: !negatively correlated with! Protein abundances
Data: !integrated to! Examine changes in leaf transcriptomes, proteomes and key metabolites