The crucial role of microRNAs in plant development is exceedingly well supported; their importance in environmental robustness is studied in less detail. Here, we describe a novel, environmentally dependent phenotype in hypomorphic argonaute1 (ago1) mutants and uncover its mechanistic underpinnings in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). AGO1 is a key player in microRNA-mediated gene regulation. We observed transparent lesions on embryonic leaves of ago1 mutant seedlings. These lesions increased in frequency in full-spectrum light. Notably, the lesion phenotype was most environmentally responsive in ago1-27 mutants. This allele is thought to primarily affect translational repression, which has been linked with the response to environmental perturbation. Using several lines of evidence, we found that these lesions represent dead and dying tissues due to an aberrant hypersensitive response. Although all three canonical defense hormone pathways (salicylic acid, jasmonate, and jasmonate/ethylene pathways) were up-regulated in ago1 mutants, we demonstrate that jasmonate perception drives the lesion phenotype. Double mutants of ago1 and coronatine insensitive1, the jasmonate receptor, showed greatly decreased frequency of affected seedlings. The chaperone HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN 90 (HSP90), which maintains phenotypic robustness in the face of environmental perturbations, is known to facilitate AGO1 function. HSP90 perturbation has been shown previously to up-regulate jasmonate signaling and to increase plant resistance to herbivory. Although single HSP90 mutants showed subtly elevated levels of lesions, double mutant analysis disagreed with a simple epistatic model for HSP90 and AGO1 interaction; rather, both appeared to act nonadditively in producing lesions. In summary, our study identifies AGO1 as a major, largely HSP90-independent, factor in providing environmental robustness to plants.

AGO1: !affects! microRNA-mediated gene regulation
AGO1: !enhances! environmental robustness
AGO1: !interacts with! HSP90
jasmonate: !perceived by! coronatine insensitive1
HSP90: !maintains! phenotypic robustness
HSP90: !up-regulates! jasmonate signaling