['26888284', 'The shaping of organs in plants depends on the intercellular flow of the  phytohormone auxin, of which the directional signaling is determined by the polar  subcellular localization of PIN-FORMED (PIN) auxin transport proteins.  Phosphorylation dynamics of PIN proteins are affected by the protein phosphatase  2A (PP2A) and the PINOID kinase, which act antagonistically to mediate their  apical-basal polar delivery. Here, we identified the ROTUNDA3 (RON3) protein as a  regulator of the PP2A phosphatase activity in Arabidopsis thaliana. The RON3 gene  was map-based cloned starting from the ron3-1 leaf mutant and found to be a  unique, plant-specific gene coding for a protein with high and dispersed proline  content. The ron3-1 and ron3-2 mutant phenotypes [i.e., reduced apical dominance,  primary root length, lateral root emergence, and growth; increased ectopic stages  II, IV, and V lateral root primordia; decreased auxin maxima in indole-3-acetic  acid (IAA)-treated root apical meristems; hypergravitropic root growth and  response; increased IAA levels in shoot apices; and reduced auxin accumulation in  root meristems] support a role for RON3 in auxin biology. The affinity-purified  PP2A complex with RON3 as bait suggested that RON3 might act in PIN transporter  trafficking. Indeed, pharmacological interference with vesicle trafficking  processes revealed that single ron3-2 and double ron3-2 rcn1 mutants have altered  PIN polarity and endocytosis in specific cells. Our data indicate that RON3  contributes to auxin-mediated development by playing a role in PIN recycling and  polarity establishment through regulation of the PP2A complex activity.', '2016 Mar 8', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1501343112', 'Van']

PIN: !localizes to! auxin transport proteins 
PP2A: !affects! phosphorylation dynamics of PIN proteins 
PINOID kinase: !interacts with! PP2A 
RON3: !regulates! PP2A phosphatase activity 
RON3: !enhances! PIN transporter trafficking 
RON3: !represses! ectopic stages II, IV, and V lateral root primordia 
RON3: !synthesizes! protein with high proline content