['26884175', 'In this study, we used a loss-of-function approach to elucidate the functions of  three Arabidopsis type B response regulators (ARRs)--namely ARR1, ARR10, and  ARR12--in regulating the Arabidopsis plant responses to drought. The arr1,10,12  triple mutant showed a significant increase in drought tolerance versus WT  plants, as indicated by its higher relative water content and survival rate on  drying soil. This enhanced drought tolerance of arr1,10,12 plants can be  attributed to enhanced cell membrane integrity, increased anthocyanin  biosynthesis, abscisic acid (ABA) hypersensitivity, and reduced stomatal  aperture, but not to altered stomatal density. Further drought-tolerance tests of  lower-order double and single mutants indicated that ARR1, ARR10, and ARR12  negatively and redundantly control plant responses to drought, with ARR1  appearing to bear the most critical function among the three proteins. In  agreement with these findings, a comparative genome-wide analysis of the leaves  of arr1,10,12 and WT plants under both normal and dehydration conditions  suggested a cytokinin (CK) signaling-mediated network controlling plant  adaptation to drought via many dehydration/drought- and/or ABA-responsive genes  that can provide osmotic adjustment and protection to cellular and membrane  structures. Expression of all three ARR genes was repressed by dehydration and  ABA treatments, inferring that plants down-regulate these genes as an adaptive  mechanism to survive drought. Collectively, our results demonstrate that  repression of CK response, and thus CK signaling, is one of the strategies plants  use to cope with water deficit, providing novel insight for the design of  drought-tolerant plants by genetic engineering.', '2016 Mar 15', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1600399113', 'Tran']

ARR1: !represses! CK signaling 
ARR10: !represses! CK signaling 
ARR12: !represses! CK signaling 
ARR1: !most critical for! drought tolerance 
ABA: !represses! ARR1, ARR10, ARR12 
Dehydration: !represses! ARR1, ARR10, ARR12 
CK signaling: !enhances! drought tolerance 
CK signaling: !down-regulated by! ABA, dehydration