A significant number of epigenetic regulators were differentially expressed during embryogenesis at different epitype-inducing conditions. Our results support that methylation of DNA and histones, as well as sRNAs, are pivotal for the establishment of the epigenetic memory. As a forest tree species with long generation times, Norway spruce is remarkably well adapted to local environmental conditions despite having recently, from an evolutionary perspective, recolonized large areas following the last glaciation. In this species, there is an enigmatic epigenetic memory of the temperature conditions during embryogenesis that allows rapid adaptation to changing environment. We used a transcriptomic approach to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of the epigenetic memory during somatic embryogenesis in Norway spruce. Nine mRNA libraries were prepared from three epitypes of the same genotype resulting from exposure to epitype-inducing temperatures of 18, 23 and 28 °C. RNA-Seq analysis revealed more than 10,000 differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The epitype-inducing conditions during SE were accompanied by marked transcriptomic changes for multiple gene models related to the epigenetic machinery. Out of 735 putative orthologs of epigenetic regulators, 329 were affected by the epitype-inducing temperatures and differentially expressed. The majority of DEGs among the epigenetic regulators was related to DNA and histone methylation, along with sRNA pathways and a range of putative thermosensing and signaling genes. These genes could be the main epigenetic regulators involved in formation of the epigenetic memory. We suggest considerable expansion of gene families of epigenetic regulators in Norway spruce compared to orthologous gene families in Populus and Arabidopsis. Obtained results provide a solid basis for further genome annotation and studies focusing on the importance of these candidate genes for the epigenetic memory formation.

DNA: !methylated by! epigenetic regulators 
histones: !methylated by! epigenetic regulators 
sRNAs: !regulated by! epigenetic regulators 
epitype-inducing temperatures: !affects! epigenetic regulators 
epigenetic memory: !formed by! epigenetic regulators 
Norway spruce: !contains! expanded gene families of epigenetic regulators