Phytochrome B (phyB) enables plants to modify shoot branching or tillering in response to varying light intensities and ratios of red and far-red light caused by shading and neighbor proximity. Tillering is inhibited in sorghum genotypes that lack phytochrome B (58M, phyB-1) until after floral initiation. The growth of tiller buds in the first leaf axil of wild-type (100M, PHYB) and phyB-1 sorghum genotypes is similar until 6 d after planting when buds of phyB-1 arrest growth, while wild-type buds continue growing and develop into tillers. Transcriptome analysis at this early stage of bud development identified numerous genes that were up to 50-fold differentially expressed in wild-type/phyB-1 buds. Up-regulation of terminal flower1, GA2oxidase, and TPPI could protect axillary meristems in phyB-1 from precocious floral induction and decrease bud sensitivity to sugar signals. After bud growth arrest in phyB-1, expression of dormancy-associated genes such as DRM1, GT1, AF1, and CKX1 increased and ENOD93, ACCoxidase, ARR3/6/9, CGA1, and SHY2 decreased. Continued bud outgrowth in wild-type was correlated with increased expression of genes encoding a SWEET transporter and cell wall invertases. The SWEET transporter may facilitate Suc unloading from the phloem to the apoplast where cell wall invertases generate monosaccharides for uptake and utilization to sustain bud outgrowth. Elevated expression of these genes was correlated with higher levels of cytokinin/sugar signaling in growing buds of wild-type plants.

phyB: !enables! shoot branching
58M, phyB-1: !inhibits! tillering
terminal flower1: !protects! axillary meristems
GA2oxidase: !decreases! bud sensitivity to sugar signals
DRM1: !increases! expression
GT1: !increases! expression
AF1: !increases! expression
CKX1: !increases! expression
ENOD93: !decreases! expression
ACCoxidase: !decreases! expression
ARR3/6/9: !decreases! expression
CGA1: !decreases! expression
SHY2: !decreases! expression
SWEET transporter: !facilitates! Suc unloading
cell wall invertases: !generate! monosaccharides
cytokinin/sugar signaling: !correlated with! higher levels