The hepatoprotectant flavonolignan silymarin (Sm) is synthesized through 4-coumaroyl-CoA, which enters both the flavonoid and the monolignol pathway giving the two immediate precursors taxifolin (Tx) and coniferyl alcohol (CA), respectively. Sm formation occurs via oxidative radicalization of Tx and CA and is accumulated at high levels at final stages of maturation of Silybum marianum fruits. By contrast, Sm production is severely reduced in cell cultures of this species, although suspensions are able to excrete Sm compounds into the medium upon elicitation with methyl jasmonate (MeJA) or cyclodextrins (CD). Knowledge of gene expression is important to understand Sm dynamics and to develop strategies aimed at increasing production by means of cell cultures but, to date, only one gene of the pathway (chalcone synthase, SmCHS) has been cloned. Therefore, to elucidate the relationship between expression of Sm pathway genes and production of these metabolites, four cDNA fragments of genes putatively involved in flavonolignan biosynthesis, chalcone isomerase, flavanone 3-hydroxylase, flavonol 3'-hydroxylase and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase, were isolated from Sm producing S. marianum fruits and their expression, together with that of the SmCHS, were studied both in fruits at different maturation stages and in elicited cell suspensions. Combined results at both transcript expression and metabolite levels at three different stages of fruit maturation revealed that the formation of the flavonoid moiety precedes flavonolignan biosynthesis, being Sm accumulation associated to expression of the monolignol pathway. There was not detectable accumulation of transcripts in cell suspensions, however, elicitation with MeJA or CD notably induced expression of the studied fragments. These results indicate that the five genes expressed during maturation of S. marianum fruits may contribute to observed increases in flavonolignan accumulation upon treatment of cell cultures with elicitors.

SmCHS: !synthesizes! 4-coumaroyl-CoA 
chalcone isomerase: !synthesizes! taxifolin 
flavanone 3-hydroxylase: !synthesizes! coniferyl alcohol 
flavonol 3'-hydroxylase: !synthesizes! Sm 
cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase: !synthesizes! Sm 
SmCHS: !enhances! Sm formation 
fruits: !accumulate! Sm 
cell suspensions: !excrete! Sm compounds 
MeJA/CD: !elicit! cell suspensions 
fruits: !express! Sm pathway genes 
cell suspensions: !induce! expression of studied fragments