['26904077', 'Chloride ions can be translocated across cell membranes through Cl(-) channels or  Cl(-)/H(+) exchangers. The thylakoid-located member of the Cl(-) channel CLC  family in Arabidopsis thaliana (AtCLCe) was hypothesized to play a role in  photosynthetic regulation based on the initial photosynthetic characterization of  clce mutant lines. The reduced nitrate content of Arabidopsis clce mutants  suggested a role in regulation of plant nitrate homeostasis. In this study, we  aimed to further investigate the role of AtCLCe in the regulation of ion  homeostasis and photosynthetic processes in the thylakoid membrane. We report  that the size and composition of proton motive force were mildly altered in two  independent Arabidopsis clce mutant lines. Most pronounced effects in the clce  mutants were observed on the photosynthetic electron transport of dark-adapted  plants, based on the altered shape and associated parameters of the polyphasic  OJIP kinetics of chlorophyll a fluorescence induction. Other alterations were  found in the kinetics of state transition and in the macro-organization of  photosystem II supercomplexes, as indicated by circular dichroism measurements.  Pre-treatment with KCl but not with KNO3 restored the wild-type photosynthetic  phenotype. Analyses by transmission electron microscopy revealed a bow-like  arrangement of the thylakoid network and a large thylakoid-free stromal region in  chloroplast sections from the dark-adapted clce plants. Based on these data, we  propose that AtCLCe functions in Cl(-) homeostasis after transition from light to  dark, which affects chloroplast ultrastructure and regulation of photosynthetic  electron transport.', '2016', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2016.00115', 'Spetea']

AtCLCe: !translocates! Cl(-) 
AtCLCe: !regulates! Photosynthetic processes 
AtCLCe: !affects! Proton motive force 
AtCLCe: !alters! OJIP kinetics of chlorophyll a fluorescence induction 
AtCLCe: !modifies! Kinetics of state transition 
AtCLCe: !influences! Macro-organization of photosystem II supercomplexes 
AtCLCe: !impacts! Chloroplast ultrastructure