Leaf senescence is not only primarily governed by developmental age but also influenced by various internal and external factors. Although some genes that control leaf senescence have been identified, the detailed regulatory mechanisms underlying integration of diverse senescence-associated signals into the senescence programs remain to be elucidated. To dissect the regulatory pathways involved in leaf senescence, we isolated the not oresara1-1 (nore1-1) mutant showing accelerated leaf senescence phenotypes from an EMS-mutagenized Arabidopsis thaliana population. We found that altered transcriptional programs in defense response-related processes were associated with the accelerated leaf senescence phenotypes observed in nore1-1 through microarray analysis. The nore1-1 mutation activated defense program, leading to enhanced disease resistance. Intriguingly, high ambient temperature effectively suppresses the early senescence and death phenotypes of nore1-1. The gene responsible for the phenotypes of nore1-1 contains a missense mutation in SENESCENCE-ASSOCIATED E3 UBIQUITIN LIGASE 1 (SAUL1), which was reported as a negative regulator of premature senescence in the light intensity- and PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT 4 (PAD4)-dependent manner. Through extensive double mutant analyses, we recently identified suppressor of the G2 Allele of SKP1b (SGT1b), one of the positive regulators for disease resistance conferred by many resistance (R) proteins, as a downstream signaling component in NORE1-mediated senescence and cell death pathways. In conclusion, NORE1/SAUL1 is a key factor integrating signals from temperature-dependent defense programs and leaf senescence in Arabidopsis. These findings provide a new insight that plants might utilize defense response program in regulating leaf senescence process, possibly through recruiting the related genes during the evolution of the leaf senescence program.

NORE1/SAUL1: !integrates! temperature-dependent defense programs and leaf senescence
nore1-1 mutation: !activates! defense program
high ambient temperature: !suppresses! early senescence and death phenotypes of nore1-1
SGT1b: !downstream signaling component in! NORE1-mediated senescence and cell death pathways