MAX2/strigolactone signaling in the endodermis and/or quiescent center of the root is partially sufficient to exert changes in F-actin density and cellular trafficking in the root epidermis, and alter gene expression during plant response to low Pi conditions. Strigolactones (SLs) are a new group of plant hormones that regulate different developmental processes in the plant via MAX2, an F-box protein that interacts with their receptor. SLs and MAX2 are necessary for the marked increase in root-hair (RH) density in seedlings under conditions of phosphate (Pi) deprivation. This marked elevation was associated with an active reduction in actin-filament density and endosomal movement in root epidermal cells. Also, expression of MAX2 under the SCARECROW (SCR) promoter was sufficient to confer SL sensitivity in roots, suggesting that SL signaling pathways act through a root-specific, yet non-cell-autonomous regulatory mode of action. Here we show evidence for a non-cell autonomous signaling of SL/MAX2, originating from the root endodermis, and necessary for seedling response to conditions of Pi deprivation. SCR-derived expression of MAX2 in max2-1 mutant background promoted the root low Pi response, whereas supplementation of the synthetic SL GR24 to these SCR:MAX2 expressing lines further enhanced this response. Moreover, the SCR:MAX2 expression led to changes in actin density and endosome movement in epidermal cells and in TIR1 and PHO2 gene expression. These results demonstrate that MAX2 signaling in the endodermis and/or quiescent center is partially sufficient to exert changes in F-actin density and cellular trafficking in the epidermis, and alter gene expression under low Pi conditions.

MAX2: !interacts with! SL receptor 
SLs: !regulate! developmental processes 
MAX2: !necessary for! marked increase in root-hair density 
MAX2: !reduces! actin-filament density 
SCR promoter: !expresses! MAX2 
MAX2: !promotes! root low Pi response 
GR24: !enhances! root low Pi response 
MAX2: !changes! actin density and endosome movement 
MAX2: !alters! TIR1 and PHO2 gene expression