Plant defense mechanisms against pathogens result in differential regulation of various processes of primary and secondary metabolism. Imaging techniques, such as fluorescence imaging and thermography, are very valuable tools providing spatial and temporal information about these processes. In this study, effects of Grapevine leafroll-associated virus 3 (GLRaV-3) on grapevine physiology were analyzed in pot-grown asymptomatic plants of the white cultivar Malvasía de Banyalbufar. The virus triggered changes in the activity of photosynthesis and secondary metabolism. There was a decrease in the photorespiratory intermediates glycine and serine in infected plants, possibly as a defense response against the infection. The content of malate, which plays an important role in plant metabolism, also decreased. These results correlate with the increased non-photochemical quenching found in infected plants. On the other hand, the concentration of flavonols (represented by myricetin, kaempferol and quercetin derivatives) and hydroxycinnamic acids (which include derivatives of caffeic acid) increased following infection by the virus. These compounds could be responsible for the increase in multicolor fluorescence F440 (blue fluorescence) and F520 (green fluorescence) on the leaves, and changes in the fluorescence parameters F440/F680, F440/F740, F520/F680, F520/F740 and F680/F740. The combined analysis of chlorophyll fluorescence kinetics and blue-green fluorescence emitted by phenolics could constitute disease signatures allowing the discrimination between GLRaV-3 infected and non-infected plants at very early stage of infection, prior to the development of symptoms.

GLRaV-3: !triggers changes in! photosynthesis and secondary metabolism
Glycine/Serine: !decrease in! infected plants
Malate: !decreases in! infected plants
Flavonols/Hydroxycinnamic Acids: !increase in! infected plants
Fluorescence F440/F680/F740: !changes in! infected plants
Chlorophyll Fluorescence Kinetics/Blue-Green Fluorescence: !allow discrimination between! infected and non-infected plants