['26932457', "Monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) catalyzes the last step of triacylglycerol  breakdown, which is the hydrolysis of monoacylglycerol (MAG) to fatty acid and  glycerol. Arabidopsis harbors over 270 genes annotated as 'lipase', the largest  class of acyl lipid metabolism genes that have not been characterized  experimentally. In this study, computational modeling suggested that 16  Arabidopsis putative MAGLs (AtMAGLs) have a three-dimensional structure that is  similar to a human MAGL. Heterologous expression and enzyme assays indicated that  11 of the 16 encoded proteins indeed possess MAG lipase activity. Additionally,  AtMAGL4 displayed hydrolase activity with lysophosphatidylcholine and  lysophosphatidylethanolamine (LPE) substrates and AtMAGL1 and 2 utilized LPE as a  substrate. All recombinant AtMAGLs preferred MAG substrates with unsaturated  fatty acids over saturated fatty acids and AtMAGL8 exhibited the highest  hydrolase activities with MAG containing 20:1 fatty acids. Except for AtMAGL4,  -14 and -16, all AtMAGLs showed similar activity with both sn-1 and sn-2 MAG  isomers. Spatial, temporal and stress-induced expression of the 16 AtMAGL genes  was analyzed by transcriptome analyses. AtMAGL:eYFP fusion proteins provided  initial evidence that AtMAGL1, -3, -6, -7, -8, -11, -13, -14 and -16 are targeted  to the endoplasmic reticulum and/or Golgi network, AtMAGL10, -12 and -15 to the  cytosol and AtMAGL2, -4 and -5 to the chloroplasts. Furthermore, AtMAGL8 was  associated with the surface of oil bodies in germinating seeds and leaves  accumulating oil bodies. This study provides the broad characterization of one of  the least well-understood groups of Arabidopsis lipid-related enzymes and will be  useful for better understanding their roles in planta.", '2016 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13146', 'Suh']

Monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL): !catalyzes! triacylglycerol breakdown 
AtMAGLs: !have structure similar to! human MAGL 
AtMAGLs: !exhibit hydrolase activity with! MAG, LPE substrates 
AtMAGLs: !prefer! unsaturated fatty acids 
AtMAGLs: !targeted to! endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi network, cytosol, chloroplasts 
AtMAGL8: !associated with! surface of oil bodies