A metabolic profiling including calculation of energy cost of amino acids biosynthesis in cultured cells of Scrophularia striata showed that methyl jasmonate-inducible oxidative stress elicited secondary metabolites formation derived from phenylalanine and tyrosine and increased energy cost for these amino acids biosynthesis. Understanding of the metabolic pathways in cell culture of Scrophularia striata, an aromatic plant species, facilitates means of production of pharmaceutical metabolites under oxidative stress. In this study, we evaluated the effects of MeJA on the S. striata metabolic pathway and the responses to oxidative stress. Exposure to methyl jasmonate (MeJA) affects plant growth, effectively induces production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inserts oxidative stress at the cellular level which results in alteration of primary metabolites and production of phenylepropanoid compounds. Cells treated with MeJA indicated increase in the activities of three antioxidant enzymes including superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), guaiacol peroxidase (GPx) as well as intracellular H2O2 and MDA contents compared with mock-treated cells. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-based metabolome analysis revealed dynamic metabolic changes in oxidatively stressed S. striata cells, e.g., general phenylpropanoid pathway, phenylethanoid-glycosides, lignans, and increased energy cost of biosynthesis and accumulation of amino acids. Furthermore, principal component analysis (PCA)-derived score plots demonstrated that MeJA affects cellular metabolism in S. striata cells and significantly alters metabolite composition under MeJA-inducible oxidative stress. These observations suggest that MeJA-elicited cell suspension cultures of S. striata balanced the production of primary and secondary metabolites in coordination with ROS-scavenging system.

Methyl jasmonate: !induces! Oxidative Stress 
Oxidative Stress: !affects! Metabolite Composition 
Metabolite Composition: !alters! Energy Cost of Biosynthesis 
Superoxide Dismutase: !increases! Activity 
Catalase: !increases! Activity 
Guaiacol Peroxidase: !increases! Activity 
Intracellular H2O2: !increases! Content 
Intracellular MDA: !increases! Content 
Phenylpropanoid Pathway: !activates! Production 
Phenylethanoid-Glycosides: !produces! Lignans