['26942722', 'MOB1 protein is a core component of the Hippo signaling pathway in animals where  it is involved in controlling tissue growth and tumor suppression. Plant MOB1  proteins display high sequence homology to animal MOB1 proteins, but little is  known regarding their role in plant growth and development. Herein we report the  critical roles of Arabidopsis MOB1 (AtMOB1A) in auxin-mediated development in  Arabidopsis. We found that loss-of-function mutations in AtMOB1A completely  eliminated the formation of cotyledons when combined with mutations in PINOID  (PID), which encodes a Ser/Thr protein kinase that participates in auxin  signaling and transport. We showed that atmob1a was fully rescued by its  Drosophila counterpart, suggesting functional conservation. The atmob1a pid  double mutants phenocopied several well-characterized mutant combinations that  are defective in auxin biosynthesis or transport. Moreover, we demonstrated that  atmob1a greatly enhanced several other known auxin mutants, suggesting that  AtMOB1A plays a key role in auxin-mediated plant development. The atmob1a single  mutant displayed defects in early embryogenesis and had shorter root and smaller  flowers than wild type plants. AtMOB1A is uniformly expressed in embryos and  suspensor cells during embryogenesis, consistent with its role in embryo  development. AtMOB1A protein is localized to nucleus, cytoplasm, and associated  to plasma membrane, suggesting that it plays roles in these subcellular  localizations. Furthermore, we showed that disruption of AtMOB1A led to a reduced  sensitivity to exogenous auxin. Our results demonstrated that AtMOB1A plays an  important role in Arabidopsis development by promoting auxin signaling.', '2016 Mar', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1005923', 'Cheng']

MOB1 protein: !controls! tissue growth 
MOB1 protein: !involved in! Arabidopsis development 
AtMOB1A: !eliminates! cotyledon formation 
AtMOB1A: !rescued by! Drosophila counterpart 
AtMOB1A: !enhances! auxin mutants 
AtMOB1A: !plays role in! embryo development 
AtMOB1A: !localized to! nucleus, cytoplasm, plasma membrane 
AtMOB1A: !promotes! auxin signaling