['26945740', "The functional homologues of vertebrate natriuretic peptides (NPs), the plant  natriuretic peptides (PNPs), are a novel class of peptidic hormones that signal  via guanosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cGMP) and systemically affect plant  salt and water balance and responses to biotrophic plant pathogens. Although  there is increasing understanding of the complex roles of PNPs in plant responses  at the systems level, little is known about the underlying signaling mechanisms.  Here we report isolation and identification of a novel Leucine-Rich Repeat (LRR)  protein that directly interacts with A. thaliana PNP, AtPNP-A. In vitro binding  studies revealed that the Arabidopsis AtPNP-A binds specifically to the LRR  protein, termed AtPNP-R1, and the active region of AtPNP-A is sufficient for the  interaction to occur. Importantly, the cytosolic part of the AtPNP-R1, much like  in some vertebrate NP receptors, harbors a catalytic center diagnostic for  guanylyl cyclases and the recombinant AtPNP-R1 is capable of catalyzing the  conversion of guanosine triphosphate to cGMP. In addition, we show that AtPNP-A  causes rapid increases of cGMP levels in wild type (WT) leaf tissue while this  response is significantly reduced in the atpnp-r1 mutants. AtPNP-A also causes  cGMP-dependent net water uptake into WT protoplasts, and hence volume increases,  whereas responses of the protoplasts from the receptor mutant are impaired. Taken  together, our results suggest that the identified LRR protein is an AtPNP-A  receptor essential for the PNP-dependent regulation of ion and water homeostasis  in plants and that PNP- and vertebrate NP-receptors and their signaling  mechanisms share surprising similarities.", '2016 Jun', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-016-0465-8', 'Gehring']

AtPNP-A: !interacts with! AtPNP-R1 
AtPNP-R1: !catalyzes! conversion of guanosine triphosphate to cGMP 
AtPNP-A: !causes! rapid increases of cGMP levels in WT leaf tissue 
AtPNP-A: !causes! cGMP-dependent net water uptake into WT protoplasts