In plants, miRNAs are endogenous small RNAs derived from single-stranded precursors with hairpin structures. The evolution of miRNAs and their targets represents one of the most dynamic circuits directing gene expression, which may play fundamental roles in shaping the development of distinct plant organs. Here we performed high-throughput small RNA sequencing in five organ types of Camellia azalea to capture the spatial profile of small non-coding RNA. In total we obtained >227 million high-quality reads and identified 175 miRNAs with mature and precursor sequences. We aligned the miRNAs to known miRNA databases and revealed some conserved as well as 'newly evolved' miRNA genes. Twelve miRNAs were identified to be specific in the genus Camellia, supporting the lineage-specific manner of expansion of 'young' miRNAs. Through differential expression analysis, we showed that many miRNAs were preferentially abundant in certain organ types. Moreover, hierarchical clustering analysis revealed distinctive expression patterns of tissue-specific miRNAs. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis of targets of stamen- and carpel-specific miRNA subclusters showed that miRNA-target regulatory circuits were involved in many important biological processes, enabling their proper specification and organogenesis, such as 'DNA integration' and 'fruit development'. Further, quantitative PCR of key miRNAs and their target genes revealed anti-correlated patterns, and uncovered the functions of key miRNA-target pairs in different floral organs. Taken together, this work yielded valuable information on miRNA-target regulation in the control of floral organ development and sheds light on the evolution of lineage-specific miRNAs in Camellia.

miRNA: !evolves! target
miRNA: !regulates! biological process
miRNA: !preferentially abundant in! organ type
miRNA: !involved in! DNA integration
miRNA: !involved in! fruit development
miRNA: !anti-correlated with! target gene
miRNA: !enables! proper specification and organogenesis