['26961657', 'Directional control of tip-growing cells is essential for proper tissue  organization and cell-to-cell communication in animals and plants. In the sexual  reproduction of flowering plants, the tip growth of the male gametophyte, the  pollen tube, is precisely guided by female cues to achieve fertilization. Several  female-secreted peptides have recently been identified as species-specific  attractants that directly control the direction of pollen tube growth. However,  the method by which pollen tubes precisely and promptly respond to the guidance  signal from their own species is unknown. Here we show that tip-localized  pollen-specific receptor-like kinase 6 (PRK6) with an extracellular leucine-rich  repeat domain is an essential receptor for sensing of the LURE1 attractant  peptide in Arabidopsis thaliana under semi-in-vivo conditions, and is important  for ovule targeting in the pistil. PRK6 interacted with pollen-expressed ROPGEFs  (Rho of plant guanine nucleotide-exchange factors), which are important for  pollen tube growth through activation of the signalling switch Rho GTPase ROP1  (refs 7, 8). PRK6 conferred responsiveness to AtLURE1 in pollen tubes of the  related species Capsella rubella. Furthermore, our genetic and physiological data  suggest that PRK6 signalling through ROPGEFs and sensing of AtLURE1 are achieved  in cooperation with the other PRK family receptors, PRK1, PRK3 and PRK8. Notably,  the tip-focused PRK6 accumulated asymmetrically towards an external AtLURE1  source before reorientation of pollen tube tip growth. These results demonstrate  that PRK6 acts as a key membrane receptor for external AtLURE1 attractants, and  recruits the core tip-growth machinery, including ROP signalling proteins. This  work provides insights into the orchestration of efficient pollen tube growth and  species-specific pollen tube attraction by multiple receptors during male-female  communication.', '2016 Mar 10', 'Nature', '10.1038/nature17413', 'Higashiyama']

PRK6: !senses! AtLURE1 
PRK6: !interacts with! ROPGEFs 
PRK6: !recruits! core tip-growth machinery 
PRK1, PRK3, PRK8: !cooperate with! PRK6 
AtLURE1: !attracts! pollen tube