['26979064', 'The Ca(2+)-binding protein-1 (PCaP1) of Arabidopsis thaliana is a new type  protein that binds to phosphatidylinositol phosphates and Ca(2+)-calmodulin  complex as well as free Ca(2+). Although biochemical properties, such as binding  to ligands and N-myristoylation, have been revealed, the intracellular  localization, tissue and cell specificity, integrity of membrane association and  physiological roles of PCaP1 are unknown. We investigated the tissue and  intracellular distribution of PCaP1 by using transgenic lines expressing PCaP1  linked with a green fluorescence protein (GFP) at the carboxyl terminus of PCaP1.  GFP fluorescence was obviously detected in most tissues including root, stem,  leaf and flower. In these tissues, PCaP1-GFP signal was observed predominantly in  the plasma membrane even under physiological stress conditions but not in other  organelles. The fluorescence was detected in the cytosol when the 25-residue  N-terminal sequence was deleted from PCaP1 indicating essential contribution of  N-myristoylation to the plasma membrane anchoring. Fluorescence intensity of  PCaP1-GFP in roots was slightly decreased in seedlings grown in medium  supplemented with high concentrations of iron for 1 week and increased in those  grown with copper. In stomatal guard cells, PCaP1-GFP was strictly, specifically  localized to the plasma membrane at the epidermal-cell side but not at the pore  side. A T-DNA insertion mutant line of PCaP1 did not show marked phenotype in a  life cycle except for well growth under high CO2 conditions. However, stomata of  the mutant line did not close entirely even in high osmolarity, which usually  induces stomata closure. These results suggest that PCaP1 is involved in the  stomatal movement, especially closure process, in leaves and response to  excessive copper in root and leaf as a mineral nutrient as a physiological role.', '2016 May', 'J Plant Res', '10.1007/s10265-016-0787-2', 'Maeshima']

PCaP1: !binds to! phosphatidylinositol phosphates 
PCaP1: !binds to! Ca(2+)-calmodulin complex 
PCaP1: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
PCaP1: !localizes to! cytosol 
PCaP1: !responds to! iron 
PCaP1: !responds to! copper 
PCaP1: !specifically localizes to! epidermal-cell side of stomatal guard cells 
PCaP1: !involved in! stomatal movement 
PCaP1: !enhances! stomata closure