The issues of whether, where, and to what extent carbon isotopic fractionations occur during respiration affect interpretations of plant functions that are important to many disciplines across the natural sciences. Studies of carbon isotopic fractionation during dark respiration in C3 plants have repeatedly shown respired CO2 to be (13)C enriched relative to its bulk leaf sources and (13)C depleted relative to its bulk root sources. Furthermore, two studies showed respired CO2 to become progressively (13)C enriched during leaf ontogeny and (13)C depleted during root ontogeny in C3 legumes. As such data on C4 plants are scarce and contradictory, we investigated apparent respiratory fractionations of carbon and their possible causes in different organs of maize plants during early ontogeny. As in the C3 plants, leaf-respired CO2 was (13)C enriched whereas root-respired CO2 was (13)C depleted relative to their putative sources. In contrast to the findings for C3 plants, however, not only root- but also leaf-respired CO2 became more (13)C depleted during ontogeny. Leaf-respired CO2 was highly (13)C enriched just after light-dark transition but the enrichment rapidly decreased over time in darkness. We conclude that (i) although carbon isotopic fractionations in C4 maize and leguminous C3 crop roots are similar, increasing phosphoenolpyruvate-carboxylase activity during maize ontogeny could have produced the contrast between the progressive (13)C depletion of maize leaf-respired CO2 and (13)C enrichment of C3 leaf-respired CO2 over time, and (ii) in both maize and C3 leaves, highly (13)C enriched leaf-respired CO2 at light-to-dark transition and its rapid decrease during darkness, together with the observed decrease in leaf malate content, may be the result of a transient effect of light-enhanced dark respiration.

CO2: !enriched in! C3 leaves 
CO2: !depleted in! C3 roots 
CO2: !enriched in! maize leaves 
CO2: !depleted in! maize leaves 
CO2: !enriched in! maize leaves !at light-dark transition! 
CO2: !depleted in! maize leaves !over time in darkness! 
PEP carboxylase: !increases! in maize ontogeny 
Light: !enhances! dark respiration