Adventitious roots (AR) develop from tissues other than the primary root, in a process physiologically regulated by phytohormones. Adventitious roots provide structural support and contribute to water and nutrient absorption, and are critical for commercial vegetative propagation of several crops. Here we quantified the number of AR, root architectural traits and root biomass in cuttings from a pseudo-backcross population of Populus deltoides and Populus trichocarpa. Quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping and whole-transcriptome analysis of individuals with alternative QTL alleles for AR number were used to identify putative regulators of AR development. Parental individuals and progeny showed extensive segregation for AR developmental traits. Quantitative trait loci for number of AR mapped consistently in the same interval of linkage group (LG) II and LG XIV, explaining 7-10 % of the phenotypic variation. A time series transcriptome analysis identified 26,121 genes differentially expressed during AR development, particularly during the first 24 h after cuttings were harvested. Of those, 1929 genes were differentially regulated between individuals carrying alternative alleles for the two QTL for number of AR, in one or more time point. Eighty-one of these genes were physically located within the QTL intervals for number of AR, including putative homologs of the Arabidopsis genes SUPERROOT2 (SUR2) and TRYPTOPHAN SYNTHASE ALPHA CHAIN (TSA1), both of which are involved in the auxin indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) biosynthesis pathway. This study suggests the involvement of two genes of the tryptophan-dependent auxin biosynthesis pathway, SUR2 and TSA1, in the regulation of a critical trait for the clonal propagation of woody species. A possible model for this regulation is that poplar individuals that have poor AR formation synthesize auxin indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) primarily through the tryptophan (Trp) pathway. Much of the Trp pathway flux appears to be directed to the synthesis of indole glucosinolates (IG), as suggested by the over-expression of SUR2. Individuals that are efficient in AR formation may utilize alternative (non-Trp) pathways to synthesize IAA, based on the observation that they down-regulate the expression of TSA1, one of the critical steps in the synthesis of tryptophan.

Adventitious roots: !develop from! tissues 
phytohormones: !regulate! AR development 
QTL: !map to! LG II and XIV 
26,121 genes: !differentially expressed during! AR development 
1929 genes: !differentially regulated between! individuals with alternative QTL alleles 
81 genes: !physically located within! QTL intervals 
SUR2 and TSA1: !involved in! auxin IAA biosynthesis pathway 
Trp pathway: !directs flux to! IG synthesis 
TSA1: !down-regulated in! efficient AR formation