Despite often being conceptualized as a thin layer of soil around roots, the rhizosphere is actually a dynamic system of interacting processes. Hiltner originally defined the rhizosphere as the soil influenced by plant roots. However, soil physicists, chemists, microbiologists, and plant physiologists have studied the rhizosphere independently, and therefore conceptualized the rhizosphere in different ways and using contrasting terminology. Rather than research-specific conceptions of the rhizosphere, the authors propose a holistic rhizosphere encapsulating the following components: microbial community gradients, macroorganisms, mucigel, volumes of soil structure modification, and depletion or accumulation zones of nutrients, water, root exudates, volatiles, and gases. These rhizosphere components are the result of dynamic processes and understanding the integration of these processes will be necessary for future contributions to rhizosphere science based upon interdisciplinary collaborations. In this review, current knowledge of the rhizosphere is synthesized using this holistic perspective with a focus on integrating traditionally separated rhizosphere studies. The temporal dynamics of rhizosphere activities will also be considered, from annual fine root turnover to diurnal fluctuations of water and nutrient uptake. The latest empirical and computational methods are discussed in the context of rhizosphere integration. Clarification of rhizosphere semantics, a holistic model of the rhizosphere, examples of integration of rhizosphere studies across disciplines, and review of the latest rhizosphere methods will empower rhizosphere scientists from different disciplines to engage in the interdisciplinary collaborations needed to break new ground in truly understanding the rhizosphere and to apply this knowledge for practical guidance.

Root: !influences! Soil
Plant Physiologists: !conceptualize! Rhizosphere
Microbial Community Gradients: !comprise! Rhizosphere
Macroorganisms: !comprise! Rhizosphere
Mucigel: !comprise! Rhizosphere
Soil Structure Modification: !comprises! Rhizosphere
Nutrients: !accumulate/deplete! Rhizosphere
Water: !accumulate/deplete! Rhizosphere
Root Exudates: !accumulate/deplete! Rhizosphere
Volatiles: !accumulate/deplete! Rhizosphere
Gases: !accumulate/deplete! Rhizosphere
Rhizosphere: !integrates! Studies
Fine Root Turnover: !occurs! Annually
Water Uptake: !fluctuates! Diurnally
Nutrient Uptake: !fluctuates! Diurnally
Empirical Methods: !apply to! Rhizosphere
Computational Methods: !apply to! Rhizosphere
Rhizosphere Scientists: !collaborate! Interdisciplinarily