Hydrogen gas (H2) is involved in plant development and stress responses. Cucumber explants were used to study whether nitric oxide (NO) is involved in H2-induced adventitious root development. The results revealed that 50% and 100% hydrogen-rich water (HRW) apparently promoted the development of adventitious root in cucumber. While, the responses of HRW-induced adventitious rooting were blocked by a specific NO scavenger 2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide potassium salt (cPTIO), NO synthase (NOS) enzyme inhibitor N(G)-nitro-l-arginine methylester hydrochloride (l-NAME) and nitrate reductase (NR) inhibitor NaN3. HRW also increased NO content and NOS and NR activity both in a dose- and time-dependent fashion. Moreover, molecular evidence showed that HRW up-regulated NR genes expression in explants. The results indicate the importance of NOS and NR enzymes, which might be responsible for NO production in explants during H2-induced root organogenesis. Additionally, peroxidase (POD) and indoleacetic acid oxidase (IAAO) activity was significantly decreased in the explants treated with HRW, while HRW treatment significantly increased polyphenol oxidase (PPO) activity. In addition, cPTIO, l-NAME and NaN3 inhibited the actions of HRW on the activity of these enzymes. Together, NO may be involved in H2-induced adventitious rooting, and NO may be acting downstream in plant H2 signaling cascade.

H2: !induces! adventitious root development
NO: !promotes! H2-induced adventitious rooting
NOS: !synthesizes! NO
NR: !synthesizes! NO
HRW: !increases! NOS and NR activity
HRW: !up-regulates! NR genes expression
HRW: !increases! NO content
cPTIO: !blocks! HRW-induced adventitious rooting
l-NAME: !blocks! HRW-induced adventitious rooting
NaN3: !blocks! HRW-induced adventitious rooting
HRW: !decreases! POD and IAAO activity
HRW: !increases! PPO activity
cPTIO: !inhibits! HRW action on enzymes
l-NAME: !inhibits! HRW action on enzymes
NaN3: !inhibits! HRW action on enzymes