Syntrichia caninervis Mitt. is a typical desiccation tolerant moss from a temperate desert which has been a good resource for stress tolerant gene isolation. Dehydration responsive element binding proteins (DREBs) was proven to play an important role in responding to abiotic stress, which has been identified in many plants, and were rarely reported in moss. In this study, we cloned ten DREB genes from S. caninervis, and investigated their abiotic stress response and stress tolerance. The results showed that ten ScDREB proteins belonged to the A-5 sub-group of the DREB sub-family. Six genes, ScDREB1, ScDREB2, ScDREB4, ScDREB6, ScDREB7, and ScDREB8 were involved in the ABA-dependent signal pathway and the desiccation, salt, and cold stress response. ScDREB3 also responded to desiccation, salt, and cold stresses, but was insensitive to ABA treatment. Another gene, ScDREB5, was involved in an ABA-independent cold stress-responsive signal pathway. Two genes, ScDREB9 and ScDREB10, responded slightly or had no response to neither stress factor or ABA treatment. We transformed four typical genes into yeast cells and the stress tolerance ability of transgenic yeast was evaluated. The results showed that ScDREB3 and ScDREB5 enhanced the yeast's cold and salt tolerance. ScDREB8 and ScDREB10 conferred the osmotic, salt, cold, and high temperature stresses tolerance, especially for osmotic and salt stresses. Our results indicated that A-5 sub-group DREB genes in S. caninervis played important roles in abiotic stresses response and enhanced stress tolerance to transgenic yeast. To our knowledge, this is the first report on DREB genes characterization from desiccation tolerant moss, and this study will not only provide insight into the molecular mechanisms of S. caninervis adaptation to environmental stresses, but also provides valuable gene candidates for plant molecular breeding.

ScDREB1: !responds to! ABA-dependent signal pathway 
ScDREB2: !responds to! desiccation, salt, and cold stress 
ScDREB3: !responds to! desiccation, salt, and cold stresses, !insensitive to! ABA treatment 
ScDREB4: !responds to! ABA-dependent signal pathway 
ScDREB5: !involved in! ABA-independent cold stress-responsive signal pathway 
ScDREB6: !responds to! ABA-dependent signal pathway 
ScDREB7: !responds to! ABA-dependent signal pathway 
ScDREB8: !responds to! ABA-dependent signal pathway 
ScDREB9: !responds slightly or has no response to! neither stress factor or ABA treatment 
ScDREB10: !responds slightly or has no response to! neither stress factor or ABA treatment 
ScDREB3: !enhances! yeast's cold and salt tolerance 
ScDREB5: !enhances! yeast's cold and salt tolerance 
