Plant heme oxygenase (HO) catalyzes the oxygenation of heme to biliverdin, carbon monoxide, and free iron, and is regarded as a stress-responsive protein. Here, a cabbage HO1 gene (named as BoHO1) was isolated and characterized. BoHO1 shares a high degree homology with Arabidopsis AtHO1, and could locate in Arabidopsis chloroplast. BoHO1 mRNA was ubiquitously expressed in cabbage tissues, and was responsive to several stimuli and chemicals. Genetic evidence illustrated that over-expression of BoHO1 in transgenic Arabidopsis plants (35S:BoHO1-1 and 35S:BoHO1-2) significantly alleviated salinity stress-inhibited seedling growth, which were accompanied with the re-establishment of reactive oxygen species and ion homeostasis. Comparative proteomic analysis was subsequently performed. Results revealed that protein abundance related to light reactions was greatly suppressed by NaCl stress in wild-type, whereas was partially recovered in 35S:BoHO1-1. Salinity stress also strongly activated stress-related metabolic processes in wild-type, i.e. carbon and energy metabolism, ammonium detoxification, and protein turnover, and these induced tendencies were more intensive in 35S:BoHO1-1. Particularly, proteins related to glutathione metabolism and ion homeostasis were specifically enriched in NaCl-stressed 35S:BoHO1-1. On the basis of above results, we propose that BoHO1 could activate multiple stress-responsive pathways to help Arabidopsis regain cellular homeostasis, thus presenting enhanced adaptation to salinity stress.

BoHO1: !shares homology with! AtHO1 
BoHO1: !locates in! chloroplast 
BoHO1: !responds to! stimuli and chemicals 
35S:BoHO1-1: !alleviates! salinity stress-inhibited seedling growth 
35S:BoHO1-1: !recovers! reactive oxygen species and ion homeostasis 
NaCl stress: !suppresses! light reactions in wild-type 
NaCl stress: !activates! stress-related metabolic processes in wild-type 
35S:BoHO1-1: !enriches! proteins related to glutathione metabolism and ion homeostasis 
BoHO1: !activates! multiple stress-responsive pathways