['27028365', 'Aquaporins of the TIP subfamily (Tonoplast Intrinsic Proteins) have been  suggested to facilitate permeation of water and ammonia across the vacuolar  membrane of plants, allowing the vacuole to efficiently sequester ammonium ions  and counteract cytosolic fluctuations of ammonia. Here, we report the structure  determined at 1.18 A resolution from twinned crystals of Arabidopsis thaliana  aquaporin AtTIP2;1 and confirm water and ammonia permeability of the purified  protein reconstituted in proteoliposomes as further substantiated by molecular  dynamics simulations. The structure of AtTIP2;1 reveals an extended selectivity  filter with the conserved arginine of the filter adopting a unique unpredicted  position. The relatively wide pore and the polar nature of the selectivity filter  clarify the ammonia permeability. By mutational studies, we show that the  identified determinants in the extended selectivity filter region are sufficient  to convert a strictly water-specific human aquaporin into an AtTIP2;1-like  ammonia channel. A flexible histidine and a novel water-filled side pore are  speculated to deprotonate ammonium ions, thereby possibly increasing permeation  of ammonia. The molecular understanding of how aquaporins facilitate ammonia flux  across membranes could potentially be used to modulate ammonia losses over the  plasma membrane to the atmosphere, e.g., during photorespiration, and thereby to  modify the nitrogen use efficiency of plants.', '2016 Mar', 'PLoS Biol', '10.1371/journal.pbio.1002411', 'Johanson']

AtTIP2;1: !facilitates! permeation of water and ammonia 
AtTIP2;1: !has! extended selectivity filter 
Arginine: !adopts! unique unpredicted position 
Proteoliposomes: !confirm! water and ammonia permeability 
Molecular dynamics simulations: !substantiate! permeability 
Mutational studies: !show! determinants in filter region are sufficient to convert human aquaporin 
Flexible histidine: !speculated to! deprotonate ammonium ions 
Novel water-filled side pore: !speculated to! increase permeation of ammonia