['27029353', 'Calmodulins (CaMs) are important mediators of Ca(2+) signals that are found  ubiquitously in all eukaryotic organisms. Plants contain a unique family of  calmodulin-like proteins (CMLs) that exhibit greater sequence variance compared  to canonical CaMs. The Arabidopsis thaliana proteins AtCML4 and AtCML5 are  members of CML subfamily VII and possess a CaM domain comprising the  characteristic double pair of EF-hands, but they are distinguished from other  members of this subfamily and from canonical CaMs by an N-terminal extension of  their amino acid sequence. Transient expression of yellow fluorescent  protein-tagged AtCML4 and AtCML5 under a 35S-promoter in Nicotiana benthamiana  leaf cells revealed a spherical fluorescence pattern. This pattern was confirmed  by transient expression in Arabidopsis protoplasts under the native promoter.  Co-localization analyses with various endomembrane marker proteins suggest that  AtCML4 and AtCML5 are localized to vesicular structures in the interphase between  Golgi and the endosomal system. Further studies revealed AtCML5 to be a  single-pass membrane protein that is targeted into the endomembrane system by an  N-terminal signal anchor sequence. Self-assembly green fluorescent protein and  protease protection assays support a topology with the CaM domain exposed to the  cytosolic surface and not the lumen of the vesicles, indicating that AtCML5 could  sense Ca(2+) signals in the cytosol. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that AtCML4  and AtCML5 are closely related paralogues originating from a duplication event  within the Brassicaceae family. CML4/5-like proteins seem to be universally  present in eudicots but are absent in some monocots. Together these results show  that CML4/5-like proteins represent a flowering plant-specific subfamily of CMLs  with a potential function in vesicle transport within the plant endomembrane  system.', '2016 Jun', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erw101', 'Vothknecht']

AtCML4: !localizes to! vesicular structures 
AtCML5: !localizes to! vesicular structures 
AtCML5: !targeted into! endomembrane system 
AtCML5: !exposed to! cytosolic surface 
AtCML4/5: !originate from! duplication event 
CML4/5-like proteins: !present in! eudicots 
CML4/5-like proteins: !absent in! monocots