['27047516', 'Phosphatidylglycerol (PG) is the only major phospholipid in the thylakoid  membrane in cyanobacteria and plant chloroplasts. Although PG accounts only for  ~10% of total thylakoid lipids, it plays indispensable roles in oxygenic  photosynthesis. In contrast to the comprehensive analyses of PG-deprived mutants  in cyanobacteria, in vivo roles of PG in photosynthesis during plant growth  remain elusive. In this study, we characterized the photosynthesis of an  Arabidopsis thaliana T-DNA insertional mutant (pgp1-2), which lacks plastidic PG  biosynthesis. In the pgp1-2 mutant, energy transfer from antenna pigments to the  photosystem II (PSII) reaction center was severely impaired, which resulted in  low photochemical efficiency of PSII. Unlike in the wild type, in pgp1-2, the  PSII complexes were susceptible to photodamage by red light irradiation.  Manganese ions were mostly dissociated from protein systems in pgp1-2, with  oxygen-evolving activity of PSII absent in the mutant thylakoids. The  oxygen-evolving complex may be disrupted in pgp1-2, which may accelerate the  photodamage to PSII by red light. On the acceptor side of the mutant PSII,  decreased electron-accepting capacity was observed along with impaired electron  transfer. Although the reaction center of PSI was relatively active in pgp1-2  compared to the severe impairment in PSII, the cyclic electron transport was  dysfunctional. Chlorophyll fluorescence analysis at 77K revealed that PG may not  be needed for the self-organization of the macromolecular protein network in  grana thylakoids but is essential for the assembly of antenna-reaction center  complexes. Our data clearly show that thylakoid glycolipids cannot substitute for  the role of PG in photosynthesis during plant growth.', '2016', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2016.00336', 'Wada']

PG: !affects! Photosynthesis 
PG: !impairs! Energy transfer 
PG: !disrupts! Oxygen-evolving complex 
PG: !decreases! Electron-accepting capacity 
PG: !assembles! Antenna-reaction center complexes