['27082651', 'Plants have a large panel of nucleotide-binding/leucine rich repeat (NLR) immune  receptors which monitor host interference by diverse pathogen molecules  (effectors) and trigger disease resistance pathways. NLR receptor systems are  necessarily under tight control to mitigate the trade-off between induced  defenses and growth. Hence, mis-regulated NLRs often cause autoimmunity  associated with stunting and, in severe cases, necrosis. Nucleocytoplasmic  ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY1 (EDS1) is indispensable for effector-triggered  and autoimmune responses governed by a family of  Toll-Interleukin1-Receptor-related NLR receptors (TNLs). EDS1 operates  coincidently or immediately downstream of TNL activation to transcriptionally  reprogram cells for defense. We show here that low levels of nuclear-enforced  EDS1 are sufficient for pathogen resistance in Arabidopsis thaliana, without  causing negative effects. Plants expressing higher nuclear EDS1 amounts have the  genetic, phenotypic and transcriptional hallmarks of TNL autoimmunity. In a  screen for genetic suppressors of nuclear EDS1 autoimmunity, we map multiple,  independent mutations to one gene, DM2h, lying within the polymorphic DANGEROUS  MIX2 cluster of TNL RPP1-like genes from A. thaliana accession Landsberg erecta  (Ler). The DM2 locus is a known hotspot for deleterious epistatic interactions  leading to immune-related incompatibilities between A. thaliana natural  accessions. We find that DM2hLer underlies two further genetic incompatibilities  involving the RPP1-likeLer locus and EDS1. We conclude that the DM2hLer TNL  protein and nuclear EDS1 cooperate, directly or indirectly, to drive cells into  an immune response at the expense of growth. A further conclusion is that  regulating the available EDS1 nuclear pool is fundamental for maintaining  homeostatic control of TNL immune pathways.', '2016 Apr', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1005990', 'Parker']

NLR: !monitors! effectors 
EDS1: !triggers! TNL activation 
DM2hLer: !cooperates with! EDS1 
EDS1: !regulates! TNL immune pathways