Receptor-like proteins (RLPs) have been implicated in multiple biological processes, including plant development and immunity to microbial infection. Fifty-seven AtRLP genes have been identified in Arabidopsis, whereas only a few have been functionally characterized. This is due to the lack of suitable physiological screening conditions and the high degree of functional redundancy among AtRLP genes. To overcome the functional redundancy and further understand the role of AtRLP genes, we studied the evolution of AtRLP genes and compiled a comprehensive profile of the transcriptional regulation of AtRLP genes upon exposure to a range of environmental stresses and different hormones. These results indicate that the majority of AtRLP genes are differentially expressed under various conditions that were tested, an observation that will help to select certain AtRLP genes involved in a specific biological process for further experimental studies to eventually dissect their function. A large number of AtRLP genes were found to respond to more than one treatment, suggesting that one single AtRLP gene may be involved in multiple physiological processes. In addition, we performed a genome-wide cloning of the AtRLP genes, and generated and characterized transgenic Arabidopsis plants overexpressing the individual AtRLP genes, presenting new insight into the roles of AtRLP genes, as exemplified by AtRLP3, AtRLP11 and AtRLP28 Our study provides an overview of biological processes in which AtRLP genes may be involved, and presents valuable resources for future investigations into the function of these genes.

Receptor-like proteins (RLPs): !implicated in! multiple biological processes 
AtRLP genes: !identified in! Arabidopsis 
AtRLP genes: !characterized by! lack of suitable physiological screening conditions 
AtRLP genes: !evolution studied! to understand role 
AtRLP genes: !transcriptionally regulated! upon exposure to environmental stresses and hormones 
AtRLP genes: !respond to! multiple treatments 
AtRLP genes: !cloned! genome-wide 
AtRLP genes: !overexpressed! in transgenic Arabidopsis plants 
AtRLP3, AtRLP11, AtRLP28: !provide insight into! roles of AtRLP genes