Paper-bagging treatment can transform non-transcribed MdMYB1 - 2 and MdMYB1 - 3 alleles into transcribed alleles through epigenetic regulations, resulting in the red pigmentation of a normally non-red apple cultivar 'Mutsu.' Anthocyanin biosynthesis in apples is regulated by MdMYB1/A/10, an R2R3-Type MYB gene. 'Mutsu,' a triploid apple cultivar harboring non-transcribed MdMYB1-2 and MdMYB1-3 alleles, retains green skin color under field conditions. However, it can show red/pink pigmentation under natural or artificial ultraviolet-B (UV-B) light exposure after paper-bagging and bag removal treatment. In the present study, we found that in 'Mutsu,' paper bagging-induced red pigmentation was due to the activation of non-transcribed MdMYB1-2/-3 alleles, which triggered the expression of downstream anthocyanin biosynthesis genes in a UV-B-dependent manner. By monitoring the epigenetic changes during UV-B-induced pigmentation, no significant differences in DNA methylation and histone modifications in the 5' upstream region of MdMYB1-2/-3 were recorded between the UV-B-treated fruit skin (red) and the fruit skin treated only by white light (green). In contrast, bag treatment lowered the DNA methylation in this region of MdMYB1-2/-3 alleles. Similarly, higher levels of histone H3 acetylation and trimethylation of H3 tail at lysine 4, and lower level of trimethylation of H3 tail at lysine 27 were observed in the 5' upstream region of MdMYB1-2/-3 in the skin of the fruit immediately after bag removal. These results suggest that bagging treatment can induce epigenetic changes, facilitating the binding of trans factor(s) to MdMYB1-2/-3 alleles, resulting in the activation of these MYBs after bag removal.

MdMYB1/A/10: !regulates! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
MdMYB1-2/-3: !transformed by! Paper-bagging treatment
MdMYB1-2/-3: !activated by! Bag removal treatment
DNA methylation: !lowered by! Bag treatment
Histone H3 acetylation: !increased by! Bag treatment
Trimethylation of H3 tail at lysine 4: !increased by! Bag treatment
Trimethylation of H3 tail at lysine 27: !decreased by! Bag treatment