Nitric oxide signal and GSNOR activity play an essential role for Chlamydomonas reinhardtii response to salt stress. The unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is one of the most important model organisms phylogenetically situated between higher plants and animals. In the present study, we used comparative proteomics and physiological approaches to study the mechanisms underlying the response to salt stress in C. reinhardtii. We identified 74 proteins that accumulated differentially after salt stress, including oxidative enzymes and enzymes associated with nitric oxide (NO) metabolism, cell damage, and cell autophagy processes. A set of antioxidant enzymes, as well as S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (GSNOR) activity, were induced to balance the cellular redox status during short-term salt stress. Enzymes involved in DNA repair and cell autophagy also contribute to adaptation to short-term salt stress. However, under long-term salt stress, antioxidant enzymes and GSNOR were gradually inactivated through protein S-nitrosylation, leading to oxidative damage and a reduction in cell viability. Modulating the protein S-nitrosylation levels by suppressing GSNOR activity or adding thioredoxin affected the plant's adaptation to salt stress, through altering the redox status and DNA damage and autophagy levels. Based on these data, we propose that unicellular algae use multiple strategies to adapt to salt stress, and that, during this process, GSNOR activity and protein S-nitrosylation levels play important roles.

Nitric oxide signal: !plays essential role for! Chlamydomonas reinhardtii response to salt stress 
Oxidative enzymes: !accumulate differentially after! salt stress 
Enzymes associated with NO metabolism: !accumulate differentially after! salt stress 
Cell damage enzymes: !accumulate differentially after! salt stress 
Cell autophagy processes: !accumulate differentially after! salt stress 
Antioxidant enzymes: !induced to balance! cellular redox status 
GSNOR activity: !induced to balance! cellular redox status 
DNA repair enzymes: !contribute to adaptation to! short-term salt stress 
Cell autophagy: !contribute to adaptation to! short-term salt stress 
Antioxidant enzymes: !inactivated through protein S-nitrosylation! under long-term salt stress 
GSNOR activity: !inactivated through protein S-nitrosylation! under long-term salt stress 
Protein S-nitrosylation levels: !modulated by suppressing GSNOR activity or adding thioredoxin! to affect plant's adaptation to salt stress 
Redox status: !al