['27121119', 'BACKGROUND: Plant adaptation to limited phosphate availability comprises a wide  range of responses to conserve and remobilize internal phosphate sources and to  enhance phosphate acquisition. Vigorous restructuring of root system architecture  provides a developmental strategy for topsoil exploration and phosphate  scavenging. Changes in external phosphate availability are locally sensed at root  tips and adjust root growth by modulating cell expansion and cell division. The  functionally interacting Arabidopsis genes, LOW PHOSPHATE RESPONSE 1 and 2  (LPR1/LPR2) and PHOSPHATE DEFICIENCY RESPONSE 2 (PDR2), are key components of  root phosphate sensing. We recently demonstrated that the LOW PHOSPHATE RESPONSE  1 - PHOSPHATE DEFICIENCY RESPONSE 2 (LPR1-PDR2) module mediates apoplastic  deposition of ferric iron (Fe(3+)) in the growing root tip during phosphate  limitation. Iron deposition coincides with sites of reactive oxygen species  generation and triggers cell wall thickening and callose accumulation, which  interfere with cell-to-cell communication and inhibit root growth. RESULTS: We  took advantage of the opposite phosphate-conditional root phenotype of the  phosphate deficiency response 2 mutant (hypersensitive) and low phosphate  response 1 and 2 double mutant (insensitive) to investigate the phosphate  dependent regulation of gene and protein expression in roots using genome-wide  transcriptome and proteome analysis. We observed an overrepresentation of genes  and proteins that are involved in the regulation of iron homeostasis, cell wall  remodeling and reactive oxygen species formation, and we highlight a number of  candidate genes with a potential function in root adaptation to limited phosphate  availability. Our experiments reveal that FERRIC REDUCTASE DEFECTIVE 3 mediated,  apoplastic iron redistribution, but not intracellular iron uptake and iron  storage, triggers phosphate-dependent root growth modulation. We further  highlight expressional changes of several cell wall-modifying enzymes and provide  evidence for adjustment of the pectin network at sites of iron accumulation in  the root. CONCLUSION: Our study reveals new aspects of the elaborate interplay  between phosphate starvation responses and changes in iron homeostasis. The  results emphasize the importance of apoplastic iron redistribution to mediate  phosphate-dependent root growth adjustment and suggest an important role for  citrate in phosphate-dependent apoplastic iron transport. We further demonstrate  that root growth modulation correlates with an altered expression of cell wall  modifying enzymes and changes in the pectin network of the phosphate-deprived  root tip, supporting the hypothesis that pectins are involved in iron binding  and/or phosphate mobilization.', '2016 Apr 28', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-016-0790-8', 'Muller']

LPR1: !mediates! Fe(3+) deposition
PDR2: !regulates! gene/protein expression
Fe(3+): !triggers! cell wall thickening
FERRIC REDUCTASE DEFECTIVE 3: !redistributes! apoplastic iron
cell wall-modifying enzymes: !adjust! pectin network
citrate: !transports! apoplastic iron