['27145098', 'Plant cell wall polymers are synthesized by glycosyltransferases using nucleotide  sugars as substrates. Most UDP-sugars are synthesized from UDP-glucose via de  novo pathways but salvage pathways work in parallel to recycle sugars, which have  been released during cell wall polymer and glycoprotein turnover. Here we report  on the cloning and biochemical analysis of two arabinokinases in Arabidopsis.  Arabinokinase is a 100 kDa protein located in the cytosol with a putative  N-terminal glycosyltransferase domain and a C-terminal sugar-1-kinase domain.  This unique structure is highly conserved in the plant kingdom. Arabinokinase has  a high affinity for l-arabinose, which is the only sugar substrate of this GHMP  (galactose; homoserine; mevalonate; phosphomevalonate) kinase. Plants that were  knocked-out for arabinokinase and the previously described ara1-1 mutant were  characterized. The ARA1-1 mutant form of the enzyme carries a point mutation in  an alpha-helix. The mutation is close to the substrate binding site and changes the  Km value for arabinose from 80 mum in the wild type to 17 000 mum in ARA1-1. The  previous arabinose toxicity explanation is challenged by knockout plants in  arabinokinase that accumulate higher levels of arabinose but do not show signs of  arabinose toxicity. Analysis of marker genes from sugar signalling pathways  (SnRK1 and Tor) suggest that ara1-1 misinterprets its carbon energy status.  Although glucose is present in ara1-1 similar to wild type levels, it  constitutively changes gene expression as typically found in wild type plants  only under starvation conditions. Furthermore, ara1-1 shows increased expression  of marker genes for programmed cell death as found in other lesion mimic mutants.', '2016 Aug', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13206', 'Tenhaken']

UDP-sugars: !synthesized from! UDP-glucose 
UDP-sugars: !recycled by! salvage pathways 
Arabinokinase: !localizes to! cytosol 
Arabinokinase: !has affinity for! l-arabinose 
arabinokinase: !knocked out in! arabinokinase knockout plants 
ara1-1 mutant: !carries point mutation in! alpha-helix 
ara1-1 mutant: !changes Km value for! arabinose 
ara1-1 mutant: !misinterprets carbon energy status! glucose 
ara1-1 mutant: !increases expression of! marker genes for programmed cell death