The glandular trichomes are developed on the aerial organs of Tussilago farfara ; they produce phenols and terpenoids. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum and leucoplasts are the main organelles of the trichome secretory cells. The aim of this study was to characterise the morphology, anatomy, histochemistry and ultrastructure of the trichomes in Tussilago farfara as well as to identify composition of the secretory products. Structure of trichomes located on the peduncles, bracts, phyllaries, and leaves were studied by light and electron microscopy. The capitate glandular trichomes consist of a multicellular head and a biseriate long stalk. Histochemical tests and fluorescence microscopy reveal phenols and terpenoids in the head cells. During secretory stage, the head cells contain smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, diversiform leucoplasts with opaque contents in lamellae, chloroplasts, mitochondria, and microbodies. In the capitate glandular trichomes of T. farfara subcuticular cavity is absent, unlike glandular trichomes in other Asteraceae species. For the first time, content of metabolites in the different vegetative and reproductive organs as well as in the isolated capitate glandular trichomes was identified by GC-MS. Forty-five compounds, including organic acids, sugars, polyols, phenolics, and terpenoids were identified. It appeared that metabolite content in the methanol extracts from peduncles, bracts and phyllaries is biochemically analogous, and similar to the metabolites from leaves, in which photosynthesis happens. At the same time, the metabolites from trichome extracts essentially differ and refer to the above-mentioned secondary substances. The study has shown that the practical value of the aerial organs of coltsfoot is provided with flavonoids produced in the capitate glandular trichomes.

Trichomes: !produce! Phenols and terpenoids 
Light microscopy: !reveals! Structure of trichomes 
Head cells: !contain! Smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum 
GC-MS: !identifies! Metabolites in vegetative and reproductive organs 
Metabolites: !differ from! Photosynthesis metabolites 
Flavonoids: !produced in! Capitate glandular trichomes