Seedlings of Ponkan (Citrus reticulata) were irrigated with nutrient solution containing 0 (Mg-deficiency) or 1mM MgSO4 (control) every two day for 16 weeks. Thereafter, we examined magnesium (Mg)-deficiency-induced changes in leaf and root gas exchange, total soluble proteins and gene expression. Mg-deficiency lowered leaf CO2 assimilation, and increased leaf dark respiration. However, Mg-deficient roots had lower respiration. Total soluble protein level was not significantly altered by Mg-deficiency in roots, but was lower in Mg-deficient leaves than in controls. Using cDNA-AFLP, we obtained 70 and 71 differentially expressed genes from leaves and roots. These genes mainly functioned in signal transduction, stress response, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, cell transport, cell wall and cytoskeleton metabolism, nucleic acid, and protein metabolisms. Lipid metabolism (Ca(2+) signals)-related Mg-deficiency-responsive genes were isolated only from roots (leaves). Although little difference existed in the number of Mg-deficiency-responsive genes between them both, most of these genes only presented in Mg-deficient leaves or roots, and only four genes were shared by them both. Our data clearly demonstrated that Mg-deficiency-induced alterations of physiology and gene expression greatly differed between leaves and roots. In addition, we focused our discussion on the causes for photosynthetic decline in Mg-deficient leaves and the responses of roots to Mg-deficiency.

Mg-deficiency: !lowers! Leaf CO2 assimilation 
Mg-deficiency: !increases! Leaf dark respiration 
Mg-deficiency: !lowers! Root respiration 
Mg-deficiency: !lowers! Total soluble protein level in leaves 
Signal transduction: !responds to! Mg-deficiency 
Stress response: !responds to! Mg-deficiency 
Carbohydrate and energy metabolism: !responds to! Mg-deficiency 
Cell transport: !responds to! Mg-deficiency 
Cell wall and cytoskeleton metabolism: !responds to! Mg-deficiency 
Nucleic acid: !responds to! Mg-deficiency 
Protein metabolism: !responds to! Mg-deficiency 
Lipid metabolism (Ca(2+) signals): !responds to! Mg-deficiency in roots