The cultivated peanut Arachis hypogaea (AABB) is thought to have originated from the hybridization of Arachis duranensis (AA) and Arachis ipaënsis (BB) followed by spontaneous chromosome doubling. In this study, we cloned and analyzed chromosome markers from cultivated peanut and its wild relatives. A fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)-based karyotyping cocktail was developed with which to study the karyotypes and chromosome evolution of peanut and its wild relatives. Karyotypes were constructed in cultivated peanut and its two putative progenitors using our FISH-based karyotyping system. Comparative karyotyping analysis revealed that chromosome organization was highly conserved in cultivated peanut and its two putative progenitors, especially in the B genome chromosomes. However, variations existed between A. duranensis and the A genome chromosomes in cultivated peanut, especially for the distribution of the interstitial telomere repeats (ITRs). A search of additional A. duranensis varieties from different geographic regions revealed both numeric and positional variations of ITRs, which were similar to the variations in tetraploid peanut varieties. The results provide evidence for the origin of cultivated peanut from the two diploid ancestors, and also suggest that multiple hybridization events of A. ipaënsis with different varieties of A. duranensis may have occurred during the origination of peanut.

Arachis hypogaea: !originated from! hybridization of Arachis duranensis and Arachis ipaënsis 
FISH-based karyotyping cocktail: !developed to study! karyotypes and chromosome evolution of peanut and its wild relatives 
Karyotypes: !constructed in! cultivated peanut and its two putative progenitors 
Chromosome organization: !highly conserved in! cultivated peanut and its two putative progenitors 
Interstitial telomere repeats (ITRs): !varied between! A. duranensis and the A genome chromosomes in cultivated peanut 
Additional A. duranensis varieties: !revealed numeric and positional variations of ITRs! similar to tetraploid peanut varieties