Currently, the global citrus production is declining due to the spread of Huanglongbing (HLB). HLB, otherwise known as citrus greening, is caused by Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) and is transmitted by the Asian citrus psyllids (ACP), Diaphorina citri Kuwayama. ACP transmits CLas bacterium while feeding on the citrus phloem sap. Multiplication of CLas in the phloem of citrus indicates that the sap contains all the essential nutrients needed for CLas. In this study, we investigated the micro- and macro-nutrients, nucleotides, and others secondary metabolites of phloem sap from pineapple sweet orange. The micro- and macro-nutrients were analyzed using inductively coupled plasma-mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) and inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES). Nucleotides and other secondary metabolites analysis was accomplished by reversed phase HPLC coupled with UV, fluorescence detection, or negative mode electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). Calcium (89 mM) was the highest element followed by potassium (38.8 mM) and phosphorous (24 mM). Magnesium and sulfur were also abundant and their concentrations were 15 and 9 mM, respectively. The rest of the elements were found in low amounts (< 2mM). The concentrations of ATP, ADP, and AMP were 16, 31, and 3 µ mole/Kg fwt, respectively. GTP, GMP. NAD, FMN, FAD, and riboflavin were found at concentrations below (3 µ mole/Kg fwt). The phloem was rich in nomilin 124 mM and limonin 176 µ mole/Kg fwt. Hesperidin, vicenin-2, sinensetin, and nobiletin were the most predominant flavonoids. In addition, several hydroxycinnamates were detected. The results of this study will increase our knowledge about the nature and the chemical composition of citrus phloem sap.

ACP: !transmits! CLas 
CLas: !multiplies in! phloem 
ICP-MS/OES: !analyzes! micro-/macro-nutrients 
HPLC: !analyzes! nucleotides/secondary metabolites 
Calcium: !highest element! in phloem 
ATP/ADP/AMP: !concentrations of! 16/31/3 µ mole/Kg fwt 
GTP/GMP/NAD/FMN/FAD/riboflavin: !concentrations of! < 3 µ mole/Kg fwt 
nomilin/limonin: !concentrations of! 124/176 µ mole/Kg fwt 
flavonoids: !predominant! in phloem 
hydroxycinnamates: !detected! in phloem