Flower opening is essential for pollination and thus successful sexual reproduction; however, the underlying mechanisms of its timing control remain largely elusive. We identify a unique cucumber (Cucumis sativus) line '6457' that produces normal ovaries when nutrients are under-supplied, and super ovaries (87%) with delayed corolla opening when nutrients are oversupplied. Corolla opening in both normal and super ovaries is divided into four distinct phases, namely the green bud, green-yellow bud, yellow bud, and flowering stages, along with progressive color transition, cytological tuning, and differential expression of 14,282 genes. In the super ovary, cell division and cell expansion persisted for a significantly longer period of time; the expressions of genes related to photosynthesis, protein degradation, and signaling kinases were dramatically up-regulated, whereas the activities of most transcription factors and stress-related genes were significantly down-regulated; concentrations of cytokinins (CKs) and gibberellins were higher in accordance with reduced cytokinin conjugation and degradation and increased expression of gibberellin biosynthesis genes. Exogenous CK application was sufficient for the genesis of super ovaries, suggesting a decisive role of CKs in controlling the timing of corolla opening. Furthermore, 194 out of 11,127 differentially expressed genes identified in pairwise comparisons, including critical developmental, signaling, and cytological regulators, contained all three types of cis-elements for CK, nitrate, and phosphorus responses in their promoter regions, indicating that the integration of hormone modulation and nutritional regulation orchestrated the precise control of corolla opening in cucumber. Our findings provide a valuable framework for dissecting the regulatory pathways for flower opening in plants.

nutrients: !affects! corolla opening
cell division/expansion: !persists longer! super ovary
photosynthesis/protein degradation/signaling kinases: !up-regulated! super ovary
transcription factors/stress-related genes: !down-regulated! super ovary
CKs/gibberellins: !higher concentrations! super ovary
exogenous CK application: !sufficient for! genesis of super ovaries
CK/nitrate/phosphorus responses: !integrated in! promoter regions