Mutations generated by CRISPR/Cas9 in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) are often somatic and are rarely heritable. Isolation of mutations in Cas9-free Arabidopsis plants can ensure the stable transmission of the identified mutations to next generations, but the process is laborious and inefficient. Here, we present a simple visual screen for Cas9-free T2 seeds, allowing us to quickly obtain Cas9-free Arabidopsis mutants in the T2 generation. To demonstrate this in principle, we targeted two sites in the AUXIN-BINDING PROTEIN1 (ABP1) gene, whose function as a membrane-associated auxin receptor has been challenged recently. We obtained many T1 plants with detectable mutations near the target sites, but only a small fraction of T1 plants yielded Cas9-free abp1 mutations in the T2 generation. Moreover, the mutations did not segregate in Mendelian fashion in the T2 generation. However, mutations identified in the Cas9-free T2 plants were stably transmitted to the T3 generation following Mendelian genetics. To further simplify the screening procedure, we simultaneously targeted two sites in ABP1 to generate large deletions, which can be easily identified by PCR. We successfully generated two abp1 alleles that contained 1,141- and 711-bp deletions in the ABP1 gene. All of the Cas9-free abp1 alleles we generated were stable and heritable. The method described here allows for effectively isolating Cas9-free heritable CRISPR mutants in Arabidopsis.

CRISPR/Cas9: !generates! Mutations 
Mutations: !stable transmission to! Next generations 
Visual screen: !allows for! Obtaining Cas9-free Arabidopsis mutants 
ABP1 gene: !targeted by! CRISPR/Cas9 
ABP1 gene: !function as! Membrane-associated auxin receptor 
T1 plants: !yield! Cas9-free abp1 mutations in T2 generation 
Mutations: !do not segregate in! Mendelian fashion 
Cas9-free abp1 alleles: !generated and! Stably transmitted to T3 generation 
PCR: !used to! Identify large deletions 
Method: !allows for! Isolating Cas9-free heritable CRISPR mutants