['27208238', 'GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) are essential for plant growth and development;  knockout mutations in enzymes responsible for anchor biosynthesis or attachment  are gametophyte or embryo lethal. In a genetic screen targeted to identify genes  regulating stomata formation, we discovered a missense mutation in the  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) homolog of GPI8/PIG-K, a Cys protease that  transfers an assembled GPI anchor to proteins. The Arabidopsis genome has a  single copy of AtGPI8, and the atgpi8-1 mutation reduces the efficiency of this  enzyme, leading to reduced accumulation of GPI-anchored proteins. While the  atgpi8-1 mutation strongly disrupts plant growth, it is not lethal. Phenotypic  analysis of atgpi8-1 mutants suggests that GPI-APs are important for root and  shoot growth, stomata formation, apical dominance, transition to flowering, and  male gametophyte viability. In addition, atgpi8-1 mutants accumulate higher  levels of callose and have reduced plasmodesmata permeability. Genetic  interactions of atgpi8-1 with mutations in ERECTA family (ERf) genes suggest the  existence of a GPI-AP in a branch of the ERf signaling pathway that regulates  stomata formation. Activation of the ERf signal transduction cascade by  constitutively active YODA rescues stomata clustering in atgpi8-1, indicating  that a GPI-AP functions upstream of the MAP kinase cascade. TOO MANY MOUTHS (TMM)  is a receptor-like protein that is able to form heterodimers with ERfs. Our  analysis demonstrates that tmm-1 is epistatic to atgpi8-1, indicating that either  TMM is a GPI-AP or there is another GPI-AP regulating stomata development whose  function is dependent upon TMM.', '2016 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.16.00339', 'ORCID:']

GPI-APs: !essential for! plant growth and development 
AtGPI8: !transfers! GPI anchor to proteins 
atgpi8-1 mutation: !reduces efficiency of! AtGPI8 
GPI-APs: !important for! root and shoot growth, stomata formation, apical dominance, transition to flowering, male gametophyte viability 
atgpi8-1 mutants: !accumulate higher levels of! callose 
ERf genes: !interact with! atgpi8-1 
YODA: !rescues stomata clustering in! atgpi8-1 
TMM: !forms heterodimers with! ERfs 
tmm-1: !epistatic to! atgpi8-1