['27208269', 'Thylakoid membrane-localized chloroplast ATP synthases use the proton motive  force generated by photosynthetic electron transport to produce ATP from ADP.  Although it is well known that the chloroplast ATP synthase is composed of more  than 20 proteins with alpha3beta3gamma1epsilon1delta1I1II1III14IV1 stoichiometry, its biogenesis  process is currently unclear. To unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying the  biogenesis of chloroplast ATP synthase, we performed extensive screening for  isolating ATP synthase mutants in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). In the  recently identified bfa3 (biogenesis factors required for ATP synthase 3) mutant,  the levels of chloroplast ATP synthase subunits were reduced to approximately 25%  of wild-type levels. In vivo labeling analysis showed that assembly of the CF1  component of chloroplast ATP synthase was less efficient in bfa3 than in the wild  type, indicating that BFA3 is required for CF1 assembly. BFA3 encodes a  chloroplast stromal protein that is conserved in higher plants, green algae, and  a few species of other eukaryotic algae, and specifically interacts with the CF1beta  subunit. The BFA3 binding site was mapped to a region in the catalytic site of  CF1beta. Several residues highly conserved in eukaryotic CF1beta are crucial for the  BFA3-CF1beta interaction, suggesting a coevolutionary relationship between BFA3 and  CF1beta. BFA3 appears to function as a molecular chaperone that transiently  associates with unassembled CF1beta at its catalytic site and facilitates subsequent  association with CF1alpha during assembly of the CF1 subcomplex of chloroplast ATP  synthase.', '2016 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.16.00248', 'Peng']

Thylakoid membrane-localized chloroplast ATP synthases: !use! proton motive force 
BFA3: !encodes! chloroplast stromal protein 
BFA3: !interacts with! CF1beta subunit 
BFA3: !functions as! molecular chaperone 
CF1beta: !binds to! BFA3 
CF1beta: !associates with! CF1alpha