The Arabidopsis cuticle, as observed by electron microscopy, consists primarily of the cutin/cutan matrix. The cuticle possesses a complex substructure, which is correlated with the presence of intracuticular waxes. The plant cuticle is composed of an insoluble polyester, cutin, and organic solvent soluble cuticular waxes, which are embedded within and coat the surface of the cutin matrix. How these components are arranged in the cuticle is not well understood. The Arabidopsis cuticle is commonly understood as 'amorphous,' lacking in ultrastructural features, and is often observed as a thin (~80-100 nm) electron-dense layer on the surface of the cell wall. To examine this cuticle in more detail, we examined cuticles from both rapidly elongating and mature sections of the stem and compared the preservation of the cuticles using conventional chemical fixation methods and high-pressure freezing/freeze-substitution (HPF/FS). We found that HPF/FS preparation revealed a complex cuticle substructure, which was more evident in older stems. We also found that the cuticle increases in thickness with development, indicating an accretion of polymeric material, likely in the form of the non-hydrolyzable polymer, cutan. When wax was extracted by chloroform immersion prior to sample preparation, the contribution of waxes to cuticle morphology was revealed. Overall, the electron-dense cuticle layer was still visible but there was loss of the cuticle substructure. Furthermore, the cuticle of cer6, a wax-deficient mutant, also lacked this substructure, suggesting that these fine striations were dependent on the presence of cuticular waxes. Our findings show that HPF/FS preparation can better preserve plant cuticles, but also provide new insights into the fine structure of the Arabidopsis cuticle.

Cuticle: !composed of! cutin/cutan matrix 
Cuticle: !embedded with! cuticular waxes 
Cuticle: !increases in thickness with! development 
Cuticle: !revealed by! HPF/FS preparation 
Cuticle: !dependent on! presence of cuticular waxes 
Cuticle: !lacks substructure in! cer6 mutant