The chloroplast thylakoid membrane is the site for the initial steps of photosynthesis that convert solar energy into chemical energy, ultimately powering almost all life on earth. The heterogeneous distribution of protein complexes within the membrane gives rise to an intricate three-dimensional structure that is nonetheless extremely dynamic on a timescale of seconds to minutes. These dynamics form the basis for the regulation of photosynthesis, and therefore the adaptability of plants to different environments. High-resolution microscopy has in recent years begun to provide new insights into the structural dynamics underlying a number of regulatory processes such as membrane stacking, photosystem II repair, photoprotective energy dissipation, state transitions and alternative electron transfer. Here we provide an overview of the essentials of thylakoid membrane structure in plants, and consider how recent advances, using a range of microscopies, have substantially increased our knowledge of the thylakoid dynamic structure. We discuss both the successes and limitations of the currently available techniques and highlight newly emerging microscopic methods that promise to move the field beyond the current 'static' view of membrane organization based on frozen snapshots to a 'live' view of functional membranes imaged under native aqueous conditions at ambient temperature and responding dynamically to external stimuli.

Chloroplast thylakoid membrane: !site for! photosynthesis 
Protein complexes: !give rise to! intricate 3D structure 
High-resolution microscopy: !provides insights into! structural dynamics 
Membrane stacking: !regulated by! regulatory processes 
Photosystem II repair: !regulated by! regulatory processes 
Photoprotective energy dissipation: !regulated by! regulatory processes 
State transitions: !regulated by! regulatory processes 
Alternative electron transfer: !regulated by! regulatory processes 
Microscopies: !increase knowledge of! thylakoid dynamic structure 
Techniques: !limited by! current 'static' view 
Newly emerging microscopic methods: !promise to move field beyond! current 'static' view