['27276217', 'Berberine bridge enzyme-like (BBE-like) proteins form a multigene family (pfam  08031), which is present in plants, fungi and bacteria. They adopt the vanillyl  alcohol-oxidase fold and predominantly show bi-covalent tethering of the FAD  cofactor to a cysteine and histidine residue, respectively. The Arabidopsis  thaliana genome was recently shown to contain genes coding for 28 BBE-like  proteins, while featuring four distinct active site compositions. We determined  the structure of a member of the AtBBE-like protein family (termed AtBBE-like  28), which has an active site composition that has not been structurally and  biochemically characterized thus far. The most salient and distinguishing  features of the active site found in AtBBE-like 28 are a mono-covalent linkage of  a histidine to the 8alpha-position of the flavin-isoalloxazine ring and the lack of a  second covalent linkage to the 6-position, owing to the replacement of a cysteine  with a histidine. In addition, the structure reveals the interaction of a  glutamic acid (Glu426) with an aspartic acid (Asp369) at the active site, which  appear to share a proton. This arrangement leads to the delocalization of a  negative charge at the active site that may be exploited for catalysis. The  structure also indicates a shift of the position of the isoalloxazine ring in  comparison to other members of the BBE-like family. The dioxygen surrogate  chloride was found near the C(4a) position of the isoalloxazine ring in the  oxygen pocket, pointing to a rapid reoxidation of reduced enzyme by dioxygen. A  T-DNA insertional mutant line for AtBBE-like 28 results in a phenotype, that is  characterized by reduced biomass and lower salt stress tolerance. Multiple  sequence analysis showed that the active site composition found in AtBBE-like 28  is only present in the Brassicaceae, suggesting that it plays a specific role in  the metabolism of this plant family.', '2016', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0156892', 'Macheroux']

AtBBE-like 28: !adopts! vanillyl alcohol-oxidase fold 
AtBBE-like 28: !features! mono-covalent linkage of histidine to 8alpha-position of flavin-isoalloxazine ring 
AtBBE-like 28: !interacts with! Glu426 and Asp369 
AtBBE-like 28: !shifts! position of isoalloxazine ring 
AtBBE-like 28: !contains! dioxygen surrogate chloride near C(4a) position 
AtBBE-like 28: !results in! reduced biomass and lower salt stress tolerance 
AtBBE-like 28: !specific to! Brassicaceae