The 18 kDa translocator protein (TSPO) is highly 0conserved in eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Since its discovery in 1977, numerous studies established the TSPO's importance for life essential functions. For these studies, synthetic TSPO ligands typically are applied. Tetrapyrroles present endogenous ligands for the TSPO. Tetrapyrroles are also evolutionarily conserved and regulate multiple functions. TSPO and tetrapyrroles regulate each other. In animals TSPO-tetrapyrrole interactions range from effects on embryonic development to metabolism, programmed cell death, response to stress, injury and disease, and even to life span extension. In animals TSPOs are primarily located in mitochondria. In plants TSPOs are also present in plastids, the nuclear fraction, the endoplasmic reticulum, and Golgi stacks. This may contribute to translocation of tetrapyrrole intermediates across organelles' membranes. As in animals, plant TSPO binds heme and protoporphyrin IX. TSPO-tetrapyrrole interactions in plants appear to relate to development as well as stress conditions, including salt tolerance, abscisic acid-induced stress, reactive oxygen species homeostasis, and finally cell death regulation. In bacteria, TSPO is important for switching from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism, including the regulation of photosynthesis. As in mitochondria, in bacteria TSPO is located in the outer membrane. TSPO-tetrapyrrole interactions may be part of the establishment of the bacterial-eukaryote relationships, i.e., mitochondrial-eukaryote and plastid-plant endosymbiotic relationships.

TSPO: !regulates! Tetrapyrroles 
TSPO: !localizes to! Mitochondria 
TSPO: !binds! Heme 
TSPO: !binds! Protoporphyrin IX 
TSPO: !switches! Aerobic to Anaerobic Metabolism 
TSPO: !regulates! Photosynthesis 
TSPO: !localizes to! Outer Membrane 
Tetrapyrroles: !regulate! Multiple Functions 
Tetrapyrroles: !present! Endogenous Ligands 
Tetrapyrroles: !regulate! Embryonic Development 
Tetrapyrroles: !regulate! Metabolism 
Tetrapyrroles: !regulate! Programmed Cell Death 
Tetrapyrroles: !regulate! Response to Stress 
Tetrapyrroles: !regulate! Injury and Disease 
Tetrapyrroles: !regulate! Life Span Extension 
Tetrapyrroles: !regulate! Salt Tolerance 
Tetrapyrroles: