Salinity stress is a major constrain in the global rice production and hence serious efforts are being undertaken towards deciphering its remedial strategies. The comparative analysis of differential response of salt sensitive and salt tolerant lines is a judicious approach to obtain essential clues towards understanding the acquisition of salinity tolerance in rice plants. However, adaptation to salt stress is a fairly complex process and operates through different mechanisms. Among various mechanisms involved, the reactive oxygen species mediated salinity tolerance is believed to be critical as it evokes cascade of responses related to stress tolerance. In this background, the present paper for the first time evaluates the ROS generating and the scavenging system in tandem in both salt sensitive and salt tolerant cultivars of rice for getting better insight into salinity stress adaptation. Comparative analysis of ROS indicates the higher level of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and lower level of superoxide ions (O(2-)) in the salt tolerant as compared to salt sensitive cultivars. Specific activity of ROS generating enzyme, NADPH oxidase was also found to be more in the tolerant cultivars. Further, activities of various enzymes involved in enzymatic and non enzymatic antioxidant defence system were mostly higher in tolerant cultivars. The transcript level analysis of antioxidant enzymes were in alignment with the enzymatic activity. Other stress markers like proline were observed to be higher in tolerant varieties whereas, the level of malondialdehyde (MDA) equivalents and chlorophyll content were estimated to be more in sensitive. The present study showed significant differences in the level of ROS production and antioxidant enzymes activities among sensitive and tolerant cultivars, suggesting their possible role in providing natural salt tolerance to selected cultivars of rice. Our study demonstrates that the cellular machinery for ROS production and scavenging system works in an interdependent manner to offer better salt stress adaptation in rice. The present work further highlights that the elevated level of H2O2 which is considered as a key determinant for conferring salt stress tolerance to rice might have originated through an alternative route of photocatalytic activity of chlorophyll.

NADPH oxidase: !generates! H2O2 
Salt tolerant cultivars: !have higher levels of! H2O2 
Salt tolerant cultivars: !have higher activities of! antioxidant enzymes 
Salt tolerant cultivars: !have higher levels of! proline 
Salt sensitive cultivars: !have higher levels of! MDA equivalents 
Salt sensitive cultivars: !have higher levels of! chlorophyll content 
ROS production: !interacts with! antioxidant defence system