small Heat Shock Proteins (sHSP) is a wide proteins family. SHSP are found in all kingdoms and they play critical roles in plant stress tolerance mechanisms (as well as in pathogenic microorganisms and are implicated in human diseases). sHSPdb (small Heat Shock Proteins database) is an integrated resource containing non-redundant, full-length and curated sequences of sHSP, classified on the basis of amino acids motifs and physico-chemical properties. sHSPdb gathers data about sHSP defined by various databases (Uniprot, PFAM, CDD, InterPro). It provides a browser interface for retrieving information from the whole database and a search interface using various criteria for retrieving a refined subset of entries. Physicochemical properties, amino acid composition and combinations are calculated for each entry. sHSPdb provides automatic statistical analysis of all sHSP properties. Among various possibilities, sHSPdb allows BLAST searches, alignment of selected sequences and submission of sequences. sHSPdb is a new database containing information about sHSP from all kingdoms. sHSPdb provides a classification of sHSP, as well as tools and data for the analysis of the structure - function relationships of sHSP. Data are mainly related to various physico-chemical properties of the amino acids sequences of sHSP. sHSPdb is accessible at http://forge.info.univ-angers.fr/~gh/Shspdb/index.php .

sHSP: !plays critical roles in! plant stress tolerance mechanisms 
sHSPdb: !contains! non-redundant, full-length and curated sequences of sHSP 
sHSPdb: !classifies! sHSP on the basis of amino acids motifs and physico-chemical properties 
sHSPdb: !provides! browser interface for retrieving information from the whole database 
sHSPdb: !allows! BLAST searches, alignment of selected sequences and submission of sequences 
sHSPdb: !gathers data about! sHSP defined by various databases 
sHSPdb: !calculates! physicochemical properties, amino acid composition and combinations 
sHSPdb: !provides automatic statistical analysis of! all sHSP properties