['27317682', 'Coilin is a marker protein for subnuclear organelles known as Cajal bodies, which  are sites of various RNA metabolic processes including the biogenesis of  spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles. Through self-associations  and interactions with other proteins and RNA, coilin provides a structural  scaffold for Cajal body formation. However, despite a conspicuous presence in  Cajal bodies, most coilin is dispersed in the nucleoplasm and expressed in cell  types that lack these organelles. The molecular function of coilin, particularly  of the substantial nucleoplasmic fraction, remains uncertain. We identified  coilin loss-of-function mutations in a genetic screen for mutants showing either  reduced or enhanced expression of an alternatively spliced GFP reporter gene in  Arabidopsis thaliana The coilin mutants feature enhanced GFP fluorescence and  diminished Cajal bodies compared with wild-type plants. The amount of GFP protein  is several-fold higher in the coilin mutants owing to elevated GFP transcript  levels and more efficient splicing to produce a translatable GFP mRNA.  Genome-wide RNA-sequencing data from two distinct coilin mutants revealed a  small, shared subset of differentially expressed genes, many encoding  stress-related proteins, and, unexpectedly, a trend toward increased splicing  efficiency. These results suggest that coilin attenuates splicing and modulates  transcription of a select group of genes. The transcriptional and splicing  changes observed in coilin mutants are not accompanied by gross phenotypic  abnormalities or dramatically altered stress responses, supporting a role for  coilin in fine tuning gene expression. Our GFP reporter gene provides a sensitive  monitor of coilin activity that will facilitate further investigations into the  functions of this enigmatic protein.', '2016 Aug', 'Genetics', '10.1534/genetics.116.190751', 'Matzke']

Coilin: !localizes to! Cajal bodies 
Coilin: !interacts with! other proteins and RNA 
Coilin: !represses! splicing 
Coilin: !modulates! transcription of select genes