['27310016', 'Light-induced chloroplast movement and attachment to the plasma membrane are  dependent on actin filaments. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the short actin filaments  on the chloroplast envelope, cp-actin filaments, are essential for chloroplast  movement and positioning. Furthermore, cp-actin-filament-mediated chloroplast  movement is necessary for the strong-light-induced nuclear avoidance response.  The proteins CHLOROPLAST UNUSUAL POSITIONING 1 (CHUP1), KINESIN-LIKE PROTEIN FOR  ACTIN-BASED CHLOROPLAST MOVEMENT 1 (KAC1) and KAC2 are required for the  generation and/or maintenance of cp-actin filaments in Arabidopsis. In land  plants, CHUP1 and KAC family proteins play pivotal roles in the proper movement  of chloroplasts and their attachment to the plasma membrane. Here, we report  similar but distinct phenotypes in chloroplast and nuclear photorelocation  movements between chup1 and kac1kac2 mutants. Measurement of chloroplast  photorelocation movement indicated that kac1kac2, but not chup1, exhibited a  clear strong-light-induced increase in leaf transmittance changes. The  chloroplast movement in kac1kac2 depended on phototropin 2, CHUP1 and two other  regulators for cp-actin filaments, PLASTID MOVEMENT IMPAIRED 1 and THRUMIN 1.  Furthermore, kac1kac2 retained a weak but significant nuclear avoidance response  although chup1 displayed a severe defect in the nuclear avoidance response. The  kac1kac2chup1 triple mutant was completely defective in both chloroplast and  nuclear avoidance responses. These results indicate that CHUP1 and the KACs  function somewhat independently, but interdependently mediate both chloroplast  and nuclear photorelocation movements.', '2016', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0157429', 'ORCID:']

CHUP1: !mediates! chloroplast and nuclear photorelocation movements
KACs: !mediates! chloroplast and nuclear photorelocation movements
CHUP1: !interdependently interacts with! KACs
KACs: !interdependently interacts with! CHUP1
phototropin 2: !regulates! chloroplast movement in kac1kac2
PLASTID MOVEMENT IMPAIRED 1: !regulates! cp-actin filaments in kac1kac2
THRUMIN 1: !regulates! cp-actin filaments in kac1kac2