Pressure-volume (PV) curve analysis is the most common and accurate way of estimating all components of the water relationships in leaves (water potential isotherms) as summarized in the Höfler diagram. PV curve analysis yields values of osmotic pressure, turgor pressure, and elastic modulus of cell walls as a function of relative water content. It allows the computation of symplasmic/apoplastic water content partitioning. For about 20 years, cavitation in xylem has been postulated as a possible source of error when estimating the above parameters, but, to the best of the authors' knowledge, no one has ever previously quantified its influence. Results in this paper provide independent estimates of osmotic pressure by PV curve analysis and by thermocouple psychrometer measurement. An anatomical evaluation was also used for the first time to compare apoplastic water fraction estimates from PV analysis with anatomical values. Conclusions include: (i) PV curve values of osmotic pressure are underestimated prior to correcting osmotic pressure for water loss by cavitation in Metasequoia glyptostroboides; (ii) psychrometer estimates of osmotic pressure obtained in tissues killed by freezing or heating agreed with PV values before correction for apoplastic water dilution; (iii) after correction for dilution effects, a solute concentration enhancement (0.27MPa or 0.11 osmolal) was revealed. The possible sources of solute enhancement were starch hydrolysis and release of ions from the Donnan free space of needle cell walls.

PV curve analysis: !yields! water potential isotherms
PV curve analysis: !allows computation of! symplasmic/apoplastic water content partitioning
cavitation in xylem: !postulated as! source of error
thermocouple psychrometer measurement: !estimates! osmotic pressure
anatomical evaluation: !compares! apoplastic water fraction estimates from PV analysis
PV curve values of osmotic pressure: !underestimated! prior to correcting for cavitation
psychrometer estimates of osmotic pressure: !agreed with! PV values before correction
solute concentration enhancement: !revealed after! correction for dilution effects
starch hydrolysis: !possible source of! solute enhancement
ions from Donnan free space of needle cell walls: !possible source of! solute enhancement