The phosphate transporter PHT4;6 locates to the trans-Golgi compartment, and its impaired activity causes altered intracellular phosphate compartmentation, leading to low cytosolic Pi levels, a blockage of Golgi-related processes such as protein glycosylation and hemicellulose biosynthesis, and a dwarf phenotype. However, it was unclear whether altered Pi homeostasis in pht4;6 mutants causes further cellular problems, typically associated with limited phosphate availability. Here we report that pht4;6 mutants exhibit a markedly increased disposition to induce dark-induced senescence. In control experiments, in which pht4;6 mutants and wild-type plants developed similarly, we confirmed that accelerated dark-induced senescence in mutants is not a 'pleiotropic' process associated with the dwarf phenotype. In fact, accelerated dark-induced senescence in pht4;6 mutants correlates strongly with increased levels of toxic NH4 (+) and higher sensitivity to ammonium, which probably contribute to the inability of pht4;6 mutants to recover from dark treatment. Experiments with modified levels of either salicylic acid (SA) or trans-zeatin (tZ) demonstrate that altered concentrations of these compounds in pht4;6 plants act as major cellular mediators for dark-induced senescence. This conclusion gained further support from the notion that the expression of the pht4;6 gene is, in contrast to genes coding for major phosphate importers, substantially induced by tZ. Taken together, our findings point to a critical function of PHT4;6 to control cellular phosphate levels, in particular the cytosolic Pi availability, required to energize plant primary metabolism for proper plant development. Phosphate and its allocation mediated by PHT4;6 is critical to prevent onset of dark-induced senescence.

PHT4;6: !locates to! trans-Golgi compartment
PHT4;6: !causes! altered intracellular phosphate compartmentation
altered Pi homeostasis: !induces! dark-induced senescence
pht4;6 mutants: !exhibit! increased disposition to induce dark-induced senescence
pht4;6 mutants: !correlate with! increased levels of toxic NH4 (+)
modified SA/tZ levels: !act as! major cellular mediators for dark-induced senescence
expression of pht4;6 gene: !substantially induced by! tZ
PHT4;6: !controls! cellular phosphate levels