Plants have evolved shoot elongation mechanisms to escape from diverse environmental stresses such as flooding and vegetative shade. The apparent similarity in growth responses suggests a possible convergence of the signaling pathways. Shoot elongation is mediated by passive ethylene accumulating to high concentrations in flooded plant organs and by changes in light quality and quantity under vegetation shade. Here, we study hypocotyl elongation as a proxy for shoot elongation and delineate Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) hypocotyl length kinetics in response to ethylene and shade. Based on these kinetics, we further investigated ethylene- and shade-induced genome-wide gene expression changes in hypocotyls and cotyledons separately. Both treatments induced a more extensive transcriptome reconfiguration in the hypocotyls compared with the cotyledons. Bioinformatics analyses suggested contrasting regulation of growth promotion- and photosynthesis-related genes. These analyses also suggested an induction of auxin, brassinosteroid, and gibberellin signatures and the involvement of several candidate regulators in the elongating hypocotyls. Pharmacological and mutant analyses confirmed the functional involvement of several of these candidate genes and physiological control points in regulating stress-escape responses to different environmental stimuli. We discuss how these signaling networks might be integrated and conclude that plants, when facing different stresses, utilize a conserved set of transcriptionally regulated genes to modulate and fine-tune growth.

ethylene: !induces! hypocotyl length kinetics 
shade: !induces! hypocotyl length kinetics 
hypocotyls: !reconfigure! transcriptome 
cotyledons: !reconfigure! transcriptome 
growth promotion-related genes: !contrastingly regulated by! ethylene and shade 
photosynthesis-related genes: !contrastingly regulated by! ethylene and shade 
auxin: !induced by! ethylene and shade 
brassinosteroid: !induced by! ethylene and shade 
gibberellin: !induced by! ethylene and shade 
candidate regulators: !involved in! elongating hypocotyls 
candidate genes: !confirmed by! pharmacological and mutant analyses 
transcriptionally regulated genes: !utilized by! plants to modulate growth