['27329222', 'Induction and secretion of acid phosphatases (APases) is an adaptive response  that plants use to cope with P (Pi) deficiency in their environment. The  molecular mechanism that regulates this response, however, is poorly understood.  In this work, we identified an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutant, hps8,  which exhibits enhanced APase activity on its root surface (also called  root-associated APase activity). Our molecular and genetic analyses indicate that  this altered Pi response results from a mutation in the AtTHO1 gene that encodes  a subunit of the THO/TREX protein complex. The mutation in another subunit of  this complex, AtTHO3, also enhances root-associated APase activity under Pi  starvation. In Arabidopsis, the THO/TREX complex functions in mRNA export and  miRNA biogenesis. When treated with Ag(+), an inhibitor of ethylene perception,  the enhanced root-associated APase activity in hps8 is largely reversed. hpr1-5  is another mutant allele of AtTHO1 and shows similar phenotypes as hps8 ein2 is  completely insensitive to ethylene. In the hpr1-5ein2 double mutant, the enhanced  root-associated APase activity is also greatly suppressed. These results indicate  that the THO/TREX complex in Arabidopsis negatively regulates root-associated  APase activity induced by Pi starvation by inhibiting ethylene signaling. In  addition, we found that the miRNA399-PHO2 pathway is also involved in the  regulation of root-associated APase activity induced by Pi starvation. These  results provide insight into the molecular mechanism underlying the adaptive  response of plants to Pi starvation.', '2016 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.16.00680', 'ORCID:']

AtTHO1: !mutates to! enhance APase activity 
AtTHO3: !mutates to! enhance APase activity 
Ag(+): !inhibits! ethylene perception 
hps8: !exhibits! enhanced APase activity 
hpr1-5: !shows! similar phenotypes as hps8 
ein2: !insensitive to! ethylene 
hpr1-5ein2: !suppresses! enhanced APase activity 
THO/TREX complex: !negatively regulates! root-associated APase activity 
THO/TREX complex: !inhibits! ethylene signaling 
miRNA399-PHO2 pathway: !involved in! regulation of root-associated APase activity