Roots of plants with high artemisinin-producing leaves increased leaf production of artemisinin in low-producing plants and vice versa indicating roots are involved in controlling artemisinin biosynthesis in shoots. The anti-malarial sesquiterpene, artemisinin, is produced and stored in glandular trichomes (GLTs) of Artemisia annua. Evidence suggested roots, which produce no significant artemisinin nor precursor compounds, regulate production of artemisinin biosynthesis in the leaves. Using grafting, we studied the relationship between rootstock and scion by measuring GLTs and five artemisinic metabolites (artemisinin, deoxyartemisinin, dihydroartemisinic acid, artemisinic acid, arteannuin B) in scions of ungrafted, self-grafted, and cross-grafted plants among three cultivars: S and 15 both having GLTs with artemisinin at 1.49 and 0.57 %, respectively, and G producing neither GLTs nor detectable artemisinin. All artemisinin-producing self-grafts, e.g., S/S (scion/rootstock) and 15/15, produced more artemisinin than ungrafted plants, likely from grafting stress. S/S grafts also produced more GLTs. The 15/S grafts produced more artemisinin than S/15, suggesting rootstocks from high producing S plants stimulated artemisinin production in 15 scions. S/15 grafts yielded less artemisinin than S/S, but more than either 15/15 or ungrafted n15 and nS; S/15 grafts also had a lower density of GLTs than S/S, suggesting rootstock inhibition of the scion. The S rootstock induced trace artemisinin production in G scions, but did not induce GLT formation in G/S grafts. Different grafts exhibited different trichome morphologies and effects on artemisinic pathway flux. This study provides new information regarding the role of roots in GLT development and artemisinin production in this important medicinal plant.

rootstock: !increases! artemisinin production in scion
rootstock: !induces! GLT formation in scion
scion: !enhances! artemisinin production in rootstock
grafting: !stimulates! artemisinin production
grafting: !alters! trichome morphology