['27337244', 'The aerial surfaces of terrestrial plants are covered by a cuticular wax layer,  which protects the plants from environmental stresses such as desiccation, high  irradiance, and UV radiation. Cuticular wax deposition is regulated in an  organ-specific manner; Arabidopsis stems have more than 10-fold higher wax loads  than leaves. In this study, we found that WRINKLED4 (WRI4), encoding an AP2/ERF  (ethylene-responsive factor) transcription factor (TF), is predominantly  expressed in stem epidermis, is upregulated by salt stress, and is involved in  activating cuticular wax biosynthesis in Arabidopsis stems. WRI4 harbors a  transcriptional activation domain at its N-terminus, and fluorescent signals from  a WRI4:eYFP construct were localized to the nuclei of tobacco leaf protoplasts.  Deposition of epicuticular wax crystals on stems was reduced in wri4-1 and wri4-3  knockout mutants. Total wax loads were reduced by ~28% in wri4 stems but were not  altered in wri4 siliques or leaves compared to the wild type. The levels of  29-carbon long alkanes, ketones, and secondary alcohols, which are the most  abundant components of stem waxes, were significantly reduced in wri4 stems  relative to the wild type. A transactivation assay in tobacco protoplasts and a  chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that the expression of  long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase1 (LACS1), beta-ketoacyl CoA reductase1 (KCR1),  PASTICCINO2 (PAS2), trans-2,3-enoyl-CoA reductase (ECR), and bifunctional wax  synthase/acyl-CoA: diacylglycerol acyltransferase (WSD1) is positively regulated  by direct binding of WRI4 to their promoters. Taken together, these results  suggest that WRI4 is a transcriptional activator that specifically controls  cuticular wax biosynthesis in Arabidopsis stems.', '2016 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13248', 'Suh']

WRI4: !activates! cuticular wax biosynthesis 
WRI4: !localizes to! nuclei of tobacco leaf protoplasts 
WRI4: !upregulates! LACS1, KCR1, PAS2, ECR, WSD1 
WRI4: !binds to! promoters of LACS1, KCR1, PAS2, ECR, WSD1