OVATE gene was first identified as a key regulator of fruit shape in tomato. OVATE family proteins (OFPs) are characterized as plant-specific transcription factors and conserved in Arabidopsis, tomato, and rice. Roles of OFPs involved in plant development and growth are largely unknown. Brassinosteroids (BRs) are a class of steroid hormones involved in diverse biological functions. OsGKS2 plays a critical role in BR signaling by phosphorylating downstream components such as OsBZR1 and DLT. Here we report in rice that OsOFP8 plays a positive role in BR signaling pathway. BL treatment induced the expression of OsOFP8 and led to enhanced accumulation of OsOFP8 protein. The gain-of-function mutant Osofp8 and OsOFP8 overexpression lines showed enhanced lamina joint inclination, whereas OsOFP8 RNAi transgenic lines showed more upright leaf phenotype, which suggest that OsOFP8 is involved in BR responses. Further analyses indicated that OsGSK2 interacts with and phosphorylates OsOFP8. BRZ treatment resulted in the cytoplasmic distribution of OsOFP8, and bikinin treatment reduced the cytoplasmic accumulation of OsOFP8. Phosphorylation of OsOFP8 by OsGSK2 is needed for its nuclear export. The phospphorylated OsOFP8 shuttles to the cytoplasm and is targeted for proteasomal degradation. These results indicate that OsOFP8 is a substrate of OsGSK2 and the function of OsOFP8 in plant growth and development is at least partly through the BR signaling pathway.

OVATE gene: !regulates! fruit shape
OFPs: !characterized as! plant-specific transcription factors
BRs: !involved in! diverse biological functions
OsGKS2: !phosphorylates! downstream components
OsOFP8: !plays a positive role in! BR signaling pathway
BL treatment: !induces! OsOFP8 expression
gain-of-function mutant Osofp8: !enhances! lamina joint inclination
OsOFP8 overexpression lines: !enhances! lamina joint inclination
OsOFP8 RNAi transgenic lines: !causes! upright leaf phenotype
OsGSK2: !interacts with and phosphorylates! OsOFP8
BRZ treatment: !results in! cytoplasmic distribution of OsOFP8
bikinin treatment: !reduces! cytoplasmic accumulation of OsOFP8
OsOFP8: !shuttles to! cytoplasm
OsOFP8: !targeted for! proteasomal degradation