DNA methylation is antagonistically controlled by DNA methyltransferases and DNA demethylases. The level of DNA methylation controls plant gene expression on a global level. We have examined impacts of global changes in DNA methylation on the Arabidopsis immune system. A range of hypo-methylated mutants displayed enhanced resistance to the biotrophic pathogen Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (Hpa), whereas two hyper-methylated mutants were more susceptible to this pathogen. Subsequent characterization of the hypo-methylated nrpe1 mutant, which is impaired in RNA-directed DNA methylation, and the hyper-methylated ros1 mutant, which is affected in DNA demethylation, revealed that their opposite resistance phenotypes are associated with changes in cell wall defence and salicylic acid (SA)-dependent gene expression. Against infection by the necrotrophic pathogen Plectosphaerella cucumerina, nrpe1 showed enhanced susceptibility, which was associated with repressed sensitivity of jasmonic acid (JA)-inducible gene expression. Conversely, ros1 displayed enhanced resistance to necrotrophic pathogens, which was not associated with increased responsiveness of JA-inducible gene expression. Although nrpe1 and ros1 were unaffected in systemic acquired resistance to Hpa, they failed to develop transgenerational acquired resistance against this pathogen. Global transcriptome analysis of nrpe1 and ros1 at multiple time-points after Hpa infection revealed that 49% of the pathogenesis-related transcriptome is influenced by NRPE1- and ROS1-controlled DNA methylation. Of the 166 defence-related genes displaying augmented induction in nrpe1 and repressed induction in ros1, only 25 genes were associated with a nearby transposable element and NRPE1- and/or ROS1-controlled DNA methylation. Accordingly, we propose that the majority of NRPE1- and ROS1-dependent defence genes are regulated in trans by DNA methylation.

DNA methyltransferases: !antagonistically control! DNA demethylases
DNA methylation: !controls! plant gene expression
nrpe1 mutant: !enhances! resistance to biotrophic pathogen, !represses! sensitivity of JA-inducible gene expression
ros1 mutant: !enhances! resistance to necrotrophic pathogen, !not associated with! increased responsiveness of JA-inducible gene expression
NRPE1/ROS1: !influence! 49% of pathogenesis-related transcriptome, !regulate in trans! 166 defence-related genes