['27340941', 'Plants rely on different immune receptors to recognize pathogens and defend  against pathogen attacks. Nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat (NLR)  proteins play a major role as intracellular immune receptors. Their homeostasis  must be maintained at optimal levels in order to effectively recognize pathogens  without causing autoimmunity. Previous studies have shown that the activity of  the ubiquitin-proteasome system is essential to prevent excessive accumulation of  NLR proteins such as Suppressor of NPR1, Constitutive 1 (SNC1). Attenuation of  the ubiquitin E3 ligase SCF(CPR1) (Constitutive expressor of Pathogenesis Related  genes 1) or the E4 protein MUSE3 (Mutant, SNC1-Enhancing 3) leads to NLR  accumulation and autoimmunity. In the current study, we report the identification  of AtCDC48A as a negative regulator of NLR-mediated immunity. Plants carrying  Atcdc48A-4, a partial loss-of-function allele of AtCDC48A, exhibit dwarf  morphology and enhanced disease resistance to the oomycete pathogen  Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (H.a.) Noco2. The SNC1 level is increased in  Atcdc48A-4 plants and AtCDC48A interacts with MUSE3 in co-immunoprecipitation  experiments, supporting a role for AtCDC48A in NLR turnover. While Arabidopsis  contains four other paralogs of AtCDC48A, knockout mutants of these genes do not  show obvious immunity-related phenotypes, suggesting functional divergence within  this family. As an AAA-ATPase, AtCDC48A likely serves to process the  poly-ubiquitinated NLR substrate for final protein degradation by the 26S  proteasome.', '2016 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13251', 'Li']

Nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat (NLR) proteins: !maintain homeostasis! to prevent autoimmunity
Ubiquitin-proteasome system: !prevents accumulation of! NLR proteins
SCF(CPR1): !attenuates! ubiquitin E3 ligase
MUSE3: !interacts with! AtCDC48A
AtCDC48A: !regulates! NLR-mediated immunity
AtCDC48A: !processes! poly-ubiquitinated NLR substrate