Microspore production using endogenous developmental programs has not been well studied. The main limitation is the difficulty in identifying genes preferentially expressed in pollen grains at early stages. To overcome this limitation, we collected transcriptome data from anthers and microspore/pollen and performed meta-expression analysis. Subsequently, we identified 410 genes showing preferential expression patterns in early developing pollen samples of both japonica and indica cultivars. The expression patterns of these genes are distinguishable from genes showing pollen mother cell or tapetum-preferred expression patterns. Gene Ontology enrichment and MapMan analyses indicated that microspores in rice are closely linked with protein degradation, nucleotide metabolism, and DNA biosynthesis and regulation, while the pollen mother cell or tapetum are strongly associated with cell wall metabolism, lipid metabolism, secondary metabolism, and RNA biosynthesis and regulation. We also generated transgenic lines under the control of the promoters of eight microspore-preferred genes and confirmed the preferred expression patterns in plants using the GUS reporting system. Furthermore, cis-regulatory element analysis revealed that pollen specific elements such as POLLEN1LELAT52, and 5659BOXLELAT5659 were commonly identified in the promoter regions of eight rice genes with more frequency than estimation. Our study will provide new sights on early pollen development in rice, a model crop plant.

Gene: !affects! Protein degradation
Gene: !affects! Nucleotide metabolism
Gene: !affects! DNA biosynthesis and regulation
Gene: !affects! Cell wall metabolism
Gene: !affects! Lipid metabolism
Gene: !affects! Secondary metabolism
Gene: !affects! RNA biosynthesis and regulation
Gene: !localizes to! Microspores
Gene: !localizes to! Pollen mother cell
Gene: !localizes to! Tapetum
Gene: !enhances! GUS reporting system
Gene: !interacts with! POLLEN1LELAT52
Gene: !interacts with! 5659BOXLELAT5659