Viroids are the smallest plant pathogens consisting of a single stranded circular RNA molecule with a strong secondary structure, lacking a coat protein or any other proteins. The mechanism of viroid pathogenicity has remained unclear. Recent advances in instrumentation and data mining have made it possible to study the effects of various stresses on primary and secondary metabolisms. Here, we have utilized metabolic profiling approach to show how PSTVd infection alters tomato metabolic profile and the related pathways. Three terminal leaflets of third true leaf of 20-day-old tolerant tomato cultivar 'Moneymaker' were mechanically inoculated by PSTVd intermediate variant cDNAs and samples were taken from eighth leaf, 19days post-inoculation. Metabolites were extracted and analyzed by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and subjected to statistical data analysis. Affected pathways were identified by Pathway Tools program and were compared with microarray data previously reported. The study showed that 79 metabolites changed significantly and 23 pathways were identified in relation to these metabolites. Fourteen of these pathways were similar to those reported in other works. The altered pathways in PSTVd infected tomato leaves included, eight cutin and wax biosynthesis, seven pathways that produce defense related compounds, two energy generator pathways, three hormone biosynthesis pathways, two signal transduction pathways, and one nucleotide biosynthesis pathway. Our data on up/down-regulation of pathways supported the data produced on their corresponding gene(s) up/down-regulation.

Viroids: !alter! Tomato metabolic profile 
Stress: !affects! Primary and secondary metabolisms 
PSTVd: !alters! Cutin and wax biosynthesis 
PSTVd: !alters! Defense related compounds 
PSTVd: !alters! Energy generator pathways 
PSTVd: !alters! Hormone biosynthesis pathways 
PSTVd: !alters! Signal transduction pathways 
PSTVd: !alters! Nucleotide biosynthesis pathway 
Pathways: !compared with! Microarray data