['27402258', 'One of the plant host resistance machineries to viruses is attributed to  recessive alleles of genes encoding critical host factors for virus infection.  This type of resistance, also referred to as recessive resistance, is useful for  revealing plant-virus interactions and for breeding antivirus resistance in crop  plants. Therefore, it is important to identify a novel host factor responsible  for robust recessive resistance to plant viruses. Here, we identified a mutant  from an ethylmethane sulfonate (EMS)-mutagenized Arabidopsis population which  confers resistance to plantago asiatica mosaic virus (PlAMV, genus Potexvirus).  Based on map-based cloning and single nucleotide polymorphism analysis, we  identified a premature termination codon in a functionally unknown gene  containing a GYF domain, which binds to proline-rich sequences in eukaryotes.  Complementation analyses and robust resistance to PlAMV in a T-DNA mutant  demonstrated that this gene, named Essential for poteXvirus Accumulation 1  (EXA1), is indispensable for PlAMV infection. EXA1 contains a GYF domain and a  conserved motif for interaction with eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E  (eIF4E), and is highly conserved among monocot and dicot species. Analysis using  qRT-PCR and immunoblotting revealed that EXA1 was expressed in all tissues, and  was not transcriptionally responsive to PlAMV infection in Arabidopsis plants.  Moreover, accumulation of PlAMV and a PlAMV-derived replicon was drastically  diminished in the initially infected cells by the EXA1 deficiency. Accumulation  of two other potexviruses also decreased in exa1-1 mutant plants. Our results  provided a functional annotation to GYF domain-containing proteins by revealing  the function of the highly conserved EXA1 gene in plant-virus interactions.', '2016 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13265', 'Namba']

EXA1: !binds to! proline-rich sequences 
EXA1: !interacts with! eIF4E 
EXA1: !essential for! PlAMV infection 
EXA1: !represses! PlAMV accumulation 
EXA1: !represses! other potexvirus accumulation