Here, we compared the development of dark- and light-grown Chinese fir (Cunninghamia lanceolata) cotyledons, which synthesize chlorophyll in the dark, representing a different phenomenon from angiosperm model plants. We determined that the grana lamellar membranes were well developed in both chloroplasts and etiochloroplasts. The accumulation of thylakoid membrane protein complexes was similar between chloroplasts and etiochloroplasts. Measurement of chlorophyll fluorescence parameters indicated that photosystem II (PSII) had low photosynthetic activities, whereas the photosystem I (PSI)-driven cyclic electron flow (CEF) rate exceeded the rate of PSII-mediated photon harvesting in etiochloroplasts. Analysis of the protein contents in etiochloroplasts indicated that the light-harvesting complex II remained mostly in its monomeric conformation. The ferredoxin NADP<sup>+</sup> oxidoreductase and NADH dehydrogenase-like complexes were relatively abundantly expressed in etiochloroplasts for Chinese fir. Our transcriptome analysis contributes a global expression database for Chinese fir cotyledons, providing background information on the regulatory mechanisms of different genes involved in the development of dark- and light-grown cotyledons. In conclusion, we provide a novel description of the early developmental status of the light-dependent and light-independent photosynthetic apparatuses in gymnosperms.

grana lamellar membranes: !well developed in! chloroplasts and etiochloroplasts
thylakoid membrane protein complexes: !accumulated similarly in! chloroplasts and etiochloroplasts
PSII: !low photosynthetic activities in! etiochloroplasts
PSI-driven CEF rate: !exceeded PSII-mediated photon harvesting in! etiochloroplasts
light-harvesting complex II: !remained mostly in monomeric conformation in! etiochloroplasts
ferredoxin NADP<sup>+</sup> oxidoreductase: !abundantly expressed in! etiochloroplasts
NADH dehydrogenase-like complexes: !abundantly expressed in! etiochloroplasts