['27446127', 'ERECTA (ER) receptor-like kinase (RLK) regulates Arabidopsis thaliana organ  growth, and inflorescence and stomatal development by interacting with the  ERECTA-family genes (ERf) paralogs, ER-like 1 (ERL1) and ERL2, and the  receptor-like protein (RLP) TOO MANY MOUTHS (TMM). ER also controls immune  responses and resistance to pathogens such as the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae  pv. tomato DC3000 (Pto) and the necrotrophic fungus Plectosphaerella cucumerina  BMM (PcBMM). We found that er null-mutant plants overexpressing an ER  dominant-negative version lacking the cytoplasmic kinase domain (ERDeltaK) showed an  enhanced susceptibility to PcBMM, suggesting that ERDeltaK associates and forms  inactive complexes with additional RLKs/RLPs required for PcBMM resistance.  Genetic analyses demonstrated that ER acts in a combinatorial specific manner  with ERL1, ERL2, and TMM to control PcBMM resistance. Moreover, BAK1  (BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1-associated kinase 1) RLK, which together with  ERf/TMM regulates stomatal patterning and resistance to Pto, was also found to  have an unequal contribution with ER in regulating immune responses and  resistance to PcBMM. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments in Nicotiana benthamiana  further demonstrated BAK1-ER protein interaction. The secreted epidermal pattern  factor peptides (EPF1 and EPF2), which are perceived by ERf members to specify  stomatal patterning, do not seem to regulate ER-mediated immunity to PcBMM, since  their inducible overexpression in A. thaliana did not impact on PcBMM resistance.  Our results indicate that the multiproteic receptorsome formed by ERf, TMM and  BAK1 modulates A. thaliana resistance to PcBMM, and suggest that the cues  underlying ERf/TMM/BAK1-mediated immune responses are distinct from those  regulating stomatal pattering.', '2016', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2016.00897', 'Molina']

ER: !interacts with! ERL1 
ER: !interacts with! ERL2 
ER: !interacts with! TMM 
ER: !regulates! organ growth 
ER: !regulates! inflorescence development 
ER: !regulates! stomatal development 
ER: !regulates! immune responses 
ER: !regulates! resistance to pathogens 
ER: !forms inactive complexes with! additional RLKs/RLPs 
ER: !acts in a combinatorial specific manner with! ERL1, ERL2, and TMM 
BAK1: !unequal contribution with! ER 
BAK1: !interacts with! ER 
EPF1: !does not regulate! ER-mediated immunity 
EPF2: !does not regulate! ER-mediated immunity