['27472382', 'Pollen-stigma interactions are essential for pollen germination. The highly  regulated process of pollen germination includes pollen adhesion, hydration, and  germination on the stigma. However, the internal signaling of pollen that  regulates pollen-stigma interactions is poorly understood. KINbetagamma is a  plant-specific subunit of the SNF1-related protein kinase 1 complex which plays  important roles in the regulation of plant development. Here, we showed that  KINbetagamma was a cytoplasm- and nucleus-localized protein in the vegetative cells of  pollen grains in Arabidopsis. The pollen of the Arabidopsis kinbetagamma mutant could  not germinate on stigma, although it germinated normally in vitro. Further  analysis revealed the hydration of kinbetagamma mutant pollen on the stigma was  compromised. However, adding water to the stigma promoted the germination of the  mutant pollen in vivo, suggesting that the compromised hydration of the mutant  pollen led to its defective germination. In kinbetagamma mutant pollen, the structure of  the mitochondria and peroxisomes was destroyed, and their numbers were  significantly reduced compared with those in the wild type. Furthermore, we found  that the kinbetagamma mutant exhibited reduced levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS)  in pollen. The addition of H2O2 in vitro partially compensated for the reduced  water absorption of the mutant pollen, and reducing ROS levels in pollen by  overexpressing Arabidopsis CATALASE 3 resulted in compromised hydration of pollen  on the stigma. These results indicate that Arabidopsis KINbetagamma is critical for the  regulation of ROS levels by mediating the biogenesis of mitochondria and  peroxisomes in pollen, which is required for pollen-stigma interactions during  pollination.', '2016 Jul', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1006228', 'Zhang']

KINbetagamma: !localizes to! cytoplasm and nucleus 
KINbetagamma: !affects! pollen germination 
KINbetagamma: !enhances! hydration of pollen on stigma 
KINbetagamma: !synthesizes! mitochondria and peroxisomes 
KINbetagamma: !regulates! ROS levels