Drought decreases crop productivity more than any other type of environmental stress. Transcription factors (TFs) play crucial roles in regulating plant abiotic stress responses. The Arabidopsis thaliana gene DREB1A/CBF3, encoding a stress-inducible TF, was introduced into Salvia miltiorrhiza Ectopic expression of AtDREB1A resulted in increased drought tolerance, and transgenic lines had higher relative water content and Chl content, and exhibited an increased photosynthetic rate when subjected to drought stress. AtDREB1A transgenic plants generally displayed lower malondialdehyde (MDA), but higher superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT) and peroxidase (POD) activities under drought stress. In particular, plants with ectopic AtDREB1A expression under the control of the stress-induced RD29A promoter exhibited more tolerance to drought compared with p35S::AtDREB1A transgenic plants, without growth inhibition or phenotypic aberrations. Differential gene expression profiling of wild-type and pRD29A::AtDREB1A transgenic plants following drought stress revealed that the expression levels of various genes associated with the stress response, photosynthesis, signaling, carbohydrate metabolism and protein protection were substantially higher in transgenic plants. In addition, the amount of salvianolic acids and tanshinones was significantly elevated in AtDREB1A transgenic S. miltiorrhiza roots, and most of the genes in the related biosynthetic pathways were up-regulated. Together, these results demonstrated that inducing the expression of a TF can effectively regulate multiple genes in the stress response pathways and significantly improve the resistance of plants to abiotic stresses. Our results also suggest that genetic manipulation of a TF can improve production of valuable secondary metabolites by regulating genes in associated pathways.

DREB1A/CBF3: !enhances! drought tolerance 
AtDREB1A: !induces! stress-response genes 
AtDREB1A: !regulates! photosynthesis 
AtDREB1A: !regulates! signaling 
AtDREB1A: !regulates! carbohydrate metabolism 
AtDREB1A: !regulates! protein protection 
AtDREB1A: !increases! salvianolic acids 
AtDREB1A: !increases! tanshinones 
AtDREB1A: !regulates! biosynthetic pathways