['27498030', 'Specifier proteins are important components of the glucosinolate-myrosinase  system, which mediate plant defense against herbivory and pathogen attacks. Upon  tissue disruption, glucosinolates are hydrolyzed to instable aglucones by  myrosinases, and then aglucones will rearrange to form defensive isothiocyanates.  Specifier proteins can redirect this reaction to form other products, such as  simple nitriles, epithionitriles and organic thiocyanates instead of  isothiocyanates based on the side chain structure of glucosinolate and the type  of the specifier proteins. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism underlying the  different product spectrums of various specifier proteins was not fully  understood. Here in this study, we solved the crystal structure of the  Epithiospecifier Protein, ESP from Arabidopsis thaliana (AtESP) at 2.3 A  resolution. Structural comparisons with the previously solved structure of  thiocyanate forming protein, TFP from Thlaspi arvense (TaTFP) reveal that AtESP  shows a dimerization pattern different from TaTFP. Moreover, AtESP harbors a  slightly larger active site pocket than TaTFP and several residues around the  active site are different between the two proteins, which might account for the  different product spectrums of the two proteins. Together, our structural study  provides important insights into the molecular mechanisms of specifier proteins  and shed light on the basis of their different product spectrums.', '2016 Sep 16', 'Biochem Biophys Res Commun', '10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.08.019', 'Feng']

Specifier proteins: !mediate! Plant defense 
Glucosinolates: !hydrolyzed to! Instable aglucones 
Myrosinases: !hydrolyze! Glucosinolates 
Aglucones: !rearrange to form! Defensive isothiocyanates 
Specifier proteins: !redirect! Reaction 
Epithiospecifier Protein (AtESP): !dimerizes differently than! Thiocyanate forming protein (TaTFP) 
AtESP: !harbors! Larger active site pocket 
AtESP: !has different residues around! Active site