Endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) are well known in mammalians and yeast and plays an essential role in the formation of multi-vesicular bodies. Accumulating evidence has shown that ESCRT proteins contribute to proper plant development. CHMP7 (charged multi-vesicular body protein 7) is an ESCRT-III-related protein and functions in the endosomal sorting pathway in humans. However, its function in plants has not been explored in detail. In this study, we isolate the putative homolog of CHMP7 from rapeseed, BnCHMP7, which contains eight exons and encodes a protein consisting of 423 amino acid residues. Compared with the wild-type, overexpression of BnCHMP7 in Arabidopsis disturbs plant growth and decreases seed yield. Moreover, the transgenic plants also display early leaf senescence and hypersensitivity to dark treatment due to defects in autophagic degradation. Further study showed that BnCHMP7 is highly expressed in leaves and that YFP-BnCHMP7 is predominantly localized in endosome. Compared with human CHMP7, we found that BnCHMP7 not only interacts with ESCRT-III subunits SNF7.2 (CHMP4B), but also with VPS2.2 and CHMP1B. As expected, microarray analysis revealed that the expression of ESCRT transport genes is significantly affected. Additionally, the expression of some genes that are involved in senescence, protein synthesis and protein degradation is also altered in BnCHMP7-overexpressing plants. Taken together, BnCHMP7 encodes an endosome-localized protein, which causes dwarfism and leaf senescence as an ESCRT-III-related component.

CHMP7: !encodes! protein
BnCHMP7: !localizes to! endosome
BnCHMP7: !interacts with! SNF7.2
BnCHMP7: !interacts with! VPS2.2
BnCHMP7: !interacts with! CHMP1B
BnCHMP7: !affects! plant growth
BnCHMP7: !affects! seed yield
BnCHMP7: !enhances! leaf senescence
BnCHMP7: !enhances! hypersensitivity to dark treatment
BnCHMP7: !affects! expression of ESCRT transport genes
BnCHMP7: !affects! expression of senescence genes
BnCHMP7: !affects! expression of protein synthesis genes
BnCHMP7: !affects! expression of protein degradation genes