Pectins are one of the main components of plant cell walls. They are secreted to the wall as highly methylesterified forms that can be de-esterified by pectin methylesterases (PMEs). The degree of methylesterification of pectins changes during development, PMEs are involved in the cell wall remodeling that occurs during diverse plant developmental processes. Nevertheless, the functional meaning of pectin-related wall remodeling in different cell types and processes remains unclear. In vivo, the microspore follows the gametophytic pathway and differentiates to form the pollen grain. In vitro, the microspore can be reprogrammed by stress treatments becoming a totipotent cell that starts to proliferate and follows the embryogenic pathway, a process known as microspore embryogenesis. To investigate if the change of developmental programme of the microspore towards embryogenesis involves changes in pectin esterification levels, which would cause the cell wall remodeling during the process, in the present study, dynamics of PME expression and degrees of pectin esterification have been analysed during microspore embryogenesis and compared with the gametophytic development, in Brassica napus. A multidisciplinary approach has been adopted including BnPME gene expression analysis by quantitative RT-PCR, fluorescence in situ hybridization, immuno-dot-blot and immunofluorescence with JIM5 and JIM7 antibodies to reveal low and highly-methylesterified pectins. The results showed that cell differentiation at advanced developmental stages involved induction of BnPME expression and pectin de-esterification, processes that were also detected in zygotic embryos, providing additional evidence that microspore embryogenesis mimics zygotic embryogenesis. By contrast, early microspore embryogenesis, totipotency and proliferation were associated with low expression of BnPME and high levels of esterified pectins. The results show that the change of developmental programme of the microspore involves changes in pectin esterification associated with proliferation and differentiation events, which may cause the cell wall remodeling during the process. The findings indicate pectin-related modifications in the cell wall during microspore embryogenesis, providing new insights into the role of pectin esterification and cell wall configuration in microspore totipotency, embryogenesis induction and progression.

PME: !affects! Pectin methylesterification 
Pectin: !localizes to! Plant cell walls 
PME: !enhances! Cell wall remodeling 
Microspore: !follows! Gametophytic/Embryogenic pathways 
Stress treatments: !reprograms! Microspore 
PME: !induces! Pectin de-esterification 
Pectin: !associated with! Proliferation/Differentiation events