Genome-wide screening of Saccharomyces cerevisiae revealed that signaling pathways related to the alkaline pH stress contribute to resistance to plant antimicrobial peptide, Pn-AMP1. Plant antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are considered to be promising candidates for controlling phytopathogens. Pn-AMP1 is a hevein-type plant AMP that shows potent and broad-spectrum antifungal activity. Genome-wide chemogenomic screening was performed using heterozygous and homozygous diploid deletion pools of Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a chemogenetic model system to identify genes whose deletion conferred enhanced sensitivity to Pn-AMP1. This assay identified 44 deletion strains with fitness defects in the presence of Pn-AMP1. Strong fitness defects were observed in strains with deletions of genes encoding components of several pathways and complex known to participate in the adaptive response to alkaline pH stress, including the cell wall integrity (CWI), calcineurin/Crz1, Rim101, SNF1 pathways and endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT complex). Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of these genes revealed that the most highly overrepresented GO term was "cellular response to alkaline pH". We found that 32 of the 44 deletion strains tested (72 %) showed significant growth defects compared with their wild type at alkaline pH. Furthermore, 9 deletion strains (20 %) exhibited enhanced sensitivity to Pn-AMP1 at ambient pH compared to acidic pH. Although several hundred plant AMPs have been reported, their modes of action remain largely uncharacterized. This study demonstrates that the signaling pathways that coordinate the adaptive response to alkaline pH also confer resistance to a hevein-type plant AMP in S. cerevisiae. Our findings have broad implications for the design of novel and potent antifungal agents.

Cell wall integrity: !contributes to! resistance to Pn-AMP1
Calcineurin/Crz1: !contributes to! resistance to Pn-AMP1
Rim101: !contributes to! resistance to Pn-AMP1
SNF1 pathways: !contributes to! resistance to Pn-AMP1
ESCRT complex: !contributes to! resistance to Pn-AMP1
Alkaline pH: !affects! fitness of deletion strains
Alkaline pH: !enhances! sensitivity to Pn-AMP1