Camelina sativa is currently being embraced as a viable industrial bio-platform crop due to a number of desirable agronomic attributes and the unique fatty acid profile of the seed oil that has applications for food, feed and biofuel. The recent completion of the reference genome sequence of C. sativa identified a young hexaploid genome. To complement this work, we have generated a genome-wide developmental transcriptome map by RNA sequencing of 12 different tissues covering major developmental stages during the life cycle of C. sativa. We have generated a digital atlas of this comprehensive transcriptome resource that enables interactive visualization of expression data through a searchable database of electronic fluorescent pictographs (eFP browser). An analysis of this dataset supported expression of 88% of the annotated genes in C. sativa and provided a global overview of the complex architecture of temporal and spatial gene expression patterns active during development. Conventional differential gene expression analysis combined with weighted gene expression network analysis uncovered similarities as well as differences in gene expression patterns between different tissues and identified tissue-specific genes and network modules. A high-quality census of transcription factors, analysis of alternative splicing and tissue-specific genome dominance provided insight into the transcriptional dynamics and sub-genome interplay among the well-preserved triplicated repertoire of homeologous loci. The comprehensive transcriptome atlas in combination with the reference genome sequence provides a powerful resource for genomics research which can be leveraged to identify functional associations between genes and understand the regulatory networks underlying developmental processes.

Gene: !affects! Developmental Process
Gene: !localizes to! Tissue
Gene: !interacts with! Network Module
Gene: !enhances! Expression
Gene: !represses! Genome Dominance
Gene: !synthesizes! Transcription Factor