Xanthomonas euvesicatoria is the causal agent of bacterial spot disease in pepper and tomato. X. euvesicatoria bacteria interfere with plant cellular processes by injecting effector proteins into host cells through the type III secretion (T3S) system. About 35 T3S effectors have been identified in X. euvesicatoria 85-10, and a few of them were implicated in suppression of pattern-triggered immunity (PTI). We used an Arabidopsis thaliana pathogen-free protoplast-based assay to identify X. euvesicatoria 85-10 effectors that interfere with PTI signaling induced by the bacterial peptide flg22. Of 33 tested effectors, 17 inhibited activation of a PTI-inducible promoter. Among them, nine effectors also interfered with activation of an abscisic acid-inducible promoter. However, effectors that inhibited flg22-induced signaling did not affect phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases acting downstream of flg22 perception. Further investigation of selected effectors revealed that XopAJ, XopE2, and XopF2 inhibited activation of a PTI-inducible promoter by the bacterial peptide elf18 in Arabidopsis protoplasts and by flg22 in tomato protoplasts. The effectors XopF2, XopE2, XopAP, XopAE, XopH, and XopAJ inhibited flg22-induced callose deposition in planta and enhanced disease symptoms caused by attenuated Pseudomonas syringae bacteria. Finally, selected effectors were found to localize to various plant subcellular compartments. These results indicate that X. euvesicatoria bacteria utilize multiple T3S effectors to suppress flg22-induced signaling acting downstream or in parallel to MAP kinase cascades and suggest they act through different molecular mechanisms.

XopAJ: !inhibits! PTI-inducible promoter 
XopE2: !inhibits! PTI-inducible promoter 
XopF2: !inhibits! PTI-inducible promoter 
XopF2: !inhibits! callose deposition 
XopE2: !inhibits! callose deposition 
XopAP: !inhibits! callose deposition 
XopAE: !inhibits! callose deposition 
XopH: !inhibits! callose deposition 
XopAJ: !inhibits! callose deposition 
XopAJ: !enhances! disease symptoms 
XopE2: !localizes to! plant subcellular compartments 
XopF2: !localizes to! plant subcellular compartments 
XopAP: !localizes to! plant subcellular compartments 
XopAE: !localizes to! plant subcellular compartments 
XopH: !localizes to! plant subcellular compartments