['27528686', 'Plants experience hyperosmotic stress when faced with saline soils and possibly  with drought stress, but it is currently unclear how plant roots perceive this  stress in an environment of dynamic water availabilities. Hyperosmotic stress  induces a rapid rise in intracellular Ca(2+) concentrations ([Ca(2+)]i) in  plants, and this Ca(2+) response may reflect the activities of osmo-sensory  components. Here, we find in the reference plant Arabidopsis thaliana that the  rapid hyperosmotic-induced Ca(2+) response exhibited enhanced response magnitudes  after preexposure to an intermediate hyperosmotic stress. We term this phenomenon  "osmo-sensory potentiation." The initial sensing and potentiation occurred in  intact plants as well as in roots. Having established a quantitative  understanding of wild-type responses, we investigated effects of pharmacological  inhibitors and candidate channel/transporter mutants. Quintuple mechano-sensitive  channels of small conductance-like (MSL) plasma membrane-targeted channel mutants  as well as double mid1-complementing activity (MCA) channel mutants did not  affect the response. Interestingly, however, double mutations in the plastid K(+)  exchange antiporter (KEA) transporters kea1kea2 and a single mutation that does  not visibly affect chloroplast structure, kea3, impaired the rapid  hyperosmotic-induced Ca(2+) responses. These mutations did not significantly  affect sensory potentiation of the response. These findings suggest that plastids  may play an important role in early steps mediating the response to hyperosmotic  stimuli. Together, these findings demonstrate that the plant osmo-sensory  components necessary to generate rapid osmotic-induced Ca(2+) responses remain  responsive under varying osmolarities, endowing plants with the ability to  perceive the dynamic intensities of water limitation imposed by osmotic stress.', '2016 Aug 30', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1519555113', 'Schroeder']

Hyperosmotic stress: !induces! rapid rise in intracellular Ca(2+) concentrations 
MSL channel mutants: !do not affect! response 
KEA transporters: !impaired! rapid hyperosmotic-induced Ca(2+) responses 
Plastids: !may play an important role in! early steps mediating the response to hyperosmotic stimuli