Flavonoids are secondary metabolites that play significant roles in plant cells. In particular, polymethoxy flavonoids (PMFs), including nobiletin, have been reported to exhibit various health-supporting properties such as anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and anti-pathogenic properties. However, it is difficult to utilize PMFs for medicinal and dietary use because plant cells contain small amounts of these compounds. Biosynthesis of PMFs in plant cells is carried out by the methylation of hydroxyl groups of flavonoids by O-methyltransferases (FOMT), and many kinds of FOMTs with different levels of substrate specificity and regioselectivity are cooperatively involved in this biosynthesis. In this study, we isolated five genes encoding FOMT (CdFOMT1, 3, 4, 5, and 6) from Citrus depressa, which is known to accumulate nobiletin in the peels of its fruits. The genes encoded Mg(2+)-independent O-methyltransferases and showed high amino acid sequence similarity (60-95 %) with higher plant flavonoid O-methyltransferases. One of these genes is CdFOMT5, which was successfully expressed as a soluble homodimer enzyme in Escherichia coli. The molecular mass of the recombinant CdFOMT5 subunit was 42.0 kDa including a 6× histidine tag. The enzyme exhibited O-methyltransferase activity for quercetin, naringenin, (-)-epicatechin, and equol using S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) as a methyl donor, and its optimal pH and temperature were pH 7.0 and 45 °C, respectively. The recombinant CdFOMT5 demonstrated methylation activity for the 3-, 5-, 6-, and 7-hydroxyl groups of flavones, and 3,3',5,7-tetra-O-methylated quercetin was synthesized from quercetin as a final product of the whole cell reaction system. Thus, CdFOMT5 is a O-methyltransferase possessing a broad range of substrate specificity and regioselectivity for flavonoids. Five FOMT genes were isolated from C. depressa, and their nucleotide sequences were determined. CdFOMT5 was successfully expressed in E. coli cells, and the enzymatic properties of the recombinant protein were characterized. Recombinant CdFOMT5 indicated O-methyltransferase activity for many flavonoids and a broad regioselectivity for quercetin as a substrate. Whole-cell biocatalysis using CdFOMT5 expressed in E. coli cells was performed using quercetin as a substrate, and 3,3',5,7-tetramethylated quercetin was obtained as the final product.

C. depressa: !isolates! Five FOMT genes 
FOMT genes: !encode! Mg(2+)-independent O-methyltransferases 
CdFOMT5: !expresses in! E. coli cells 
CdFOMT5: !exhibits! O-methyltransferase activity 
CdFOMT5: !synthesizes! 3,3',5,7-tetramethylated quercetin