['27543091', 'Because the plant cell wall provides the first line of defense against biotic and  abiotic assaults, its functional integrity needs to be maintained under stress  conditions. Through a phenotype-based compound screening approach, we identified  a novel cellulose synthase inhibitor, designated C17. C17 administration depletes  cellulose synthase complexes from the plasma membrane in Arabidopsis thaliana,  resulting in anisotropic cell elongation and a weak cell wall. Surprisingly, in  addition to mutations in CELLULOSE SYNTHASE1 (CESA1) and CESA3, a forward genetic  screen identified two independent defective genes encoding pentatricopeptide  repeat (PPR)-like proteins (CELL WALL MAINTAINER1 [CWM1] and CWM2) as conferring  tolerance to C17. Functional analysis revealed that mutations in these PPR  proteins resulted in defective cytochrome c maturation and activation of  mitochondrial retrograde signaling, as evidenced by the induction of an  alternative oxidase. These mitochondrial perturbations increased tolerance to  cell wall damage induced by cellulose deficiency. Likewise, administration of  antimycin A, an inhibitor of mitochondrial complex III, resulted in tolerance  toward C17. The C17 tolerance of cwm2 was partially lost upon depletion of the  mitochondrial retrograde regulator ANAC017, demonstrating that ANAC017 links  mitochondrial dysfunction with the cell wall. In view of mitochondria being a  major target of a variety of stresses, our data indicate that plant cells might  modulate mitochondrial activity to maintain a functional cell wall when subjected  to stresses.', '2016 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.16.00540', 'ORCID:']

C17: !depletes! cellulose synthase complexes
CESA1/3: !confer! tolerance to C17
CWM1/2: !confer! tolerance to C17
CWM2: !results in! defective cytochrome c maturation
Mitochondrial retrograde signaling: !induced by! defective cytochrome c maturation
Alternative oxidase: !induced by! mitochondrial retrograde signaling
Antimycin A: !increases! tolerance to C17
ANAC017: !links! mitochondrial dysfunction and cell wall
Mitochondria: !target of! stresses