['27655366', 'Plants overexpressing AtHSCB and hscb knockdown mutants showed altered iron  homeostasis. The overexpression of AtHSCB led to activation of the iron uptake  system and iron accumulation in roots without concomitant transport to shoots,  resulting in reduced iron content in the aerial parts of plants. By contrast,  hscb knockdown mutants presented the opposite phenotype, with iron accumulation  in shoots despite the reduced levels of iron uptake in roots. AtHSCB play a key  role in iron metabolism, probably taking part in the control of iron  translocation from roots to shoots. Many aspects of plant iron metabolism remain  obscure. The most known and studied homeostatic mechanism is the control of iron  uptake in the roots by shoots. Nevertheless, this mechanism likely involves  various unknown sensors and unidentified signals sent from one tissue to another  which need to be identified. Here, we characterized Arabidopsis thaliana plants  overexpressing AtHSCB, encoding a mitochondrial cochaperone involved in [Fe-S]  cluster biosynthesis, and hscb knockdown mutants, which exhibit altered  shoot/root Fe partitioning. Overexpression of AtHSCB induced an increase in root  iron uptake and content along with iron deficiency in shoots. Conversely, hscb  knockdown mutants exhibited increased iron accumulation in shoots and reduced  iron uptake in roots. Different experiments, including foliar iron application,  citrate supplementation and iron deficiency treatment, indicate that the  shoot-directed control of iron uptake in roots functions properly in these lines,  implying that [Fe-S] clusters are not involved in this regulatory mechanism. The  most likely explanation is that both lines have altered Fe transport from roots  to shoots. This could be consistent with a defect in a homeostatic mechanism  operating at the root-to-shoot translocation level, which would be independent of  the shoot control over root iron deficiency responses. In summary, the phenotypes  of these plants indicate that AtHSCB plays a role in iron metabolism.', '2016 Nov', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-016-0537-9', 'Gomez-Casati']

AtHSCB: !activates! Iron uptake system 
AtHSCB: !controls! Iron translocation from roots to shoots 
hscb knockdown mutants: !increases! Iron accumulation in shoots 
hscb knockdown mutants: !reduces! Iron uptake in roots