Multidrug and toxic compound extrusion (MATE) transporter proteins are present in all organisms. Although the functions of some MATE gene family members have been studied in plants, few studies have investigated the gene expansion patterns, functional divergence, or the effects of positive selection. Forty-five MATE genes from rice and 56 from Arabidopsis were identified and grouped into four subfamilies. MATE family genes have similar exon-intron structures in rice and Arabidopsis; MATE gene structures are conserved in each subfamily but differ among subfamilies. In both species, the MATE gene family has expanded mainly through tandem and segmental duplications. A transcriptome atlas showed considerable differences in expression among the genes, in terms of transcript abundance and expression patterns under normal growth conditions, indicating wide functional divergence in this family. In both rice and Arabidopsis, the MATE genes showed consistent functional divergence trends, with highly significant Type-I divergence in each subfamily, while Type-II divergence mainly occurred in subfamily III. The Type-II coefficients between rice subfamilies I/III, II/III, and IV/III were all significantly greater than zero, while only the Type-II coefficient between Arabidopsis IV/III subfamilies was significantly greater than zero. A site-specific model analysis indicated that MATE genes have relatively conserved evolutionary trends. A branch-site model suggested that the extent of positive selection on each subfamily of rice and Arabidopsis was different: subfamily II of Arabidopsis showed higher positive selection than other subfamilies, whereas in rice, positive selection was highest in subfamily III. In addition, the analyses identified 18 rice sites and 7 Arabidopsis sites that were responsible for positive selection and for Type-I and Type-II functional divergence; there were no common sites between rice and Arabidopsis. Five coevolving amino acid sites were identified in rice and three in Arabidopsis; these sites might have important roles in maintaining local structural stability and protein functional domains. We demonstrate that the MATE gene family expanded through tandem and segmental duplication in both rice and Arabidopsis. Overall, the results of our analyses contribute to improved understanding of the molecular evolution and functions of the MATE gene family in plants.

MATE gene family: !expanded through! tandem and segmental duplication 
rice MATE genes: !showed! Type-I divergence 
Arabidopsis MATE genes: !showed! Type-II divergence 
rice subfamily II: !showed higher! positive selection 
Arabidopsis subfamily II: !showed higher! positive selection 
rice sites: !responsible for! positive selection 
Arabidopsis sites: !responsible for! positive selection