The identification of dynamic protein phosphorylation events is critical for understanding kinase/phosphatase-regulated signaling pathways. To date, protein phosphorylation and kinase expression have been examined independently in photosynthetic organisms. Here we present a method to study the global kinome and phosphoproteome in tandem in a model photosynthetic organism, the alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Chlamydomonas), using mass spectrometry-based label-free proteomics. A dual enrichment strategy targets intact protein kinases via capture on immobilized multiplexed inhibitor beads with subsequent proteolytic digestion of unbound proteins and peptide-based phosphorylation enrichment. To increase depth of coverage, both data-dependent and data-independent (via SWATH, Sequential Windowed Acquisition of All Theoretical Fragment Ion Mass Spectra) mass spectrometric acquisitions were performed to obtain a more than 50% increase in coverage of the enriched Chlamydomonas kinome over coverage found with no enrichment. The quantitative phosphoproteomic dataset yielded 2250 phosphopeptides and 1314 localized phosphosites with excellent reproducibility across biological replicates (90% of quantified sites with coefficient of variation below 11%). This approach enables simultaneous investigation of kinases and phosphorylation events at the global level to facilitate understanding of kinase networks and their influence in cell signaling events.

Chlamydomonas: !enriched by! dual enrichment strategy 
dual enrichment strategy: !targets! intact protein kinases 
intact protein kinases: !captured on! immobilized multiplexed inhibitor beads 
immobilized multiplexed inhibitor beads: !followed by! proteolytic digestion of unbound proteins 
proteolytic digestion: !and! peptide-based phosphorylation enrichment 
data-dependent and data-independent mass spectrometry: !increase! depth of coverage 
quantitative phosphoproteomic dataset: !yields! 2250 phosphopeptides and 1314 localized phosphosites 
coefficient of variation: !below! 11%