Nonspecific lipid transfer proteins reversibly bind different types of lipid molecules in a hydrophobic cavity. They facilitate phospholipid transfer between membranes in vitro, play a role in cuticle and possibly in suberin formation, and might be involved in plant pathogen defense signaling. This study focuses on the role of the lipid transfer protein AtLTPI-4 in crown gall development. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) crown gall tumors, which develop upon infection with the virulent Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain C58, highly expressed AtLTPI-4 Crown galls of the atltpI-4 loss-of-function mutant were much smaller compared with those of wild-type plants. The gene expression pattern and localization of the protein to the plasma membrane pointed to a function of AtLTPI-4 in cell wall suberization. Since Arabidopsis crown galls are covered by a suberin-containing periderm instead of a cuticle, we analyzed the suberin composition of crown galls and found a reduction in the amounts of long-chain fatty acids (C<sub>18:0</sub>) in the atltpI-4 mutant. To demonstrate the impact of AtLtpI-4 on extracellular lipid composition, we expressed the protein in Arabidopsis epidermis cells. This led to a significant increase in the very-long-chain fatty acids C<sub>24</sub> and C<sub>26</sub> in the cuticular wax fraction. Homology modeling and lipid-protein-overlay assays showed that AtLtpI-4 protein can bind these very-long-chain fatty acids. Thus, AtLtpI-4 protein may facilitate the transfer of long-chain as well as very-long-chain fatty acids into the apoplast, depending on the cell type in which it is expressed. In crown galls, which endogenously express AtLtpI-4, it is involved in suberin formation.

AtLTPI-4: !facilitates! phospholipid transfer 
AtLTPI-4: !plays a role in! cuticle formation 
AtLTPI-4: !involved in! plant pathogen defense signaling 
AtLTPI-4: !reduces! C18:0 fatty acids 
AtLTPI-4: !increases! C24 and C26 fatty acids 
AtLTPI-4: !binds! very-long-chain fatty acids 
AtLTPI-4: !involved in! suberin formation