Hypoxic root growth in maize (Zea mays) is influenced by the expression of phytoglobins (ZmPgbs). Relative to the wild type, suppression of ZmPgb1.1 or ZmPgb1.2 inhibits the growth of roots exposed to 4% oxygen, causing structural abnormalities in the root apical meristems. These effects were accompanied by increasing levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), possibly through the transcriptional induction of four Respiratory Burst Oxidase Homologs TUNEL-positive nuclei in meristematic cells indicated the involvement of programmed cell death (PCD) in the process. These cells also accumulated nitric oxide and stained heavily for ethylene biosynthetic transcripts. A sharp increase in the expression level of several 1-aminocyclopropane synthase (ZmAcs2, ZmAcs6, and ZmAcs7), 1-aminocyclopropane oxidase (Aco15, Aco20, Aco31, and Aco35), and ethylene-responsive (ZmErf2 and ZmEbf1) genes was observed in hypoxic ZmPgb-suppressing roots, which overproduced ethylene. Inhibiting ROS synthesis with diphenyleneiodonium or ethylene perception with 1-methylcyclopropene suppressed PCD, increased BAX inhibitor-1, an effective attenuator of the death programs in eukaryotes, and restored root growth. Hypoxic roots overexpressing ZmPgbs had the lowest level of ethylene and showed a reduction in ROS staining and TUNEL-positive nuclei in the meristematic cells. These roots retained functional meristems and exhibited the highest growth performance when subjected to hypoxic conditions. Collectively, these results suggest a novel function of Pgbs in protecting root apical meristems from hypoxia-induced PCD through mechanisms initiated by nitric oxide and mediated by ethylene via ROS.

ZmPgb1.1: !inhibits! root growth
ZmPgb1.2: !inhibits! root growth
ROS: !induces! PCD
Nitric oxide: !accumulates in! meristematic cells
ZmAcs2: !increases expression of! 1-aminocyclopropane synthase
ZmAcs6: !increases expression of! 1-aminocyclopropane synthase
ZmAcs7: !increases expression of! 1-aminocyclopropane synthase
Aco15: !increases expression of! 1-aminocyclopropane oxidase
Aco20: !increases expression of! 1-aminocyclopropane oxidase
Aco31: !increases expression of! 1-aminocyclopropane oxidase
Aco35: !increases expression of! 1-aminocyclopropane oxidase
ZmErf2: !increases expression of! ethylene-responsive
ZmEbf1: !increases expression of! ethylene-responsive
Diphenyleneiodonium: !inhibits! ROS