Protease inhibitors and their cognate proteases regulate growth, development and defense. Serine protease inhibitors (serpins) constitute a large family of genes in most metazoans and plants. Drosophila NECROTIC (NEC) gene and its homologues in the mammalian system are well-characterized serpins, which play a role in regulating proteases that participate in cell death pathways. Although the Arabidopsis genome contains several serpin homologs, biological function is not known for most of them. Here we show that two Arabidopsis serpins, AtSRP4 and AtSRP5, are closest sequence homologue of Drosophila NEC protein, and are involved in stress-induced cell death and defense. Expression of both AtSRP4 and AtSRP5 genes induced upon ultra-violet (UV)-treatment and inoculation with avirulent pathogens. The knockout mutants and amiRNA lines of AtSRP4 and AtSRP5 exaggerated UV- and hypersensitive response (HR)-induced cell death. Over-expression of AtSRP4 reduced UV- and HR-induced cell death. Mutants of AtSRP4 and AtSRP5 suppressed whereas over-expression of AtSRP4 supported the growth of bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 carrying the AvrRpt2 effector, but not other avirulent or virulent pathogens. Results altogether identified AtSRP4 and AtSRP5 as negative regulators of stress-induced cell death and AvrRpt2-triggered immunity; however, the influence of AtSRP4 was more prominent than AtSRP5.

Protease inhibitors: !regulate! growth, development and defense
Serpins: !constitute! a large family of genes
Drosophila NECROTIC gene: !plays a role in! regulating proteases
AtSRP4 and AtSRP5: !are closest sequence homologue of! Drosophila NEC protein
AtSRP4 and AtSRP5: !are involved in! stress-induced cell death and defense
AtSRP4 and AtSRP5: !are expressed upon! ultra-violet (UV)-treatment and inoculation with avirulent pathogens
AtSRP4 and AtSRP5: !exaggerate! UV- and hypersensitive response (HR)-induced cell death
AtSRP4: !reduces! UV- and HR-induced cell death
AtSRP4 and AtSRP5: !suppress! growth of bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 carrying the AvrRpt2 effector
AtSRP4: !is more prominent than! AtSRP5