Phytoene synthase (PSY) catalyzes the highly regulated, frequently rate-limiting synthesis of the first biosynthetically formed carotene. While PSY constitutes a small gene family in most plant taxa, the Brassicaceae, including Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), predominantly possess a single PSY gene. This monogenic situation is compensated by the differential expression of two alternative splice variants (ASV), which differ in length and in the exon/intron retention of their 5'UTRs. ASV1 contains a long 5'UTR (untranslated region) and is involved in developmentally regulated carotenoid formation, such as during deetiolation. ASV2 contains a short 5'UTR and is preferentially induced when an immediate increase in the carotenoid pathway flux is required, such as under salt stress or upon sudden light intensity changes. We show that the long 5'UTR of ASV1 is capable of attenuating the translational activity in response to high carotenoid pathway fluxes. This function resides in a defined 5'UTR stretch with two predicted interconvertible RNA conformations, as known from riboswitches, which might act as a flux sensor. The translation-inhibitory structure is absent from the short 5'UTR of ASV2 allowing to bypass translational inhibition under conditions requiring rapidly increased pathway fluxes. The mechanism is not found in the rice (Oryza sativa) PSY1 5'UTR, consistent with the prevalence of transcriptional control mechanisms in taxa with multiple PSY genes. The translational control mechanism identified is interpreted in terms of flux adjustments needed in response to retrograde signals stemming from intermediates of the plastid-localized carotenoid biosynthesis pathway.

Phytoene synthase (PSY): !catalyzes! carotene synthesis
Brassicaceae: !possesses! single PSY gene
ASV1: !contains! long 5'UTR
ASV2: !contains! short 5'UTR
ASV1: !involved in! developmentally regulated carotenoid formation
ASV2: !preferentially induced! under stress or light intensity changes
long 5'UTR: !attenuates! translational activity
5'UTR stretch: !predicted to have! two interconvertible RNA conformations
short 5'UTR: !allows to bypass! translational inhibition
rice PSY1 5'UTR: !lacks! translational control mechanism
translational control mechanism: !interpreted as! flux adjustments in response to retrograde signals