['27726859', 'Plants produce various L-tyrosine (Tyr)-derived compounds that are of  pharmaceutical or nutritional importance to humans. Tyr aminotransferase (TAT)  catalyzes the reversible transamination between Tyr and 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate  (HPP), the initial step in the biosynthesis of many Tyr-derived plant natural  products. Herein reported is the biochemical characterization and subcellular  localization of TAT enzymes from the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana.  Phylogenetic analysis showed that Arabidopsis has at least two homologous TAT  genes, At5g53970 (AtTAT1) and At5g36160 (AtTAT2). Their recombinant enzymes  showed distinct biochemical properties: AtTAT1 had the highest activity towards  Tyr, while AtTAT2 exhibited a broad substrate specificity for both amino and keto  acid substrates. Also, AtTAT1 favored the direction of Tyr deamination to HPP,  whereas AtTAT2 preferred transamination of HPP to Tyr. Subcellular localization  analysis using GFP-fusion proteins and confocal microscopy showed that AtTAT1,  AtTAT2, and HPP dioxygenase (HPPD), which catalyzes the subsequent step of TAT,  are localized in the cytosol, unlike plastid-localized Tyr and tocopherol  biosynthetic enzymes. Furthermore, subcellular fractionation indicated that,  while HPPD activity is restricted to the cytosol, TAT activity is detected in  both cytosolic and plastidic fractions of Arabidopsis leaf tissue, suggesting  that an unknown aminotransferase(s) having TAT activity is also present in the  plastids. Biochemical and cellular analyses of Arabidopsis TATs provide a  fundamental basis for future in vivo studies and metabolic engineering for  enhanced production of Tyr-derived phytochemicals in plants.', '2016 Dec', 'Phytochemistry', '10.1016/j.phytochem.2016.09.007', 'Maeda']

TAT: !catalyzes! transamination 
AtTAT1: !favors! Tyr deamination 
AtTAT2: !prefers! HPP transamination 
AtTAT1/AtTAT2/HPPD: !localized to! cytosol 
HPPD: !restricted to! cytosol 
TAT: !detected in! cytosolic/plastidic fractions