Solanum tuberosum tropinone reductase I reduced tropinone in vivo. Suppression of tropinone reductase II strongly reduced calystegines in sprouts. Overexpression of putrescine N -methyltransferase did not alter calystegine accumulation. Calystegines are hydroxylated alkaloids formed by the tropane alkaloid pathway. They accumulate in potato (Solanum tuberosum L., Solanaceae) roots and sprouting tubers. Calystegines inhibit various glycosidases in vitro due to their sugar-mimic structure, but functions of calystegines in plants are not understood. Enzymes participating in or competing with calystegine biosynthesis, including putrescine N-methyltransferase (PMT) and tropinone reductases (TRI and TRII), were altered in their activity in potato plants by RNA interference (RNAi) and by overexpression. The genetically altered potato plants were investigated for the accumulation of calystegines and for intermediates of their biosynthesis. An increase in N-methylputrescine provided by DsPMT expression was not sufficient to increase calystegine accumulation. Overexpression and gene knockdown of StTRI proved that S. tuberosum TRI is a functional tropinone reductase in vivo, but no influence on calystegine accumulation was observed. When StTRII expression was suppressed by RNAi, calystegine formation was severely compromised in the transformed plants. Under phytochamber and green house conditions, the StTRII RNAi plants did not show phenotypic alterations. Further investigation of calystegines function in potato plants under natural conditions is enabled by the calystegine deprived StTRII RNAi plants.

Solanum tuberosum tropinone reductase I: !reduces! tropinone in vivo
Suppression of tropinone reductase II: !reduces! calystegines in sprouts
Overexpression of putrescine N -methyltransferase: !does not alter! calystegine accumulation
Calystegines: !inhibit! glycosidases in vitro
Putrescine N-methyltransferase (PMT): !increases! N-methylputrescine
S. tuberosum TRI: !is a functional! tropinone reductase in vivo
StTRII expression: !suppressed by! RNAi
StTRII RNAi plants: !severely compromise! calystegine formation