We determined the crossover (CO) distribution, frequency and genomic sequences involved in interspecies meiotic recombination by using parent-assigned variants of 52 F<sub>6</sub> recombinant inbred lines obtained from a cross between tomato, Solanum lycopersicum, and its wild relative, Solanum pimpinellifolium. The interspecific CO frequency was 80% lower than reported for intraspecific tomato crosses. We detected regions showing a relatively high and low CO frequency, so-called hot and cold regions. Cold regions coincide to a large extent with the heterochromatin, although we found a limited number of smaller cold regions in the euchromatin. The CO frequency was higher at the distal ends of chromosomes than in pericentromeric regions and higher in short arm euchromatin. Hot regions of CO were detected in euchromatin, and COs were more often located in non-coding regions near the 5' untranslated region of genes than expected by chance. Besides overrepresented CCN repeats, we detected poly-A/T and AT-rich motifs enriched in 1-kb promoter regions flanking the CO sites. The most abundant sequence motifs at CO sites share weak similarity to transcription factor-binding sites, such as for the C2H2 zinc finger factors class and MADS box factors, while InterPro scans detected enrichment for genes possibly involved in the repair of DNA breaks.

gene: !affects! CO frequency
CO: !localizes to! heterochromatin
CO: !localizes to! euchromatin
CO: !localizes to! distal ends of chromosomes
CO: !localizes to! pericentromeric regions
CO: !localizes to! short arm euchromatin
CO: !enriched in! 1-kb promoter regions
CO: !overrepresented in! CCN repeats
CO: !overrepresented in! poly-A/T motifs
CO: !overrepresented in! AT-rich motifs
CO: !shares similarity with! transcription factor-binding sites
transcription factor-binding sites: !enriched for! C2H2 zinc finger factors
transcription factor-binding sites: !enriched for! MADS box factors
InterPro scans: !detected enrichment for! genes involved in DNA repair