The MADS box transcription factor Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) AGAMOUS-LIKE15 (AGL15) and a putative ortholog from soybean (Glycine max), GmAGL15, are able to promote somatic embryogenesis (SE) in these plants when ectopically expressed. SE is an important means of plant regeneration, but many plants, or even particular cultivars, are recalcitrant for this process. Understanding how (Gm)AGL15 promotes SE by identifying and characterizing direct and indirect downstream regulated genes can provide means to improve regeneration by SE for crop improvement and to perform molecular tests of genes. Conserved transcription factors and the genes they regulate in common between species may provide the most promising avenue to identify targets for SE improvement. We show that (Gm)AGL15 negatively regulates auxin signaling in both Arabidopsis and soybean at many levels of the pathway, including the repression of AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR6 (ARF6) and ARF8 and TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE1 as well as the indirect control of components via direct expression of a microRNA-encoding gene. We demonstrate interaction between auxin and gibberellic acid in the promotion of SE and document an inverse correlation between bioactive gibberellic acid and SE in soybean, a difficult crop to transform. Finally, we relate hormone accumulation to transcript accumulation of important soybean embryo regulatory factors such as ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 and FUSCA3 and provide a working model of hormone and transcription factor interaction in the control of SE.

AGL15: !promotes! SE 
GmAGL15: !promotes! SE 
(Gm)AGL15: !negatively regulates! auxin signaling 
ARF6/8: !repressed by! (Gm)AGL15 
TIR1: !repressed by! (Gm)AGL15 
microRNA-encoding gene: !expressed by! (Gm)AGL15 
auxin: !interacts with! gibberellic acid 
gibberellic acid: !promotes! SE 
bioactive gibberellic acid: !inversely correlated with! SE 
ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3: !transcript accumulation of! hormone 
FUSCA3: !transcript accumulation of! hormone