Bacterial wilt (BW) is a widespread plant disease that affects a broad range of dicot and monocot hosts and is particularly harmful for solanaceous plants, such as pepper, tomato, and eggplant. The pathogen responsible for BW is the soil-borne bacterium, Ralstonia solanacearum, which can adapt to diverse temperature conditions and is found in climates ranging from tropical to temperate. Resistance to BW has been detected in some pepper plant lines; however, the genomic loci and alleles that mediate this are poorly studied in this species. We resequenced the pepper cultivars YCM344 and Taean, which are parental recombinant inbred lines (RIL) that display differential resistance phenotypes against BW, with YCM344 being highly resistant to infection with this pathogen. We identified novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertions/deletions (Indels) that are only present in both parental lines, as compared to the reference genome and further determined variations that distinguish these two cultivars from one another. We then identified potentially informative SNPs that were found in genes related to those that have been previously associated with disease resistance, such as the R genes and stress response genes. Moreover, via comparative analysis, we identified SNPs located in genomic regions that have homology to known resistance genes in the tomato genomes. From our SNP profiling in both parental lines, we could identify SNPs that are potentially responsible for BW resistance, and practically, these may be used as markers for assisted breeding schemes using these populations. We predict that our analyses will be valuable for both better understanding the YCM334/Taean-derived populations, as well as for enhancing our knowledge of critical SNPs present in the pepper genome.

Ralstonia solanacearum: !causes! Bacterial Wilt 
YCM344/Taean: !exhibit! Differential Resistance Phenotypes 
SNPs: !distinguish! YCM344/Taean 
SNPs: !locate in! Genes Related to Disease Resistance 
SNPs: !homologous to! Known Resistance Genes in Tomato 
SNPs: !potentially responsible for! BW Resistance