Different types of P genome sequences and markers were developed, which could be used to analyze the evolution of P genome in Triticeae and identify precisely wheat- A. cristatum introgression lines. P genome of Agropyron Gaertn. plays an important role in Triticeae and could provide many desirable genes conferring high yield, disease resistance, and stress tolerance for wheat genetic improvement. Therefore, it is significant to develop specific sequences and functional markers of P genome. In this study, 126 sequences were isolated from the degenerate oligonucleotide primed-polymerase chain reaction (DOP-PCR) products of microdissected chromosome 6PS. Forty-eight sequences were identified as P genome-specific sequences by dot-blot hybridization and DNA sequences analysis. Among these sequences, 22 displayed the characteristics of retrotransposons, nine and one displayed the characteristics of DNA transposons and tandem repetitive sequence, respectively. Fourteen of 48 sequences were determined to distribute on different regions of P genome chromosomes by fluorescence in situ hybridization, and the distributing regions were as following: all over P genome chromosomes, centromeres, pericentromeric regions, distal regions, and terminal regions. We compared the P genome sequences with other genome sequences of Triticeae and found that the similar sequences of the P genome sequences were widespread in Triticeae, but differentiation occurred to various extents. Additionally, thirty-four molecular markers were developed from the P genome sequences, which could be used for analyzing the evolutionary relationship among 16 genomes of 18 species in Triticeae and identifying P genome chromatin in wheat-A. cristatum introgression lines. These results will not only facilitate the study of structure and evolution of P genome chromosomes, but also provide a rapid detecting tool for effective utilization of desirable genes of P genome in wheat improvement.

P genome: !plays important role in! Triticeae 
DOP-PCR: !isolates! 126 sequences 
dot-blot hybridization: !identifies! 48 P genome-specific sequences 
FISH: !localizes! 14 sequences to different regions of P genome chromosomes 
Triticeae: !contains similar! P genome sequences 
P genome sequences: !develops! 34 molecular markers 
markers: !analyzes! evolutionary relationship among 16 genomes of 18 species in Triticeae 
markers: !identifies! P genome chromatin in wheat-A. cristatum introgression lines