['27836324', "Apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonucleases are important DNA repair enzymes  involved in two overlapping pathways: DNA glycosylase-initiated base excision  (BER) and AP endonuclease-initiated nucleotide incision repair (NIR). In the BER  pathway, AP endonucleases cleave DNA at AP sites and 3'-blocking moieties  generated by DNA glycosylases, whereas in NIR, the same AP endonucleases incise  DNA 5' to a wide variety of oxidized bases. The flowering plant Arabidopsis  thaliana contains three genes encoding homologues of major human AP endonuclease  1 (APE1): Arp, Ape1L and Ape2. It has been shown that all three proteins contain  AP site cleavage and 3'-repair phosphodiesterase activities; however, it was not  known whether the plant AP endonucleases contain the NIR activity. Here, we  report that ARP proteins from Arabidopsis and common wheat (Triticum aestivum)  contain NIR and 3'-->5' exonuclease activities in addition to their AP endonuclease  and 3'-repair phosphodiesterase functions. The steady-state kinetic parameters of  reactions indicate that Arabidopsis ARP cleaves oligonucleotide duplexes  containing alpha-anomeric 2'-deoxyadenosine (alphadA) and 5,6-dihydrouridine (DHU) with  efficiencies (k(cat)/K(M)=134 and 7.3 muM(-1).min(-1), respectively) comparable to  those of the human counterpart. However, the ARP-catalyzed 3'-repair  phosphodiesterase and 3'-->5' exonuclease activities (k(cat)/K(M)=314 and 34  muM(-1).min(-1), respectively) were about 10-fold less efficient as compared to  those of APE1. Interestingly, homozygous A. thaliana arp(-/-) mutant exhibited  high sensitivity to methyl methanesulfonate and tert-butyl hydroperoxide, but not  to H(2)O(2), suggesting that ARP is a major plant AP endonuclease that removes  abasic sites and specific types of oxidative DNA base damage. Taken together,  these data establish the presence of the NIR pathway in plants and suggest its  possible role in the repair of DNA damage generated by oxidative stress.", '2016 Dec', 'DNA Repair (Amst)', '10.1016/j.dnarep.2016.10.009', 'Saparbaev']

Apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonucleases: !cleave! DNA 
DNA glycosylases: !generate! 3'-blocking moieties 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !contains! three genes encoding AP endonuclease 1 homologues 
ARP proteins: !contain! AP site cleavage and 3'-repair phosphodiesterase activities 
ARP proteins: !incise! DNA 5' to oxidized bases 
ARP proteins: !exhibit! NIR and 3'-->5' exonuclease activities 
A. thaliana arp(-/-) mutant: !exhibits! high sensitivity to methyl methanesulfonate and tert-butyl hydroperoxide