Miscanthus spp. are promising lignocellulosic energy crops, but cell wall recalcitrance to deconstruction still hinders their widespread use as bioenergy and biomaterial feedstocks. Identification of cell wall characteristics desirable for biorefining applications is crucial for lignocellulosic biomass improvement. However, the task of scoring biomass quality is often complicated by the lack of a reference for a given feedstock. A multidimensional cell wall analysis was performed to generate a reference profile for leaf and stem biomass from several miscanthus genotypes harvested at three developmentally distinct time points. A comprehensive suite of 155 monoclonal antibodies was used to monitor changes in distribution, structure and extractability of noncellulosic cell wall matrix glycans. Glycan microarrays complemented with immunohistochemistry elucidated the nature of compositional variation, and in situ distribution of carbohydrate epitopes. Key observations demonstrated that there are crucial differences in miscanthus cell wall glycomes, which may impact biomass amenability to deconstruction. For the first time, variations in miscanthus cell wall glycan components were comprehensively characterized across different harvests, organs and genotypes, to generate a representative reference profile for miscanthus cell wall biomass. Ultimately, this portrait of the miscanthus cell wall will help to steer breeding and genetic engineering strategies for the development of superior energy crops.

Miscanthus spp.: !promising lignocellulosic energy crops! 
Cell wall: !recalcitrance to deconstruction! 
Biomass quality: !lack of reference! 
Multidimensional cell wall analysis: !generate reference profile! 
155 monoclonal antibodies: !monitor changes in distribution, structure and extractability of noncellulosic cell wall matrix glycans! 
Glycan microarrays: !elucidate nature of compositional variation! 
Immunohistochemistry: !in situ distribution of carbohydrate epitopes! 
Miscanthus cell wall glycomes: !crucial differences! 
Variations in miscanthus cell wall glycan components: !comprehensively characterized! 
Reference profile: !generated for miscanthus cell wall biomass! 
Portrait of miscanthus cell wall: !help steer breeding and genetic engineering strategies!