This article corrects: Retracted: Three BUB1 and BUBR1/MAD3-related spindle assembly checkpoint proteins are required for accurate mitosis in Arabidopsis. New Phytologist 205: 202-215. Article first published online: 29 September 2014. This article has been retracted at the request of: Editor-in-Chief and Author 'Three BUB1 and BUBR1/MAD3-related spindle assembly checkpoint proteins are required for accurate mitosis in Arabidopsis', by Paganelli L, Caillaud M-C, Quentin M, Damiani I, Govetto B, Lecomte P, Karpov, PA, Abad P, Chabouté M-E and Favery B. The above article, first published online on Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com), and in New Phytologist 205: 202-215, has been retracted by agreement between the authors, the journal Editor-in-Chief, Alistair Hetherington, and John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Since publication of the above article, it has been brought to our attention that errors occurred in the construction of Figs 1 and 2(a); some components were inappropriately edited and duplicated, including the duplication and editing of images that first appeared in Caillaud et al. (2009), which were used by the authors as a basic template. Consequently, the integrity of the yeast two-hybrid experiments reported in the article is undermined, and, with agreement of all parties, the decision has been made to retract this article. We apologize for any inconvenience the publication of this work may have caused our readers. References Caillaud MC, Paganelli L, Lecomte P, Deslandes L, Quentin M, Pecrix Y, Le Bris M, Marfaing N, Abad P, Favery B. 2009. Spindle assembly checkpoint protein dynamics reveal conserved and unsuspected roles in plant cell division. PLoS One 4: e6757. Paganelli L, Caillaud M-C, Quentin M, Damiani I, Govetto B, Lecomte P, Karpov PA, Abad P, Chabouté M-E, Favery B. 2015. Three BUB1 and BUBR1/MAD3-related spindle assembly checkpoint proteins are required for accurate mitosis in Arabidopsis. New Phytologist 205: 202-215.

BUB1: !required for! accurate mitosis
BUBR1/MAD3: !required for! accurate mitosis
Figs 1 and 2(a): !inappropriately edited and duplicated!
Caillaud et al. (2009): !used as! basic template
Paganelli et al. (2015): !retracted! article