Our study demonstrated that symplasmic communication between Sedum acre seed compartments and the embryo proper is not uniform. The presence of plasmodesmata (PD) constitutes the structural basis for information exchange between cells, and symplasmic communication is involved in the regulation of cell differentiation and plant development. Most recent studies concerning an analysis of symplasmic communication between seed compartments and the embryo have been predominantly performed on Arabidopsis thaliana. The results presented in this paper describe the analysis of symplasmic communication on the example of Sedum acre seeds, because the ultrastructure of the seed compartments and the embryo proper, including the PD, have already been described, and this species represents an embryonic type of development different to Arabidopsis. Moreover, in this species, an unusual electron-dense dome associated with plasmodesmata on the border between the basal cell/chalazal suspensor cells and the basal cell/the endosperm has been described. This prompted the question as to whether these plasmodesmata are functional. Thus, the aim of this study was to describe the movement of symplasmic transport fluorochromes between different Sedum seed compartments, with particular emphasis on the movement between the basal cell and the embryo proper and endosperm, to answer the following questions: (1) are seeds divided into symplasmic domains; (2) if so, are they stable or do they change with the development? The results have shown that symplasmic tracers movement: (a) from the external integument to internal integument is restricted; (b) from the basal cell to the other part of the embryo proper and from the basal cell to the endosperm is also restricted;

Plasmodesmata: !constitutes! Structural Basis
Symplasmic Communication: !regulates! Cell Differentiation
Sedum acre: !represents! Embryonic Type of Development
Plasmodesmata: !associated with! Electron-Dense Dome
Symplasmic Tracers: !movement from! External Integument to Internal Integument
Symplasmic Tracers: !movement from! Basal Cell to Other Part of Embryo Proper
Symplasmic Tracers: !movement from! Basal Cell to Endosperm