['27923879', "Serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT), a pyridoxyl-5'-phosphate-dependent enzyme,  catalyzes the first and rate-limiting step in sphingolipid biosynthesis. In  humans and yeast, orosomucoid proteins (ORMs) negatively regulate SPT and thus  play an important role in maintaining sphingolipid levels. Despite the importance  of sphingoid intermediates as bioactive molecules, the regulation of sphingolipid  biosynthesis through SPT is not well understood in plants. Here, we identified  and characterized the Arabidopsis thaliana ORMs, ORM1 and ORM2. Loss of function  of both ORM1 and ORM2 (orm1 amiR-ORM2) stimulated de novo sphingolipid  biosynthesis, leading to strong sphingolipid accumulation, especially of  long-chain bases and ceramides. Yeast two-hybrid, bimolecular fluorescence  complementation, and coimmunoprecipitation assays confirmed that ORM1 and ORM2  physically interact with the small subunit of SPT (ssSPT), indicating that ORMs  inhibit ssSPT function. We found that orm1 amiR-ORM2 plants exhibited an  early-senescence phenotype accompanied by H(2)O(2) production at the cell wall  and in mitochondria, active vesicular trafficking, and formation of cell wall  appositions. Strikingly, the orm1 amiR-ORM2 plants showed increased expression of  genes related to endoplasmic reticulum stress and defenses and also had enhanced  resistance to oxidative stress and pathogen infection. Taken together, our  findings indicate that ORMs interact with SPT to regulate sphingolipid  homeostasis and play a pivotal role in environmental stress tolerance in plants.", '2016 Dec', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.16.00574', 'Yao']

Serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT): !catalyzes! sphingolipid biosynthesis
ORMs: !negatively regulate! SPT
ORM1/2: !interact with! ssSPT
orm1 amiR-ORM2 plants: !stimulate! de novo sphingolipid biosynthesis
orm1 amiR-ORM2 plants: !exhibit! early-senescence phenotype
orm1 amiR-ORM2 plants: !show increased expression of! genes related to endoplasmic reticulum stress
orm1 amiR-ORM2 plants: !have enhanced resistance to! oxidative stress and pathogen infection