Drought and its interaction with high temperature are the major abiotic stress factors affecting soybean yield and production stability. Ongoing climate changes are anticipated to intensify drought events, which will further impact crop production and food security. However, excessive water also limits soybean production. The success of soybean breeding programmes for crop improvement is dependent on the extent of genetic variation present in the germplasm base. Screening for natural genetic variation in drought- and flooding tolerance-related traits, including root system architecture, water and nitrogen-fixation efficiency, and yield performance indices, has helped to identify the best resources for genetic studies in soybean. Genomic resources, including whole-genome sequences of diverse germplasms, millions of single-nucleotide polymorphisms, and high-throughput marker genotyping platforms, have expedited gene and marker discovery for translational genomics in soybean. This review highlights the current knowledge of the genetic diversity and quantitative trait loci associated with root system architecture, canopy wilting, nitrogen-fixation ability, and flooding tolerance that contributes to the understanding of drought- and flooding-tolerance mechanisms in soybean. Next-generation mapping approaches and high-throughput phenotyping will facilitate a better understanding of phenotype-genotype associations and help to formulate genomic-assisted breeding strategies, including genomic selection, in soybean for tolerance to drought and flooding stress.

Drought: !affects! Soybean yield
High temperature: !interacts with! Drought
Germplasm base: !contains! Genetic variation
Root system architecture: !associated with! Quantitative trait loci
Canopy wilting: !associated with! Quantitative trait loci
Nitrogen-fixation ability: !associated with! Quantitative trait loci
Flooding tolerance: !associated with! Quantitative trait loci
Whole-genome sequences: !expedite! Gene and marker discovery
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms: !expedite! Gene and marker discovery
High-throughput marker genotyping platforms: !expedite! Gene and marker discovery
Next-generation mapping approaches: !facilitate! Understanding of phenotype-genotype associations
High-throughput phenotyping: !facilitate! Understanding of phenotype-genotype associations