['27923613', 'Abscisic acid (ABA) is a major phytohormone involved in important stress-related  and developmental plant processes. Membrane-delimited ABA signal transduction  plays an important role in early ABA signaling, but the molecular mechanisms  connecting core signaling components to the plasma membrane remain unclear.  Plants have evolved a large number of receptor-like kinases (RLKs) to modulate  diverse biological processes by perceiving extracellular stimuli and activating  downstream signaling responses. In this study, a putative leucine-rich repeat-RLK  gene named RECEPTOR DEAD KINASE1 (AtRDK1) was identified and characterized in  Arabidopsis thaliana. RDK1 promoter-GUS analysis revealed that RDK1 is expressed  ubiquitously in the various tissues in Arabidopsis, and its expression is mainly  induced by ABA. In the presence of ABA, RDK1-deficient rdk1-1 and rdk1-2 lines  showed significant resistance in cotyledon greening and root growth, whereas  RDK1-overexpressing lines showed enhanced sensitivity. Consistently, the  expression of ABA-responsive genes was significantly downregulated in rdk1 mutant  seedlings, which were also hypersensitive to drought stress with increased water  loss. Interestingly, RDK1 was found to be an atypical kinase localized to the  plasma membrane and did not require its kinase activity during ABA-mediated  inhibition of seedling development. Accordingly, RDK1 interacted in the plasma  membrane with type 2C protein phosphatase ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE1 (ABI1); this  interaction was further enhanced by exogenous application of ABA, suggesting that  RDK1-mediated recruitment of ABI1 onto the plasma membrane is important for ABA  signaling. Taken together, these results reveal an important role for RDK1 in  plant responses to abiotic stress conditions in an ABA-dependent manner.', '2017 Feb 13', 'Mol Plant', '10.1016/j.molp.2016.11.011', 'Kim']

ABA: !induces! RDK1 
RDK1: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
RDK1: !enhances! ABA sensitivity 
RDK1: !interacts with! ABI1 
ABA: !enhances! RDK1-ABI1 interaction