Autophagy is regarded as crucial intracellular process in plant development but also in intracellular stress response. It is known to be controlled by the energy level of the cell and consequently can be triggered by energy deprivation. In this study carbon starvation evoked in different ways was investigated in the freshwater algae model system Micrasterias denticulata (Streptophyta) which is closely related to higher plants. Cells exposed to the photosynthesis inhibiting herbicide DCMU, to the glycolysis inhibitor 2-Deoxy-d-glucose and to complete darkness over up to 9 weeks for preventing metabolism downstream of glucose supply, were investigated by means of Nile red staining and analyses in CLSM, and TEM after cryo-preparation. Our results show that lipid bodies containing both neutral and polar lipids are evenly distributed inside the chloroplast in control cells. During carbon starvation they are displaced into the cytoplasm and are either degraded via autophagy and/or excreted from the cell. Upon discharge from the chloroplast lipid bodies become engulfed by double membranes probably deriving from the ER, thus forming autophagosomes which later fuse with vacuoles. Coincidently indications for autophagy of other organelles and cytoplasmic portions were found during starvation and particularly in DCMU treated cells the number of starch grains decreased and pyrenoids disintegrated. Additionally our molecular data provide first evidence for the existence of a single ATG8 isoform in Micrasterias. ATG8 is known as main regulator of both bulk and selective autophagy in eucaryotes. Our study indicates that lipid degradation during carbon starvation is achieved via "classical" autophagy in the alga Micrasterias. This process has so far only been very rarely observed in plant cells and seems to allow recruitment of lipids for energy supply on the one hand and elimination of unusable or toxicated lipids on the other hand.

Energy deprivation: !triggers! Autophagy 
Lipid bodies: !displaced into! Cytoplasm 
ER: !forms! Autophagosomes 
Starch grains: !decrease in! DCMU treated cells 
Pyrenoids: !disintegrate in! Starved cells 
ATG8: !regulates! Autophagy