The loss of photosynthesis is frequently associated with parasitic or pathogenic lifestyles, but it also can occur in free-living, plastid-bearing lineages. A common consequence of becoming nonphotosynthetic is the reduction in size and gene content of the plastid genome. In exceptional circumstances, it can even result in the complete loss of the plastid DNA (ptDNA) and its associated gene expression system, as reported recently in several lineages, including the nonphotosynthetic green algal genus Polytomella Closely related to Polytomella is the polyphyletic genus Polytoma, the members of which lost photosynthesis independently of Polytomella Species from both genera are free-living organisms that contain nonphotosynthetic plastids, but unlike Polytomella, Polytoma members have retained a genome in their colorless plastid. Here, we present the plastid genome of Polytoma uvella: to our knowledge, the first report of ptDNA from a nonphotosynthetic chlamydomonadalean alga. The P. uvella ptDNA contains 25 protein-coding genes, most of which are related to gene expression and none are connected to photosynthesis. However, despite its reduced coding capacity, the P. uvella ptDNA is inflated with short repeats and is tens of kilobases larger than the ptDNAs of its closest known photosynthetic relatives, Chlamydomonas leiostraca and Chlamydomonas applanata In fact, at approximately 230 kb, the ptDNA of P. uvella represents the largest plastid genome currently reported from a nonphotosynthetic alga or plant. Overall, the P. uvella and Polytomella plastid genomes reveal two very different evolutionary paths following the loss of photosynthesis: expansion and complete deletion, respectively. We hypothesize that recombination-based DNA-repair mechanisms are at least partially responsible for the different evolutionary outcomes observed in such closely related nonphotosynthetic algae.

Polytomella: !loses! Photosynthesis
Polytoma: !retains! Plastid genome
P. uvella: !contains! 25 protein-coding genes
P. uvella: !inflates with! Short repeats
P. uvella: !represents! Largest plastid genome
Polytomella/Polytoma: !reveal! Different evolutionary paths
Recombination-based DNA-repair mechanisms: !responsible for! Different evolutionary outcomes