['27956490', 'In many flowering plants, xyloglucan is a major component of primary cell walls,  where it plays an important role in growth regulation. Xyloglucan can be degraded  by a suite of exoglycosidases that remove specific sugars. In this work, we show  that the xyloglucan backbone, formed by (1-->4)-linked beta-d-glucopyranosyl residues,  can be attacked by two different Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  beta-glucosidases from glycoside hydrolase family 3. While BGLC1 (At5g20950; for  beta-glucosidase active against xyloglucan 1) is responsible for all or most of the  soluble activity, BGLC3 (At5g04885) is usually a membrane-anchored protein.  Mutations in these two genes, whether on their own or combined with mutations in  other exoglycosidase genes, resulted in the accumulation of partially digested  xyloglucan subunits, such as GXXG, GXLG, or GXFG. While a mutation in BGLC1 had  significant effects on its own, lack of BGLC3 had only minor effects. On the  other hand, double bglc1 bglc3 mutants revealed a synergistic interaction that  supports a role for membrane-bound BGLC3 in xyloglucan metabolism. In addition,  bglc1 bglc3 was complemented by overexpression of either BGLC1 or BGLC3 In  overexpression lines, BGLC3 activity was concentrated in a microsome-enriched  fraction but also was present in soluble form. Finally, both genes were generally  expressed in the same cell types, although, in some cases, BGLC3 was expressed at  earlier stages than BGLC1 We propose that functional specialization could explain  the separate localization of both enzymes, as a membrane-bound beta-glucosidase  could specifically digest soluble xyloglucan without affecting the wall-bound  polymer.', '2017 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.16.01713', 'ORCID:']

BGLC1: !affects! xyloglucan metabolism 
BGLC3: !affects! xyloglucan metabolism 
BGLC1: !localizes to! soluble form 
BGLC3: !localizes to! membrane-anchored protein 
BGLC1: !interacts with! BGLC3 
BGLC3: !interacts with! BGLC1 
BGLC1: !enhances! GXXG, GXLG, or GXFG accumulation 
BGLC3: !represses! GXXG, GXLG, or GXFG accumulation 
BGLC1: !synthesizes! all or most of the soluble activity 
BGLC3: !synthesizes! membrane-bound beta-glucosidase