Soybean (Glycine max) accumulates several prenylated isoflavonoid phytoalexins, collectively referred to as glyceollins. Glyceollins (I, II, III, IV and V) possess modified pterocarpan skeletons with C<sub>5</sub> moieties from dimethylallyl diphosphate, and they are commonly produced from (6aS, 11aS)-3,9,6a-trihydroxypterocarpan [(-)-glycinol]. The metabolic fate of (-)-glycinol is determined by the enzymatic introduction of a dimethylallyl group into C-4 or C-2, which is reportedly catalyzed by regiospecific prenyltransferases (PTs). 4-Dimethylallyl (-)-glycinol and 2-dimethylallyl (-)-glycinol are precursors of glyceollin I and other glyceollins, respectively. Although multiple genes encoding (-)-glycinol biosynthetic enzymes have been identified, those involved in the later steps of glyceollin formation mostly remain unidentified, except for (-)-glycinol 4-dimethylallyltransferase (G4DT), which is involved in glyceollin I biosynthesis. In this study, we identified four genes that encode isoflavonoid PTs, including (-)-glycinol 2-dimethylallyltransferase (G2DT), using homology-based in silico screening and biochemical characterization in yeast expression systems. Transcript analyses illustrated that changes in G2DT gene expression were correlated with the induction of glyceollins II, III, IV and V in elicitor-treated soybean cells and leaves, suggesting its involvement in glyceollin biosynthesis. Moreover, the genomic signatures of these PT genes revealed that G4DT and G2DT are paralogs derived from whole-genome duplications of the soybean genome, whereas other PT genes [isoflavone dimethylallyltransferase 1 (IDT1) and IDT2] were derived via local gene duplication on soybean chromosome 11.

G4DT: !derives from! Whole-genome duplication
G2DT: !derives from! Whole-genome duplication
IDT1: !derives from! Local gene duplication
IDT2: !derives from! Local gene duplication
G2DT: !correlated with! Glyceollin induction
G4DT: !catalyzes! Glyceollin I biosynthesis
G2DT: !catalyzes! Glyceollin formation