When wounding or grafting interrupts the original connection of plant tissue, cell proliferation is induced and the divided tissue is reunited. Previous studies suggested that gibberellin derived from the cotyledon is required for tissue reunion in cucumber and tomato incised hypocotyls, and tissue reunion of Arabidopsis incised flowering stems is controlled by auxin. Differences in the hormone requirements of the tissue reunion process between Arabidopsis and cucumber might be due to differences in organs or species. In this study, we performed morphological and gene expression analyses of graft union in Arabidopsis hypocotyl. We found that removal of the cotyledon and treatment of the cotyledon with the auxin transport inhibitor triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA) suppressed cell proliferation of vascular tissue during graft union formation. These treatments also suppressed expression of IAA5, ANAC071, ANAC096 and CYCB1;1. ANAC071 is involved in the tissue reunion process. The anac071 anac096 double mutant suppressed cell proliferation more so than either of the single mutants. On the other hand, paclobutrazol treatment or deficiency of gibberellin biosynthesis genes suppressed expansion of cortex cells, and exogenous gibberellin treatment or rga/gai mutations that lack the negative regulator of gibberellin reversed this inhibition. The up-regulation of the key gibberellin biosynthesis gene GA20ox1 during graft union formation was prevented by cotyledon removal or TIBA treatment. These data suggest that auxin regulates cell proliferation of vascular tissue and expansion of cortex cells by promoting gibberellin biosynthesis during graft attachment. We hypothesize that the cotyledon-derived phytohormones are essential for graft reunion of the hypocotyl, processed in a cell type-specific manner, in Arabidopsis.

Wounding/grafting: !induces! Cell proliferation 
Cotyledon: !required for! Tissue reunion 
Auxin: !controls! Tissue reunion 
TIBA: !suppresses! Expression of IAA5, ANAC071, ANAC096 and CYCB1;1 
ANAC071: !involved in! Tissue reunion process 
Paclobutrazol: !inhibits! Expansion of cortex cells 
Gibberellin biosynthesis genes: !suppress! Expansion of cortex cells 
Exogenous gibberellin: !reverses! Inhibition 
GA20ox1: !up-regulated during! Graft union formation