['27994613', 'Pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins are extensive in all eukaryotes. Their  functions remain as yet largely unknown. Mining potential stress responsive PPRs,  and checking whether known PPR editing factors are affected in the stress  treatments. It is beneficial to elucidate the regulation mechanism of PPRs  involved in biotic and abiotic stress. Here, we explored the characteristics and  origin of the 105 E subgroup PPRs in Arabidopsis thaliana. Phylogenetic analysis  categorized the E subgroup PPRs into five discrete groups (Cluster I to V), and  they may have a common origin in both A. thaliana and rice. An in silico  expression analysis of the 105 E subgroup PPRs in A. thaliana was performed using  available microarray data. Thirty-four PPRs were differentially expressed during  A. thaliana seed imbibition, seed development stage(s), and flowers development  processes. To explore potential stress responsive PPRs, differential expression  of 92 PPRs was observed in A. thaliana seedlings subjected to different abiotic  stresses. qPCR data of E subgroup PPRs under stress conditions revealed that the  expression of 5 PPRs was responsive to abiotic stresses. In addition, PPR96 is  involved in plant responses to salt, abscisic acid (ABA), and oxidative stress.  The T-DNA insertion mutation inactivating PPR96 expression results in plant  insensitivity to salt, ABA, and oxidative stress. The PPR96 protein is localized  in the mitochondria, and altered transcription levels of several  stress-responsive genes under abiotic stress treatments. Our results suggest that  PPR96 may important function in a role connecting the regulation of oxidative  respiration and environmental responses in A. thaliana.', '2016', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2016.01825', 'Ma']

PPR: !extensive in! eukaryotes 
PPR: !categorized into! five discrete groups 
PPR: !differentially expressed during! seed imbibition, seed development, and flower development 
PPR: !responsive to! abiotic stresses 
PPR96: !involved in! plant responses to salt, ABA, and oxidative stress 
PPR96: !localized in! mitochondria 
PPR96: !alters transcription of! stress-responsive genes 
PPR96: !connects regulation of! oxidative respiration and environmental responses