['28003326', "The final size of plant organs is determined by a combination of cell  proliferation and cell expansion. Leaves account for a large part of above-ground  biomass and provide energy to complete the plant's life cycle. Although the final  size of leaves is remarkably constant under fixed environmental conditions,  several genes have been described to enhance leaf growth when their expression is  modulated. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), mutations in DA1 and BB  increase leaf size, an effect that is synergistically enhanced in the double  mutant. Here, we show that overexpression of a dominant-negative version of DA1  enhances leaf size in a broad range of natural accessions of this species,  indicating a highly conserved role of this protein in controlling organ size. We  also found that during early stages of development, leaves of da1-1 and bb/eod1-2  mutants were already larger than the isogenic Col-0 wild type, but this phenotype  was triggered by different cellular mechanisms. Later during development, da1-1  and bb/eod1-2 leaves showed a prolonged longevity, which was enhanced in the  double mutant. Conversely, ectopic expression of DA1 or BB restricted growth and  promoted leaf senescence. In concert, shortly upon induction of DA1 and BB  expression, several marker genes for the transition from proliferation to  expansion were highly up-regulated. Additionally, multiple genes involved in  maintaining the mitotic cell cycle were rapidly down-regulated and senescence  genes were strongly up-regulated, particularly upon BB induction. With these  results, we demonstrate that DA1 and BB restrict leaf size and promote senescence  through converging and different mechanisms.", '2017 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.16.01410', 'ORCID:']

DA1: !enhances! leaf size 
BB: !enhances! leaf size 
DA1: !promotes! senescence 
BB: !promotes! senescence 
DA1: !up-regulates! marker genes 
BB: !down-regulates! mitotic cell cycle genes 
BB: !up-regulates! senescence genes