['28008672', 'The characterization of mutants with altered leaf shape and pigmentation has  previously allowed the identification of nuclear genes that encode  plastid-localized proteins that perform essential functions in leaf growth and  development. A large-scale screen previously allowed us to isolate ethyl  methanesulfonate-induced mutants with small rosettes and pale green leaves with  prominent marginal teeth, which were assigned to a phenotypic class that we  dubbed Angulata. The molecular characterization of the 12 genes assigned to this  phenotypic class should help us to advance our understanding of the still poorly  understood relationship between chloroplast biogenesis and leaf morphogenesis. In  this article, we report the phenotypic and molecular characterization of the  angulata7-1 (anu7-1) mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana, which we found to be a  hypomorphic allele of the EMB2737 gene, which was previously known only for its  embryonic-lethal mutations. ANU7 encodes a plant-specific protein that contains a  domain similar to the central cysteine-rich domain of DnaJ proteins. The observed  genetic interaction of anu7-1 with a loss-of-function allele of GENOMES  UNCOUPLED1 suggests that the anu7-1 mutation triggers a retrograde signal that  leads to changes in the expression of many genes that normally function in the  chloroplasts. Many such genes are expressed at higher levels in anu7-1 rosettes,  with a significant overrepresentation of those required for the expression of  plastid genome genes. Like in other mutants with altered expression of  plastid-encoded genes, we found that anu7-1 exhibits defects in the arrangement  of thylakoidal membranes, which appear locally unappressed.', '2017 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13466', 'Micol']

Gene: !affects! Leaf growth and development 
Gene: !localizes to! Plastids 
Gene: !interacts with! GENOMES UNCOUPLED1 
Gene: !enhances! Expression of plastid genome genes 
Gene: !represses! Thylakoidal membrane arrangement 
Gene: !synthesizes! Plant-specific protein