['28011693', 'Plant growth is coordinated with environmental factors, including water  availability during times of drought. Microtubules influence cell expansion;  however, the mechanisms by which environmental signals impinge upon microtubule  organization and whether microtubule-related factors limit growth during drought  remains unclear. We found that three Clade E Growth-Regulating (EGR) Type 2C  protein phosphatases act as negative growth regulators to restrain growth during  drought. Quantitative phosphoproteomics indicated that EGRs target cytoskeleton  and plasma membrane-associated proteins. Of these, Microtubule-Associated Stress  Protein 1 (MASP1), an uncharacterized protein, increased in abundance during  stress treatment and could bind, bundle, and stabilize microtubules in vitro.  MASP1 overexpression enhanced growth, in vivo microtubule stability, and recovery  of microtubule organization during drought acclimation. These MASP1 functions in  vivo were dependent on phosphorylation of a single serine. For all EGR and MASP1  mutants and transgenic lines examined, enhanced microtubule recovery and  stability were associated with increased growth during drought stress. The  EGR-MASP1 system selectively regulates microtubule recovery and stability to  adjust plant growth and cell expansion in response to changing environmental  conditions. Modification of EGR-MASP1 signaling may be useful to circumvent  negative growth regulation limiting plant productivity. EGRs are likely to  regulate additional proteins involved in microtubule stability and stress  signaling.', '2017 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.16.00847', 'ORCID:']

EGRs: !target! cytoskeleton and plasma membrane-associated proteins
MASP1: !increases in abundance! during stress treatment
MASP1: !binds, bundles, and stabilizes! microtubules in vitro
MASP1: !overexpression enhances! growth, in vivo microtubule stability, and recovery of microtubule organization
EGR-MASP1 system: !selectively regulates! microtubule recovery and stability
EGRs: !likely regulate! additional proteins involved in microtubule stability and stress signaling