Mechanisms of suppression of pistil primordia in male flowers and of stamen primordia in female flowers differ in diclinous plants. In this study, we investigated how cell death and cell cycle arrest are related to flower organ formation in Silene latifolia. Using in situ hybridization and a TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling) assay, we detected both cell cycle arrest and cell death in suppressed stamens of female flowers and suppressed pistils of male flowers in S. latifolia. In female flowers infected with Microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae, developmental suppression of stamens is released, and cell cycle arrest and cell death do not occur. Smut spores are formed in S. latifolia anthers infected with M. lychnidis-dioicae, followed by cell death in the endothelium, middle layer, tapetal cells and pollen mother cells. Cell death is difficult to detect using a fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled TUNEL assay due to strong autofluorescence in the anther. We therefore combined a TUNEL assay in an infrared region with transmission electron microscopy to detect cell death in anthers. We show that following infection by M. lychnidis-dioicae, a TUNEL signal was not detected in the endothelium, middle layer or pollen mother cells, and cell death with outflow of cell contents, including the nucleoplast, was observed in tapetal cells.

Cell cycle arrest: !occurs in! suppressed stamens of female flowers 
Cell cycle arrest: !does not occur in! female flowers infected with Microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae 
Cell death: !occurs in! suppressed pistils of male flowers 
Cell death: !does not occur in! female flowers infected with Microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae 
Cell death: !detected in! endothelium, middle layer, tapetal cells and pollen mother cells 
TUNEL assay: !difficult to detect in! anthers due to autofluorescence 
TUNEL signal: !not detected in! endothelium, middle layer or pollen mother cells 
Cell death: !observed in! tapetal cells with outflow of cell contents