Herbaceous peony (Paeonia lactiflora) is a globally important ornamental plant. Spontaneous floral mutations occur frequently during cultivation, and are selected as a way to release new cultivars, but the underlying evolutionary developmental genetics remain largely elusive. Here, we investigated a collection of spontaneous corolla mutational plants (SCMPs) whose other floral organs were virtually unaffected. Unlike the corolla in normal plants (NPs) that withered soon after fertilization, the transformed corolla (petals) in SCMPs was greenish and persistent similar to the calyx (sepals). Epidermal cellular morphology of the SCMP corolla was also similar to that of calyx cells, further suggesting a sepaloid corolla in SCMPs. Ten floral MADS-box genes from these Paeonia plants were comparatively characterized with respect to sequence and expression. Codogenic sequence variation of these MADS-box genes was not linked to corolla changes in SCMPs. However, we found that both APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI) lineages of B-class MADS-box genes were duplicated, and subsequent selective expression alterations of these genes were closely associated with the origin of SCMPs. AP3-PI obligate heterodimerization, essential for organ identity of corolla and stamens, was robustly detected. However, selective down-regulation of these duplicated genes might result in a reduction of this obligate heterodimer concentration in a corolla-specific manner, leading to the sepaloid corolla in SCMPs, thus representing a new sepaloid corolla model taking advantage of gene duplication. Our work suggests that modifying floral MADS-box genes could facilitate the breeding of novel cultivars with distinct floral morphology in ornamental plants, and also provides new insights into the functional evolution of the MADS-box genes in plants.

AP3: !duplicated and! !selectively expressed in! SCMPs
PI: !duplicated and! !selectively expressed in! SCMPs
AP3: !obligate heterodimerizes with! PI
AP3: !down-regulated in! corolla-specific manner