The identification of protein complexes is important for the understanding of protein structure and function and the regulation of cellular processes. We used blue-native PAGE and tandem mass spectrometry to identify protein complexes systematically, and built a web database, the protein co-migration database (PCoM-DB, http://pcomdb.lowtem.hokudai.ac.jp/proteins/top), to provide prediction tools for protein complexes. PCoM-DB provides migration profiles for any given protein of interest, and allows users to compare them with migration profiles of other proteins, showing the oligomeric states of proteins and thus identifying potential interaction partners. The initial version of PCoM-DB (launched in January 2013) included protein complex data for Synechocystis whole cells and Arabidopsis thaliana thylakoid membranes. Here we report PCoM-DB version 2.0, which includes new data sets and analytical tools. Additional data are included from whole cells of the pelagic marine picocyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus, the thermophilic cyanobacterium Thermosynechococcus elongatus, the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and the bryophyte Physcomitrella patens. The Arabidopsis protein data now include data for intact mitochondria, intact chloroplasts, chloroplast stroma and chloroplast envelopes. The new tools comprise a multiple-protein search form and a heat map viewer for protein migration profiles. Users can compare migration profiles of a protein of interest among different organelles or compare migration profiles among different proteins within the same sample. For Arabidopsis proteins, users can compare migration profiles of a protein of interest with putative homologous proteins from non-Arabidopsis organisms. The updated PCoM-DB will help researchers find novel protein complexes and estimate their evolutionary changes in the green lineage.

Blue-native PAGE: !identifies! Protein Complexes 
Tandem Mass Spectrometry: !identifies! Protein Complexes 
PCoM-DB: !provides! Prediction Tools 
Synechocystis Whole Cells: !includes! Protein Complex Data 
Arabidopsis Thaliana Thylakoid Membranes: !includes! Protein Complex Data 
Prochlorococcus Marinus: !includes! Protein Complex Data 
Thermosynechococcus Elongatus: !includes! Protein Complex Data 
Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii: !includes! Protein Complex Data 
Physcomitrella Patens: !includes! Protein Complex Data 
Intact Mitochondria: !includes! Protein Data 
Intact Chloroplasts: !includes! Protein Data 
Chloroplast Stroma: !includes! Protein Data 
Chloroplast Envelopes: !includes! Protein Data 
Multiple-Protein Search Form: !provides! Analytical Tools 
Heat Map Viewer: !provides! Analytical Tools 
Protein of Interest: !compares with! Putative Homologous Proteins