Thermoperiodism is defined as the ability to discriminate between day temperature (DT) and night temperature (NT). Our aim was to shed light on the mechanistic basis of thermoperiodic floral induction with acceleration under lower DT than NT compared with other DT-NT combinations at the same average daily temperature (ADT), a response exploited in temperate area greenhouses. Arabidopsis thaliana floral pathway mutants and a lhy circadian clock mutant as well as the expression of floral integrators and LHY (LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL) were studied under different DT-NT combinations, all at the same ADT. We show that acceleration of floral induction under lower DT than NT is linked to increased FT expression early during the day and generally increased LFY expression preceding visible flower buds, compared with higher DT than NT or equal DT and NT. Consistent with FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) action through LEAFY (LFY), time to floral transition in ft-1 and lfy-1 was similar under all treatments, in contrast to the situation for soc1-1, which behaved like the wild type (WT). The lhy-21 mutants did not discriminate between opposite DT-NT combinations, whereas LHY expression in the WT differed in these temperature regimes. This might suggest that LHY plays a role in thermoperiodic control of floral induction. We conclude that thermoperiodic control of floral transition is associated with modulation of the diurnal expression patterns of FT, with timing of temperature alteration being important rather than ADT.

Thermoperiodism: !defined by! DT-NT combinations 
FT: !increased expression under! lower DT than NT 
LFY: !increased expression preceding! visible flower buds 
ft-1/lfy-1: !similar time to floral transition under! all treatments 
soc1-1: !behaved like! WT 
lhy-21: !did not discriminate between! opposite DT-NT combinations 
LHY: !expression differed in! temperature regimes 
LHY: !plays role in! thermoperiodic control of floral induction 
thermoperiodic control: !associated with modulation of! diurnal expression patterns of FT