Increased resilience of pasture grasses mediated by fungal Epichloë endophytes is crucial to pastoral industries. The underlying mechanisms are only partially understood and likely involve very different activities of the endophyte in different plant tissues and responses of the plant to these. We analyzed the transcriptomes of Epichloë festucae and its host, Lolium perenne, in host tissues of different function and developmental stages. The endophyte contributed approximately 10× more to the transcriptomes than to the biomass of infected tissues. Proliferating mycelium in growing host tissues highly expressed genes involved in hyphal growth. Nonproliferating mycelium in mature plant tissues, transcriptionally equally active, highly expressed genes involved in synthesizing antiherbivore compounds. Transcripts from the latter accounted for 4% of fungal transcripts. Endophyte infection systemically but moderately increased transcription of L. perenne genes with roles in hormone biosynthesis and perception as well as stress and pathogen resistance while reducing expression of genes involved in photosynthesis. There was a good correlation between transcriptome-based observations and physiological observations. Our data indicate that the fitness-enhancing effects of the endophyte are based both on its biosynthetic activities, predominantly in mature host tissues, and also on systemic alteration of the host's hormonal responses and induction of stress response genes. [Formula: see text] Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Epichloë endophyte: !enhances! Resilience of pasture grasses
Epichloë endophyte: !expresses! Genes involved in hyphal growth
Epichloë endophyte: !synthesizes! Antiherbivore compounds
Epichloë endophyte: !moderately increases! Host's hormonal responses
Lolium perenne: !responds to! Endophyte infection
Lolium perenne: !expresses! Genes involved in hormone biosynthesis and perception
Lolium perenne: !expresses! Genes involved in stress and pathogen resistance
Lolium perenne: !reduces expression of! Genes involved in photosynthesis