Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) presents unique opportunities for analyzing molecular mechanisms of functional divergence between gene family members. The canonical PP2A holoenzyme regulates multiple eukaryotic signaling pathways by dephosphorylating target proteins and contains a catalytic (C) subunit, a structural/scaffolding (A) subunit, and a regulatory (B) subunit. Genes encoding PP2A subunits have expanded into multigene families in both flowering plants and mammals, and the extent to which different isoform functions may overlap is not clearly understood. To gain insight into the diversification of PP2A subunits, we used phylogenetic analyses to reconstruct the evolutionary histories of PP2A gene families in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Genes encoding PP2A subunits in mammals represent ancient lineages that expanded early in vertebrate evolution, while flowering plant PP2A subunit lineages evolved much more recently. Despite this temporal difference, our data indicate that the expansion of PP2A subunit gene families in both flowering plants and animals was driven by whole-genome duplications followed by nonrandom gene loss. Selection analysis suggests that the expansion of one B subunit gene family (B56/PPP2R5) was driven by functional diversification rather than by the maintenance of gene dosage. We also observed reduced expansion rates in three distinct B subunit subclades. One of these subclades plays a highly conserved role in cell division, while the distribution of a second subclade suggests a specialized function in supporting beneficial microbial associations. Thus, while whole-genome duplications have driven the expansion and diversification of most PP2A gene families, members of functionally specialized subclades quickly revert to singleton status after duplication events.

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A): !expanded into! multigene families
Whole-genome duplications: !drove expansion of! PP2A gene families
B subunit gene family (B56/PPP2R5): !driven by! functional diversification
Functionally specialized subclades: !revert to! singleton status