The seasonality of fruits and vegetables makes it impossible to consume and use them throughout the year, thus numerous processing efforts have been made to offer an alternative to their fresh consumption and application. To prolong their availability on the market, drying has received special attention as currently this method is considered one of the most common ways for obtaining food and pharmaceutical products from natural sources. This paper demonstrates the weakness of common drying methods applied for fruits and vegetables and the possible ways to improve the quality using different drying techniques or their combination with an emphasis on the microwave energy. Particular attention has been drawn to the combined drying with the assistance of vacuum-microwaves. The quality of the dried products was ascribed by chemical properties including the content of polyphenols, antioxidant capacity and volatiles as well as physical parameters such as color, shrinkage, porosity and texture. Both these fields of quality classification were considered taking into account sensory attributes and energy aspects in the perspective of possible industrial applications. In conclusion, the most promising way for improving the quality of dried fruit and vegetable products is hybrid drying consisting of osmotic dehydration in concentrated fruit juices followed by heat pump drying and vacuum-microwave finish drying.

Drying: !improves quality of! Fruits and Vegetables
Heat Pump Drying: !combined with! Vacuum-Microwave Finish Drying
Osmotic Dehydration: !in combination with! Heat Pump Drying
Polyphenols: !measured by! Chemical Properties
Antioxidant Capacity: !measured by! Chemical Properties
Volatiles: !measured by! Chemical Properties
Color: !measured by! Physical Parameters
Shrinkage: !measured by! Physical Parameters
Porosity: !measured by! Physical Parameters
Texture: !measured by! Physical Parameters
Sensory Attributes: !considered in! Quality Classification
Energy Aspects: !considered in! Quality Classification