['28066461', 'Cell wall invertases (CWIN) cleave sucrose into glucose and fructose in the  apoplast. CWINs are key regulators of carbon partitioning and source/sink  relationships during growth, development and under biotic stresses. In this  report, we monitored the expression/activity of Arabidopsis cell wall invertases  in organs behaving as source, sink, or subjected to a source/sink transition  after infection with the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis cinerea. We showed that  organs with different source/sink status displayed differential CWIN activities,  depending on carbohydrate needs or availabilities in the surrounding environment,  through a transcriptional and posttranslational regulation. Loss-of-function  mutation of the Arabidopsis cell wall invertase 1 gene, AtCWIN1, showed that the  corresponding protein was the main contributor to the apoplastic sucrose cleaving  activity in both leaves and roots. The CWIN-deficient mutant cwin1-1 exhibited a  reduced capacity to actively take up external sucrose in roots, indicating that  this process is mainly dependent on the sucrolytic activity of AtCWIN1. Using  T-DNA and CRISPR/Cas9 mutants impaired in hexose transport, we demonstrated that  external sucrose is actively absorbed in the form of hexoses by a sugar/H(+)  symport system involving the coordinated activity of AtCWIN1 with several Sugar  Transporter Proteins (STP) of the plasma membrane, i.e., STP1 and STP13. Part of  external sucrose was imported without apoplastic cleavage into cwin1-1 seedling  roots, highlighting an alternative AtCWIN1-independent pathway for the  assimilation of external sucrose. Accordingly, we showed that several genes  encoding sucrose transporters of the plasma membrane were expressed. We also  detected transcript accumulation of vacuolar invertase (VIN)-encoding genes and  high VIN activities. Upon infection, AtCWIN1 was responsible for all the  Botrytis-induced apoplastic invertase activity. We detected a transcriptional  activation of several AtSUC and AtVIN genes accompanied with an enhanced vacuolar  invertase activity, suggesting that the AtCWIN1-independent pathway is efficient  upon infection. In absence of AtCWIN1, we postulate that intracellular sucrose  hydrolysis is sufficient to provide intracellular hexoses to maintain sugar  homeostasis in host cells and to fuel plant defenses. Finally, we demonstrated  that Botrytis cinerea possesses its own functional sucrolytic machinery and  hexose uptake system, and does not rely on the host apoplastic invertases.', '2016', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2016.01899', 'La']

Cell wall invertases (CWIN): !cleave! sucrose 
AtCWIN1: !regulates! carbon partitioning 
AtCWIN1: !contributes to! apoplastic sucrose cleaving activity 
AtCWIN1: !coordinates with! Sugar Transporter Proteins 
AtCWIN1: !activates! AtSUC and AtVIN genes 
Botrytis cinerea: !possesses! functional sucrolytic machinery