Anther cuticle and pollen exine are the major protective barriers against various stresses. The proper functioning of genes expressed in the tapetum is vital for the development of pollen exine and anther cuticle. In this study, we report a tapetum-specific gene, Abnormal Pollen Vacuolation1 (APV1), in maize that affects anther cuticle and pollen exine formation. The apv1 mutant was completely male sterile. Its microspores were swollen, less vacuolated, with a flat and empty anther locule. In the mutant, the anther epidermal surface was smooth, shiny, and plate-shaped compared with the three-dimensional crowded ridges and randomly formed wax crystals on the epidermal surface of the wild-type. The wild-type mature pollen had elaborate exine patterning, whereas the apv1 pollen surface was smooth. Only a few unevenly distributed Ubisch bodies were formed on the apv1 mutant, leading to a more apparent inner surface. A significant reduction in the cutin monomers was observed in the mutant. APV1 encodes a member of the P450 subfamily, CYP703A2-Zm, which contains 530 amino acids. APV1 appeared to be widely expressed in the tapetum at the vacuolation stage, and its protein signal co-localized with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) signal. RNA-Seq data revealed that most of the genes in the fatty acid metabolism pathway were differentially expressed in the apv1 mutant. Altogether, we suggest that APV1 functions in the fatty acid hydroxylation pathway which is involved in forming sporopollenin precursors and cutin monomers that are essential for the development of pollen exine and anther cuticle in maize.

APV1: !affects! anther cuticle and pollen exine formation 
APV1: !encodes! CYP703A2-Zm 
APV1: !localizes to! tapetum at vacuolation stage 
APV1: !co-localizes with! endoplasmic reticulum signal 
Fatty acid metabolism pathway: !differentially expressed in! apv1 mutant 
Fatty acid hydroxylation pathway: !involved in! forming sporopollenin precursors and cutin monomers 
Sporopollenin precursors and cutin monomers: !essential for! development of pollen exine and anther cuticle