We demonstrate that RNAs of StBEL11 and StBEL29 are phloem-mobile and function antagonistically to the growth-promoting characteristics of StBEL5 in potato. Both these RNAs appear to inhibit tuber growth by repressing the activity of target genes of StBEL5 in potato. Moreover, upstream sequence driving GUS expression in transgenic potato lines demonstrated that both StBEL11 and -29 promoter activity is robust in leaf veins, petioles, stems, and vascular tissues and induced by short days in leaves and stolons. Steady-state levels of their mRNAs were also enhanced by short-day conditions in selective organs. There are thirteen functional BEL1-like genes in potato that encode for a family of transcription factors (TF) ubiquitous in the plant kingdom. These BEL1 TFs work in tandem with KNOTTED1-types to regulate the expression of numerous target genes involved in hormone metabolism and growth processes. One of the StBELs, StBEL5, functions as a long-distance mRNA signal that is transcribed in leaves and moves into roots and stolons to stimulate growth. The two most closely related StBELs to StBEL5 are StBEL11 and -29. Together these three genes make up more than 70% of all StBEL transcripts present throughout the potato plant. They share a number of common features, suggesting they may be co-functional in tuber development. Upstream sequence driving GUS expression in transgenic potato lines demonstrated that both StBEL11 and -29 promoter activity is robust in leaf veins, petioles, stems, and vascular tissues and induced by short-days in leaves and stolons. Steady-state levels of their mRNAs were also enhanced by short-day conditions in specific organs. Using a transgenic approach and heterografting experiments, we show that both these StBELs inhibit growth in correlation with the long distance transport of their mRNAs from leaves to roots and stolons, whereas suppression lines of these two RNAs exhibited enhanced tuber yields. In summary, our results indicate that the RNAs of StBEL11 and StBEL29 are phloem-mobile and function antagonistically to the growth-promoting characteristics of StBEL5. Both these RNAs appear to inhibit growth in tubers by repressing the activity of target genes of StBEL5.

StBEL5: !enhances! growth
StBEL11/29: !represses! StBEL5 target genes
StBEL11/29: !localizes to! leaf veins, petioles, stems, and vascular tissues
StBEL11/29: !enhanced by! short-day conditions
StBEL11/29: !inhibits! tuber growth