The complex process of formation of storage roots (SRs) from adventitious roots affects sweetpotato yield. Identifying the genes that are uniquely expressed in the SR forming cultivated species, Ipomoea batatas (Ib), and its immediate ancestral species, Ipomoea trifida (It), which does not form SRs, may provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying SR formation in sweetpotato. Illumina paired-end sequencing generated ~208 and ~200 million reads for Ib and It, respectively. Trinity assembly of the reads resulted in 98,317 transcripts for Ib and 275,044 for It, after post-assembly removal of trans-chimeras. From these sequences, we identified 4,865 orthologous genes in both Ib and It, 60 paralogous genes in Ib and 2,286 paralogous genes in It. Among paralogous gene sets, transcripts encoding the transcription factor RKD, which may have a role in nitrogen regulation and starch formation, and rhamnogalacturonate lyase (RGL) family proteins, which produce the precursors of cell wall polysaccharides, were found only in Ib. In addition, transcripts encoding a K<sup>+</sup> efflux antiporter (KEA5) and the ERECTA protein kinase, which function in phytohormonal regulation and root proliferation, respectively, were also found only in Ib. qRT-PCR indicated that starch and sucrose metabolism genes, such as those encoding ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase and beta-amylase, showed lower expression in It than Ib, whereas lignin genes such as caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase (CoMT) and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) showed higher expression in It than Ib. A total of 7,067 and 9,650 unique microsatellite markers, 1,037,396 and 495,931 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 103,439 and 69,194 InDels in Ib and It, respectively, were also identified from this study. The detection of genes involved in the biosynthesis of RGL family proteins, the transcription factor RKD, and genes encoding a K<sup>+</sup> efflux antiporter (KEA5) and the ERECTA protein kinase only in I. batatas indicate that these genes may have important functions in SR formation in sweetpotato. Potential molecular markers (SNPs, simple sequence repeats and InDels) and sequences identified in this study may represent a valuable resource for sweetpotato gene annotation and may serve as important tools for improving SR formation in sweetpotato through breeding.

RKD: !uniquely expressed in! I. batatas 
RGL family proteins: !uniquely expressed in! I. batatas 
KEA5: !uniquely expressed in! I. batatas 
ERECTA protein kinase: !uniquely expressed in! I. batatas 
starch and sucrose metabolism genes: !lower expression in! I. trifida 
lignin genes: !higher expression in! I. trifida