Fackel (FK) is involved in the flowering of Arabidopsis mainly via the gibberellin pathway and vernalization pathway. This new function of FK is partially dependent on the FLOWERING LOCUS C ( FLC ). A common transitional process from vegetative stage to reproductive stage exists in higher plants during their life cycle. The initiation of flower bud differentiation, which plays a key role in the reproductive phase, is affected by both external environmental and internal regulatory factors. In this study, we showed that the Arabidopsis weak mutant allele fk-J3158, impaired in the FACKEL (FK) gene, which encodes a C-14 reductase involved in sterol biosynthesis, had a long life cycle and delayed flowering time in different photoperiods. In addition, FK overexpression lines displayed an earlier flowering phenotype than that of the wild type. These processes might be independent of the downstream brassinosteroid (BR) pathway and the autonomous pathway. However, the fk-J3158 plants were more sensitive than wild type in reducing the bolting days and total leaf number under gibberellic acid (GA) treatment. Further studies suggested that FK mutation led to an absence of endogenous GAs in fk-J3158 and FK gene expression was also affected under GA and paclobutrazol (PAC) treatment. Moreover, the delayed flowering time of fk-J3158 could be rescued by a 3-week vernalization treatment, and the expression of FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) was accordingly down-regulated in fk-J3158. We also demonstrated that flowering time of fk-J3158 flc double mutant was significantly earlier than that of fk-J3158 under the long-day (LD) conditions. All these results indicated that FK may affect the flowering in Arabidopsis mainly via GA pathway and vernalization pathway. And these effects are partially dependent on the FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC).

FK: !affects! Flowering 
FK: !interacts with! GA pathway 
FK: !interacts with! Vernalization pathway 
FK: !depends on! FLC 
FLC: !down-regulated by! FK mutation 
GA: !reduces! Bolting days 
GA: !reduces! Total leaf number 
Vernalization: !rescues! Delayed flowering time of fk-J3158