['28115582', 'Calcium (Ca(2+)) signaling and dynamic reorganization of the cytoskeleton are  essential processes for the coordination and control of plant cell shape and cell  growth. Calmodulin (CaM) and closely related calmodulin-like (CML) polypeptides  are principal sensors of Ca(2+) signals. CaM/CMLs decode and relay information  encrypted by the second messenger via differential interactions with a wide  spectrum of targets to modulate their diverse biochemical activities. The  plant-specific IQ67 DOMAIN (IQD) family emerged as possibly the largest class of  CaM-interacting proteins with undefined molecular functions and biological roles.  Here, we show that the 33 members of the IQD family in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) differentially localize, using green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged  proteins, to multiple and distinct subcellular sites, including microtubule (MT)  arrays, plasma membrane subdomains, and nuclear compartments. Intriguingly, the  various IQD-specific localization patterns coincide with the subcellular patterns  of IQD-dependent recruitment of CaM, suggesting that the diverse IQD members  sequester Ca(2+)-CaM signaling modules to specific subcellular sites for precise  regulation of Ca(2+)-dependent processes. Because MT localization is a hallmark  of most IQD family members, we quantitatively analyzed GFP-labeled MT arrays in  Nicotiana benthamiana cells transiently expressing GFP-IQD fusions and observed  IQD-specific MT patterns, which point to a role of IQDs in MT organization and  dynamics. Indeed, stable overexpression of select IQD proteins in Arabidopsis  altered cellular MT orientation, cell shape, and organ morphology. Because IQDs  share biochemical properties with scaffold proteins, we propose that IQD families  provide an assortment of platform proteins for integrating CaM-dependent Ca(2+)  signaling at multiple cellular sites to regulate cell function, shape, and  growth.', '2017 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.16.01743', 'Abel']

Calcium: !signals! Calmodulin
Calmodulin: !interacts with! IQD family
IQD family: !localizes to! subcellular sites
IQD family: !recruits! CaM
IQD family: !organizes! MTs
MTs: !affects! cell shape
IQD family: !regulates! cell function