Plant defenses inducible by herbivorous arthropods can determine performance of subsequent feeding herbivores. We investigated how infestation of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) plants with the Western flower thrips (Frankliniella occidentalis) alters host plant suitability and foraging decisions of their conspecifics. We explored the role of delayed-induced jasmonic acid (JA)-mediated plant defense responses in thrips preference by using the tomato mutant def-1, impaired in JA biosynthesis. In particular, we investigated the effect of thrips infestation on trichome-associated tomato defenses. The results showed that when offered a choice, thrips preferred non-infested plants over infested wild-type plants, while no differences were observed in def-1. Exogenous application of methyl jasmonate restored the repellency effect in def-1. Gene expression analysis showed induction of the JA defense signaling pathway in wild-type plants, while activating the ethylene signaling pathway in both genotypes. Activation of JA defenses led to increases in type-VI leaf glandular trichome densities in the wild type, augmenting the production of trichome-associated volatiles, i.e. terpenes. Our study revealed that plant-mediated intraspecific interactions between thrips are determined by JA-mediated defenses in tomato. We report that insects can alter not only trichome densities but also the allelochemicals produced therein, and that this response might depend on the magnitude and/or type of the induction.

Frankliniella occidentalis: !induces! JA-mediated plant defense responses 
JA-mediated plant defense responses: !determine! performance of subsequent feeding herbivores 
def-1 (tomato mutant): !impaired in! JA biosynthesis 
Frankliniella occidentalis: !prefers! non-infested plants over infested wild-type plants 
methyl jasmonate: !restores! repellency effect in def-1 
JA defense signaling pathway: !induced! in wild-type plants 
ethylene signaling pathway: !activated! in both genotypes 
JA defenses: !increase! type-VI leaf glandular trichome densities in the wild type 
trichome-associated volatiles: !augmented! by JA defenses