Representational difference analysis of cDNA was performed and differential products were sequenced and annotated. Candidate genes involved in biosynthesis of diosgenin in fenugreek were identified. Detailed mechanism of diosgenin synthesis was proposed. Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum L.) is a valuable medicinal and crop plant. It belongs to Fabaceae family and has a unique potential to synthesize valuable steroidal saponins, e.g., diosgenin. Elicitation (methyl jasmonate) and precursor feeding (cholesterol and squalene) were used to enhance the content of sterols and steroidal sapogenins in in vitro grown plants for representational difference analysis of cDNA (cDNA-RDA). To identify candidate genes involved in diosgenin biosynthesis, differential, factor-specific libraries were subject to the next-generation sequencing. Approximately 9.9 million reads were obtained, trimmed, and assembled into 31,491 unigenes with an average length of 291 bp. Then, functional annotation and gene ontogeny enrichment analysis was performed by aligning all-unigenes with public databases. Within the transcripts related to sterol and steroidal saponin biosynthesis, we discovered novel candidate genes of diosgenin biosynthesis and validated their expression using quantitative RT-PCR analysis. Based on these findings, we supported the idea that diosgenin is biosynthesized from cycloartenol via cholesterol. This is the first report on the next-generation sequencing of cDNA-RDA products. Analysis of the transcriptomes enriched in low copy sequences contributed substantially to our understanding of the biochemical pathways of steroid synthesis in fenugreek.

Elicitation: !enhances! Content of sterols 
Precursor feeding: !enhances! Content of sterols 
cDNA-RDA: !identifies! Candidate genes 
Next-generation sequencing: !identifies! Candidate genes 
Functional annotation: !annotates! Unigenes 
Gene ontogeny enrichment analysis: !annotates! Unigenes 
Candidate genes: !synthesize! Diosgenin 
Quantitative RT-PCR: !validates! Expression 
Cycloartenol: !converts to! Cholesterol 
Transcriptomes: !enrich! Low copy sequences