['28167700', 'Plants sense and integrate a variety of signals from the environment through  different interacting signal transduction pathways that involve hormones and  signaling molecules. Using ALTERNATIVE OXIDASE1a (AOX1a) gene expression as a  model system of retrograde or stress signaling between mitochondria and the  nucleus, MYB DOMAIN PROTEIN29 (MYB29) was identified as a negative regulator  (regulator of alternative oxidase1a 7 [rao7] mutant) in a genetic screen of  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). rao7/myb29 mutants have increased levels of  AOX1a transcript and protein compared to wild type after induction with antimycin  A. A variety of genes previously associated with the mitochondrial stress  response also display enhanced transcript abundance, indicating that RAO7/MYB29  negatively regulates mitochondrial stress responses in general. Meta-analysis of  hormone-responsive marker genes and identification of downstream transcription  factor networks revealed that MYB29 functions in the complex interplay of  ethylene, jasmonic acid, salicylic acid, and reactive oxygen species signaling by  regulating the expression of various ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR and WRKY  transcription factors. Despite an enhanced induction of mitochondrial stress  response genes, rao7/myb29 mutants displayed an increased sensitivity to combined  moderate light and drought stress. These results uncover interactions between  mitochondrial retrograde signaling and the regulation of glucosinolate  biosynthesis, both regulated by RAO7/MYB29. This common regulator can explain why  perturbation of the mitochondrial function leads to transcriptomic responses  overlapping with responses to biotic stress.', '2017 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.16.01494', 'ORCID:']

AOX1a: !regulated by! MYB29 
MYB29: !regulates! AOX1a 
RAO7/MYB29: !negatively regulates! mitochondrial stress responses 
RAO7/MYB29: !regulates! ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR and WRKY transcription factors 
RAO7/MYB29: !regulates! glucosinolate biosynthesis