Actin filaments are essential for the integrity of the cell membrane. In addition to this structural role, actin can modulate signaling by altering polar auxin flow. On the other hand, the organization of actin filaments is modulated by auxin constituting a self-referring signaling hub. Although the function of this auxin–actin oscillator is not clear, there is evidence for a functional link with stress signaling activated by the NADPH oxidase Respiratory burst oxidase Homolog (RboH). In the current work, we used the cell-penetrating peptide BP100 to induce a mild and transient perturbation of membrane integrity. We followed the response of actin to the BP100 uptake in a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged actin marker line of tobacco Bright Yellow 2 (BY-2) cells by spinning disc confocal microscopy. We observed that BP100 enters in a stepwise manner and reduces the extent of actin remodeling. This actin ‘freezing’ can be rescued by the natural auxin IAA, and mimicked by the auxin-efflux inhibitor 1-napthylphthalamic acid (NPA). We further tested the role of the membrane-localized NADPH oxidase RboH using the specific inhibitor diphenyl iodonium (DPI), and found that DPI acts antagonistically to BP100, although DPI alone can induce a similar actin ‘freezing’ as well. We propose a working model, where the mild violation of membrane integrity by BP100 stimulates RboH, and the resulting elevated levels of reactive oxygen species interfere with actin dynamicity. The mitigating effect of auxin is explained by competition of auxin- and RboH-triggered signaling for superoxide anions. This self-referring auxin–actin–RboH hub might be essential for integrity sensing.

Actin: !essential for! cell membrane integrity 
Auxin: !modulates! actin organization 
RboH: !activates! stress signaling 
BP100: !induces! actin 'freezing' 
IAA: !rescues! BP100-induced actin 'freezing' 
NPA: !mimics! BP100-induced actin 'freezing' 
DPI: !acts antagonistically to! BP100 
RboH: !interferes with! actin dynamicity 
Auxin: !competes with! RboH-triggered signaling