Pinus sylvestris responds to insect egg deposition by ROS accumulation linked with reduced activity of the ROS scavenger catalase. Egg mortality in needles with hypersensitive response (HR)-like symptoms is enhanced. Aggressive reactive oxygen species (ROS) play an important role in plant defence against biotic stressors, including herbivorous insects. Plants may even generate ROS in response to insect eggs, thus effectively fighting against future larval herbivory. However, so far nothing is known on how ROS-mediated plant defence against insect eggs is enzymatically regulated. Neither do we know how insects cope with egg-induced plant ROS. We addressed these gaps of knowledge by studying the activities of ROS-related enzymes in Pinus sylvestris deposited with eggs of the herbivorous sawfly Diprion pini. This species cuts a slit into pine needles and inserts its eggs into the needle tissue. About a quarter of egg-deposited needles show chlorotic tissue at the oviposition sites, indicating hypersensitive response-like direct defence responses resulting in reduced larval hatching from eggs. Hydrogen peroxide and peroxidase sensitive staining of sections of egg-deposited pine needles revealed the presence of hydrogen peroxide and peroxidase activity in needle tissue close to the eggs. Activity of ROS-producing NADPH-oxidase did not increase after egg deposition. However, the activity of the ROS-detoxifying enzyme catalase decreased after egg deposition and ovipositional wounding of needles. These results show that local ROS accumulation at the oviposition site is not caused by increased NADPH-oxidase activity, but reduced activity of pine needle catalase may contribute to it. However, our data suggest that pine sawflies can counteract the egg deposition-induced hydrogen peroxide accumulation in pine needles by high catalase activity in their oviduct secretion which is released with the eggs into pine tissue.

ROS: !accumulates in! egg-deposited needles 
NADPH-oxidase: !does not increase! after egg deposition 
catalase: !decreases! after egg deposition 
sawfly oviduct secretion: !counteracts! hydrogen peroxide accumulation