['28184867', 'ABA plays a critical role in regulating seed germination and stomatal movement in  response to drought stress. Screening ABA-responsive genes led to the  identification of a novel Arabidopsis gene encoding a protein which contained a  conserved F-box-associated (FBA) domain, subsequently named ABA-responsive FBA  domain-containing protein 1 (AFBA1). Expression of ProAFBA1:GUS revealed that  this gene was mainly expressed in guard cells. Expression of AFBA1 increased  following the application of exogenous ABA and exposure to salt (NaCl) and  drought stresses. Seed germination of the loss-of-function mutant (afba1) was  insensitive to ABA, salt or mannitol, whereas AFBA1-overexpressing (Ox) seeds  were more sensitive to these stresses than the wild-type seeds. The afba1 plants  showed decreased drought tolerance, increased water loss rate and ABA-insensitive  stomatal movement compared with the wild-type. In contrast, AFBA1-Ox plants  exhibited enhanced drought tolerance and a rapid ABA-induced stomatal closure  response. The expression of genes encoding serine/threonine protein phosphatases  that are known negative regulators of ABA signaling increased in afba1 plants but  decreased in AFBA1-Ox plants. AFBA1 was also found to be localized in the nucleus  and to interact with an R2R3-type transcription factor, MYB44, leading to the  suggestion that it functions in the stabilization of MYB44. Based on these  results, we suggest that AFBA1 functions as a novel positive regulator of ABA  responses, regulating the expression of genes involved in ABA signal transduction  in Arabidopsis through its interaction with positive regulators of ABA signaling  including MYB44, and increasing their stability during ABA-mediated responses.', '2017 Mar 1', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcx003', 'Shin']

ABA: !regulates! seed germination 
AFBA1: !enhances! ABA responses 
AFBA1: !localizes to! nucleus 
AFBA1: !interacts with! MYB44 
afba1: !insensitive to! ABA, salt, mannitol 
AFBA1-Ox: !sensitive to! ABA, salt, mannitol 
afba1: !increases! expression of negative regulators of ABA signaling 
AFBA1-Ox: !decreases! expression of negative regulators of ABA signaling