HSFA9 is a seed-specific transcription factor that in sunflower (Helianthus annuus) is involved in desiccation tolerance and longevity. Here we show that the constitutive overexpression of HSFA9 in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) seedlings attenuated hypocotyl growth under darkness and accelerated the initial photosynthetic development. Plants overexpressing HSFA9 increased accumulation of carotenoids, chlorophyllide, and chlorophyll, and displayed earlier unfolding of the cotyledons. HSFA9 enhanced phytochrome-dependent light responses, as shown by an intensified hypocotyl length reduction after treatments with continuous far-red or red light. This observation indicated the involvement of at least two phytochromes: PHYA and PHYB. Reduced hypocotyl length under darkness did not depend on phytochrome photo-activation; this was inferred from the lack of effect observed using far-red light pulses applied before the dark treatment. HSFA9 increased the expression of genes that activate photomorphogenesis, including PHYA, PHYB, and HY5. HSFA9 might directly upregulate PHYA and indirectly affect PHYB transcription, as suggested by transient expression assays. Converse effects on gene expression, greening, and cotyledon unfolding were observed using a dominant-negative form of HSFA9, which was overexpressed under a seed-specific promoter. This work uncovers a novel transcriptional link, through HSFA9, between seed maturation and early photomorphogenesis. In all, our data suggest that HSFA9 enhances photomorphogenesis via early transcriptional effects that start in seeds under darkness.

HSFA9: !enhances! photomorphogenesis
HSFA9: !increases! expression of PHYA, PHYB, and HY5
HSFA9: !upregulates! PHYA
HSFA9: !indirectly affects! PHYB transcription
HSFA9: !attenuates! hypocotyl growth under darkness
HSFA9: !accelerates! initial photosynthetic development
HSFA9: !increases! accumulation of carotenoids, chlorophyllide, and chlorophyll
HSFA9: !causes! earlier unfolding of cotyledons
PHYA: !interacts with! PHYB
PHYA: !activates! photomorphogenesis