['28223360', 'The propeptides of subtilisin-like serine proteinases (subtilases, SBTs) serve  dual functions as intramolecular chaperones that are required for enzyme folding  and as inhibitors of the mature proteases. SBT propeptides are homologous to the  I9 family of protease inhibitors that have only been described in fungi. Here we  report the identification and characterization of subtilisin propeptide-like  inhibitor 1 (SPI-1) from Arabidopsis thaliana Sequence similarity and the shared  beta-alpha-beta-beta-alpha-beta core structure identified SPI-1 as a member of the I9 inhibitor  family and as the first independent I9 inhibitor in higher eukaryotes. SPI-1 was  characterized as a high-affinity, tight-binding inhibitor of Arabidopsis  subtilase SBT4.13 with K(d) and K(i) values in the picomolar range. SPI-1 acted  as a stable inhibitor of SBT4.13 over the physiologically relevant range of pH,  and its inhibitory profile included many other SBTs from plants but not bovine  chymotrypsin or bacterial subtilisin A. Upon binding to SBT4.13, the C-terminal  extension of SPI-1 was proteolytically cleaved. The last four amino acids at the  newly formed C terminus of SPI-1 matched both the cleavage specificity of SBT4.13  and the consensus sequence of Arabidopsis SBTs at the junction of the propeptide  with the catalytic domain. The data suggest that the C terminus of SPI-1 acts as  a competitive inhibitor of target proteases as it remains bound to the active  site in a product-like manner. SPI-1 thus resembles SBT propeptides with respect  to its mode of protease inhibition. However, in contrast to SBT propeptides,  SPI-1 could not substitute as a folding assistant for SBT4.13.', '2017 Apr 14', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.M117.775445', 'Schaller']

SBT propeptides: !serve dual functions as! intramolecular chaperones 
SPI-1: !identified as! member of I9 inhibitor family 
SPI-1: !characterized as! high-affinity, tight-binding inhibitor of SBT4.13 
SPI-1: !inhibits! many other SBTs from plants 
SPI-1: !proteolytically cleaved! upon binding to SBT4.13 
SPI-1: !acts as! competitive inhibitor of target proteases 
SPI-1: !resembles SBT propeptides! with respect to mode of protease inhibition 
SPI-1: !cannot substitute! as folding assistant for SBT4.13