Grapevine (<i>Vitis vinifera</i>) is routinely grafted, and rootstocks inducing drought tolerance represent a source for adapting vineyards to climate change in temperate areas. Our goal was to investigate drought stress effects on microRNA (miRNA) abundance in a drought-resistant grapevine rootstock, M4 (<i>Vitis vinifera</i> × <i>Vitis berlandieri</i>), compared with a commercial cultivar, Cabernet Sauvignon, using their autografts and reciprocal grafts. RNA extracted from roots and leaves of droughted and irrigated plants of different graft combinations was used to prepare cDNA libraries for small RNA sequencing and to analyze miRNAs by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). Measurements of leaf water potential, leaf gas exchange, and root hydraulic conductance attested that, under irrigation, M4 reduced water loss in comparison with cultivar Cabernet Sauvignon mostly through nonhydraulic, root-specific mechanisms. Under drought, stomatal conductance decreased at similar levels in the two genotypes. Small RNA sequencing allowed the identification of 70 conserved miRNAs and the prediction of 28 novel miRNAs. Different accumulation trends of miRNAs, observed upon drought and in different genotypes and organs, were confirmed by RT-qPCR Corresponding target transcripts, predicted in silico and validated by RT-qPCR, often showed opposite expression profiles than the related miRNAs. Drought effects on miRNA abundance differed between the two genotypes. Furthermore, the concentration of drought-responsive miRNAs in each genotype was affected by reciprocal grafting, suggesting either the movement of signals inducing miRNA expression in the graft partner or, possibly, miRNA transport between scion and rootstock. These results open new perspectives in the selection of rootstocks for improving grapevine adaptation to drought.

Gene: !affects! miRNA abundance
miRNA: !regulates! target transcripts
Drought: !influences! miRNA abundance
Rootstock: !reduces! water loss
Grafting: !affects! miRNA concentration