This study was aimed at the identification and quantification of the protein components of the pollen grains in parallel with the distal stigmatic tissue of tetraploid cultivars. Proteomes were analyzed using iTRAQ 4plex labeling, peptides separation by online RP-nano-LC and analysis by ESI-MS/MS. Protein identification and quantification were made using the Asparagales database as a reference. A total of 524,037 MS/MS spectra were produced from pollen and stigma samples. From these, a total of 8368 peptides wereidentified corresponding to 994 unique peptides and 432 protein groups. Among them, 128 differentially expressed proteins were retained for further analysis. In absence of the daylily genome availability, we exploited numerous databases and bioinformatics resources to exploring the putative biological functions of these proteins. The profile of differentially expressed proteins suggests an important representation of functions associated to the signalling and response against endogenous and environmental stresses, including several enzymes implicated in the biosynthesis of antibiotics. The abundance in stigma of several structural proteins of the ribosomal sub-units as well as of the core histones suggest that the translation processes and the regulation of gene expression in stigma is a more active mechanism than in pollen. In addition, pollen prioritizes the synthesis of fructose and glucose as opposed to sucrose in stigma as a source of energy. Finally, the modulated proteins in Hemerocallis point to several pathways that give potential clues concerning the molecular mechanisms underlying the functions of the pollen and the stigmatic fluid in daylily reproduction.

Protein: !identified in! Pollen & Stigma
Protein: !differentially expressed in! Pollen & Stigma
Signalling: !regulated by! Proteins
Stress: !responded to by! Proteins
Enzymes: !involved in! Biosynthesis of Antibiotics
Translation: !active in! Stigma
Energy: !prioritized in! Pollen
Pathways: !pointed to by! Modulated Proteins