A delay in the senescence of symbiotic nodules could prolong active nitrogen fixation, resulting in improved crop yield and a reduced need for chemical fertilizers. The molecular genetic mechanisms underlying nodule senescence have not been extensively studied with a view to breeding varieties with delayed nodule senescence. In such studies, plant mutants with the phenotype of premature degradation of symbiotic structures are useful models to elucidate the genetic basis of nodule senescence. Using a dataset from transcriptome analysis of Medicago truncatula Gaertn. nodules and previous studies on pea (Pisum sativum L.) nodules, we developed a set of molecular markers based on genes that are known to be activated during nodule senescence. These genes encode cysteine proteases, a thiol protease, a bZIP transcription factor, enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of ethylene (ACS2 for ACC synthase and ACO1 for ACC oxidase) and ABA (AO3 for aldehyde oxidase), and an enzyme involved in catabolism of gibberellins (GA 2-oxidase). We analyzed the transcript levels of these genes in the nodules of two pea wild-types (cv. Sparkle and line Sprint-2) and two mutant lines, one showing premature nodule senescence (E135F (sym13)) and one showing no morphological signs of symbiotic structure degradation (Sprint-2Fix<sup>-</sup> (sym31)). Real-time PCR analyses revealed that all of the selected genes showed increased transcript levels during nodule aging in all phenotypes. Remarkably, at 4 weeks after inoculation (WAI), the transcript levels of all analyzed genes were significantly higher in the early senescent nodules of the mutant line E135F (sym13) and in nodules of the mutant Sprint-2Fix<sup>-</sup> (sym31) than in the active nitrogen-fixing nodules of wild-types. In contrast, the transcript levels of the same genes of both wild-types were significantly increased only at 6 WAI. We evaluated the expression of selected markers in the different histological nodule zones of pea cv. Sparkle and its mutant line E135F (sym13) by laser capture microdissection analysis. Finally, we analyzed ACC by immunolocalization in the nodules of both wild-type pea and their mutants. Together, the results indicate that nodule senescence is a general plant response to nodule ineffectiveness.

Cysteine proteases: !enhance! nodule senescence
Thiol protease: !enhance! nodule senescence
bZIP transcription factor: !enhance! nodule senescence
ACS2 (ACC synthase): !enhance! nodule senescence
ACO1 (ACC oxidase): !enhance! nodule senescence
AO3 (aldehyde oxidase): !enhance! nodule senescence
GA 2-oxidase: !enhance! nodule senescence
E135F (sym13) mutant line: !exhibits! premature nodule senescence
Sprint-2Fix<sup>-</sup> (sym31) mutant line: !exhibits! no morphological signs of symbiotic structure degradation
Wild-types: !show increased! transcript levels at 6 WAI
Mutants: !show increased! transcript levels at 4 WAI
Laser capture microdissection analysis: !evaluates! expression of selected markers in different histological nodule zones
Immunolocalization: !analyzes! ACC in nodules of wild-type pea and mutants