The methylation of cytosines shapes the epigenetic landscape of plant genomes, coordinates transgenerational epigenetic inheritance, represses the activity of transposable elements (TEs), affects gene expression and, hence, can influence the phenotype. Sugar beet (Beta vulgaris ssp. vulgaris), an important crop that accounts for 30% of worldwide sugar needs, has a relatively small genome size (758 Mbp) consisting of approximately 485 Mbp repetitive DNA (64%), in particular satellite DNA, retrotransposons and DNA transposons. Genome-wide cytosine methylation in the sugar beet genome was studied in leaves and leaf-derived callus with a focus on repetitive sequences, including retrotransposons and DNA transposons, the major groups of repetitive DNA sequences, and compared with gene methylation. Genes showed a specific methylation pattern for CG, CHG (H = A, C, and T) and CHH sites, whereas the TE pattern differed, depending on the TE class (class 1, retrotransposons and class 2, DNA transposons). Along genes and TEs, CG and CHG methylation was higher than that of adjacent genomic regions. In contrast to the relatively low CHH methylation in retrotransposons and genes, the level of CHH methylation in DNA transposons was strongly increased, pointing to a functional role of asymmetric methylation in DNA transposon silencing. Comparison of genome-wide DNA methylation between sugar beet leaves and callus revealed a differential methylation upon tissue culture. Potential epialleles were hypomethylated (lower methylation) at CG and CHG sites in retrotransposons and genes and hypermethylated (higher methylation) at CHH sites in DNA transposons of callus when compared with leaves.

Methylation: !shapes! Epigenetic landscape 
Methylation: !coordinates! Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance 
Methylation: !represses! Activity of transposable elements 
Methylation: !affects! Gene expression 
Methylation: !influences! Phenotype 
Genes: !show! Specific methylation pattern 
TEs: !differ! Depending on TE class 
CG/CHG Methylation: !higher! Than adjacent genomic regions 
CHH Methylation: !lower! In retrotransposons and genes 
CHH Methylation: !strongly increased! In DNA transposons 
DNA Methylation: !differential! Upon tissue culture 
Epialleles: !hypomethylated! At CG/CHG sites in retrotransposons and genes 
Epialleles: !hypermethylated! At CHH sites in DNA transposons