['28267232', 'DICER-LIKE (DCL) enzymes process double-stranded RNA into small RNAs that act as  regulators of gene expression. Arabidopsis DCL4 and DCL2 each allow the  post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) of viruses and transgenes, but primary  PTGS-prone DCL4 outcompetes transitive PTGS-prone DCL2 in wild-type plants. This  hierarchy likely prevents DCL2 having any detrimental effects on endogenous  genes. Indeed, dcl4 mutants exhibit developmental defects and increased  sensitivity to genotoxic stress. In this study, the mechanism underlying dcl4  defects was investigated using genetic, biochemical and high-throughput  sequencing approaches. We show that the purple phenotype of dcl4 leaves  correlates with carbohydrate over-accumulation and defective phloem transport,  and depends on the activity of SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING 3, RNA-DEPENDENT RNA  POLYMERASE 6 (RDR6) and DCL2. This phenotype correlates with the downregulation  of two genes expressed in the apex and the vasculature, SMAX1-LIKE 4 (SMXL4) and  SMXL5, and the accumulation of DCL2- and RDR6-dependent small interfering RNAs  derived from these two genes. Supporting a causal effect, smxl4 smxl5 double  mutants exhibit leaf pigmentation, enhanced starch accumulation and defective  phloem transport, similar to dcl4 plants. Overall, this study elucidates the  detrimental action of DCL2 when DCL4 is absent, and indicates that DCL4  outcompeting DCL2 in wild-type plants is crucial to prevent the degradation of  endogenous transcripts by DCL2- and RDR6-dependent transitive PTGS.', '2017 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13528', 'ORCID:']

DCL4: !outcompetes! DCL2 
DCL4: !prevents degradation of! endogenous transcripts 
dcl4 mutants: !exhibit! developmental defects 
dcl4 mutants: !increase sensitivity to! genotoxic stress 
SMXL4/5: !downregulated in! dcl4 mutants 
SMXL4/5: !accumulate! DCL2- and RDR6-dependent small interfering RNAs 
smxl4 smxl5 double mutants: !exhibit! leaf pigmentation 
smxl4 smxl5 double mutants: !enhance! starch accumulation 
smxl4 smxl5 double mutants: !exhibit! defective phloem transport