Photosynthetic efficiency is a critical determinant of crop yield potential, although it remains below the theoretical optimum in modern crop varieties. Enhancing mesophyll conductance (i.e. the rate of carbon dioxide diffusion from substomatal cavities to the sites of carboxylation) may increase photosynthetic and water use efficiencies. To improve water use efficiency, mesophyll conductance should be increased without concomitantly increasing stomatal conductance. Here, we partition the variance in mesophyll conductance to within- and among-cultivar components across soybean (<i>Glycine max</i>) grown under both controlled and field conditions and examine the covariation of mesophyll conductance with photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance, water use efficiency, and leaf mass per area. We demonstrate that mesophyll conductance varies more than 2-fold and that 38% of this variation is due to cultivar identity. As expected, mesophyll conductance is positively correlated with photosynthetic rates. However, a strong positive correlation between mesophyll and stomatal conductance among cultivars apparently impedes positive scaling between mesophyll conductance and water use efficiency in soybean. Contrary to expectations, photosynthetic rates and mesophyll conductance both increased with increasing leaf mass per area. The presence of genetic variation for mesophyll conductance suggests that there is potential to increase photosynthesis and mesophyll conductance by selecting for greater leaf mass per area. Increasing water use efficiency, though, is unlikely unless there is simultaneous stabilizing selection on stomatal conductance.

mesophyll conductance: !varies! 2-fold 
mesophyll conductance: !due to! cultivar identity 
mesophyll conductance: !correlated with! photosynthetic rate 
mesophyll conductance: !correlated with! stomatal conductance 
mesophyll conductance: !increases with! leaf mass per area 
photosynthesis: !enhanced by! selecting for greater leaf mass per area 
water use efficiency: !unlikely unless! stabilizing selection on stomatal conductance