['28289427', 'Plant non-specific lipid transfer proteins (nsLTPs) belong to a complex  multigenic family implicated in diverse physiological processes. However, their  function and mode of action remain unclear probably because of functional  redundancy. Among the different roles proposed for nsLTPs, it has long been  suggested that they could transport cuticular precursor across the cell wall  during the formation of the cuticle, which constitutes the first physical barrier  for plant interactions with their aerial environment. Here, we took advantage of  the Arabidopsis thaliana etiolated hypocotyl model in which AtLTP2 was previously  identified as the unique and abundant nsLTP member in the cell wall proteome, to  investigate its function. AtLTP2 expression was restricted to epidermal cells of  aerial organs, in agreement with the place of cuticle deposition. Furthermore,  transient AtLTP2-TagRFP over-expression in Nicotiana benthamiana leaf epidermal  cells resulted in its localization to the cell wall, as expected, but  surprisingly also to the plastids, indicating an original dual trafficking for a  nsLTP. Remarkably, in etiolated hypocotyls, the atltp2-1 mutant displayed  modifications in cuticle permeability together with a disorganized  ultra-structure at the cuticle-cell wall interface completely recovered in  complemented lines, whereas only slight differences in cuticular composition were  observed. Thus, AtLTP2 may not play the historical purported nsLTP shuttling role  across the cell wall, but we rather hypothesize that AtLTP2 could play a major  structural role by maintaining the integrity of the adhesion between the mainly  hydrophobic cuticle and the hydrophilic underlying cell wall. Altogether, these  results gave new insights into nsLTP functions.', '2017', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2017.00263', 'Pacquit']

AtLTP2: !localizes to! cell wall and plastids 
atltp2-1 mutant: !displays modifications in! cuticle permeability 
AtLTP2: !maintains integrity of! adhesion between cuticle and cell wall