Bacterial blight of rice, caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, is one of the most destructive bacterial diseases throughout the major rice-growing regions in the world. The rice disease resistance (R) gene Xa10 confers race-specific disease resistance to X. oryzae pv. oryzae strains that deliver the corresponding transcription activator-like (TAL) effector AvrXa10. Upon bacterial infection, AvrXa10 binds specifically to the effector binding element in the promoter of the R gene and activates its expression. Xa10 encodes an executor R protein that triggers hypersensitive response and activates disease resistance. 'Nipponbare' rice carries two Xa10-like genes in its genome, of which one is the susceptible allele of the Xa23 gene, a Xa10-like TAL effector-dependent executor R gene isolated recently from 'CBB23' rice. However, the function of the two Xa10-like genes in disease resistance to X. oryzae pv. oryzae strains has not been investigated. Here, we designated the two Xa10-like genes as Xa10-Ni and Xa23-Ni and characterized their function for disease resistance to rice bacterial blight. Both Xa10-Ni and Xa23-Ni provided disease resistance to X. oryzae pv. oryzae strains that deliver the matching artificially designed TAL effectors (dTALE). Transgenic rice plants containing Xa10-Ni and Xa23-Ni under the Xa10 promoter provided specific disease resistance to X. oryzae pv. oryzae strains that deliver AvrXa10. Xa10-Ni and Xa23-Ni knock-out mutants abolished dTALE-dependent disease resistance to X. oryzae pv. oryzae. Heterologous expression of Xa10-Ni and Xa23-Ni in Nicotiana benthamiana triggered cell death. The 19-amino-acid residues at the N-terminal regions of XA10 or XA10-Ni are dispensable for their function in inducing cell death in N. benthamiana and the C-terminal regions of XA10, XA10-Ni, and XA23-Ni are interchangeable among each other without affecting their function. Like XA10, both XA10-Ni and XA23-Ni locate to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, show self-interaction, and induce ER Ca<sup>2+</sup> depletion in leaf cells of N. benthamiana. The results indicate that Xa10-Ni and Xa23-Ni in Nipponbare encode functional executor R proteins, which induce cell death in both monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants and have the potential of being engineered to provide broad-spectrum disease resistance to plant-pathogenic Xanthomonas spp.

Xa10: !confers! race-specific disease resistance
Xa10: !activates! expression of R gene
Xa10-Ni: !provides! disease resistance to X. oryzae pv. oryzae
Xa23-Ni: !provides! disease resistance to X. oryzae pv. oryzae
Xa10-Ni: !triggers! cell death in N. benthamiana
Xa23-Ni: !triggers! cell death in N. benthamiana
Xa10-Ni: !locates to! ER membrane
Xa23-Ni: !locates to! ER membrane
Xa10-Ni: !interacts with! itself
Xa23-Ni: !interacts with! itself
Xa10-Ni: !depletes! ER Ca<sup>2+</sup>
Xa23-Ni: !depletes! ER Ca<sup>2+</sup>