This study describes a new role for hydroperoxide lyase branch of oxylipin biosynthesis pathway in protecting photosynthetic apparatus under high light conditions. Lipid-derived signaling molecules, oxylipins, produced by a multi-branch pathway are central in regulation of a wide range of functions. The two most known branches, allene oxide synthase (AOS) and 13-hydroperoxide lyase (HPL) pathways, are best recognized as producers of defense compounds against biotic challenges. In the present work, we examine the role of these two oxylipin branches in plant tolerance to the abiotic stress, namely excessive light. Towards this goal, we have analyzed variable chlorophyll fluorescence parameters of intact leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana genotypes with altered oxylipin profile, followed by examining the impact of exogenous application of selected oxylipins on functional activity of photosynthetic apparatus in intact leaves and isolated thylakoid membranes. Our findings unequivocally bridge the function of oxylipins to photosynthetic processes. Specifically, HPL overexpressing lines display enhanced adaptability in response to high light treatment as evidenced by lower rate constant of photosystem 2 (PS2) photoinhibition and higher rate constant of PS2 recovery after photoinhibition. In addition, exogenous application of linolenic acid, 13-hydroperoxy linolenic acid, 12-oxophytodienoic acid, and methyl jasmonate individually, suppresses photochemical activity of PS2 in intact plants and isolated thylakoid membranes, while application of HPL-branch metabolites-does not. Collectively these data implicate function of HPL branch of oxylipin biosynthesis pathway in guarding PS2 under high light conditions, potentially exerted through tight regulation of free linolenic acid and 13-hydroperoxy linolenic acid levels, as well as competition with production of metabolites by AOS-branch of the oxylipin pathway.

AOS: !produces! defense compounds
HPL: !produces! defense compounds
HPL: !enhances! adaptability to high light
linolenic acid: !suppresses! photochemical activity of PS2
13-hydroperoxy linolenic acid: !suppresses! photochemical activity of PS2
12-oxophytodienoic acid: !suppresses! photochemical activity of PS2
methyl jasmonate: !suppresses! photochemical activity of PS2
HPL: !guards! PS2 under high light