Root-knot nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.) cause serious threat to cucumber production. Cucumis metuliferus, a relative of cucumber, is reported to be resistant to Meloidogyne incognita, yet the underlying resistance mechanism remains unclear. In this study, the response of resistant C. metuliferus accession PI482443 following nematode infection was studied in comparison with susceptible C. sativus cv. Jinlv No.3. Roots of selected Cucumis seedings were analysed using histological and biochemical techniques. Transcriptome changes of the resistance reaction were investigated by RNA-seq. The results showed that penetration and development of the nematode in resistant plants were reduced when compared to susceptible plants. Infection of a resistant genotype with M. incognita resulted in a hypersensitive reaction. The induction of phenylalanine ammonia lyase and peroxidase activities after infection was greater in resistant than susceptible roots. Several of the most relevant genes for phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, plant hormone signal transduction, and the plant-pathogen interaction pathway that are involved in resistance to the nematode were significantly altered. The resistance in C. metuliferus PI482443 to M. incognita was associated with reduced nematode penetration, retardation of nematode development, and hypersensitive necrosis. The expression of genes resulting in the deposition of lignin, toxic compounds synthesis, cell wall reinforcement, suppression of nematode feeding and resistance protein accumulation, and activation of several transcription factors might all contribute to the resistance response to the pest. These results may lead to a better understanding of the resistance mechanism and aid in the identification of potential targets resistant to pests for cucumber improvement.

Phenylalanine ammonia lyase: !enhances! Resistance 
Peroxidase: !enhances! Resistance 
Lignin: !deposits! in Response to Nematode 
Toxic Compounds: !synthesizes! in Response to Nematode 
Cell Wall: !reinforces! in Response to Nematode 
Feeding: !suppresses! by Resistance Protein 
Transcription Factors: !activates! in Response to Nematode