['28325849', 'Plant seeds are the primary source of triacylglycerols (TAG) for food, feed,  fuel, and industrial applications. As TAG is produced from diacylglycerol (DAG),  successful engineering strategies to enhance TAG levels have focused on the  conversion of DAG to TAG. However, the production of TAG can be limited by flux  through the enzymatic reactions that supply DAG. In this study, two Arabidopsis  phospholipase D(zeta) genes (AtPLD(zeta1) and AtPLD(zeta2) ) were coexpressed in Camelina  sativa to test whether the conversion of phosphatidylcholine to DAG impacts TAG  levels in seeds. The resulting transgenic plants produced 2% to 3% more TAG as a  component of total seed biomass and had increased 18:3 and 20:1 fatty acid levels  relative to wild type. Increased DAG and decreased PC levels were examined  through the kinetics of lipid assembly by [(14)C]acetate and [(14)C]glycerol  incorporation into glycerolipids. [(14)C]acetate was rapidly incorporated into  TAG in both wild-type and overexpression lines, indicating a significant flux of  nascent and elongated acyl-CoAs into the sn-3 position of TAG. Stereochemical  analysis revealed that newly synthesized fatty acids were preferentially  incorporated into the sn-2 position of PC, but the sn-1 position of de novo DAG  and indicated similar rates of nascent acyl groups into the Kennedy pathway and  acyl editing. [(14)C]glycerol studies demonstrated PC-derived DAG is the major  source of DAG for TAG synthesis in both tissues. The results emphasize that the  interconversions of DAG and PC pools can impact oil production and composition.', '2017 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.00026', 'ORCID:']

AtPLD(zeta1): !increases! TAG levels 
AtPLD(zeta2): !increases! TAG levels 
TAG: !produced from! DAG 
DAG: !converted from! phosphatidylcholine 
transgenic plants: !produce! 2-3% more TAG 
[(14)C]acetate: !incorporated into! TAG 
nascent acyl-CoAs: !incorporated into! sn-3 position of TAG 
fatty acids: !preferentially incorporated into! sn-2 position of PC 
PC-derived DAG: !major source of! DAG for TAG synthesis