Two distinct cinnamoyl-coenzyme A reductases (CCRs) from Selaginella moellendorffii were evaluated, and of these, SmCCR2-1, which has both distinct sequence motifs and catalytic properties, was clustered into a new CCR subgroup. Cinnamoyl-coenzyme A reductases (CCRs) have been reported in many land plants to have critical functions in monolignol biosynthesis. In this study, we performed a genome-wide screen and obtained two distinct SmCCRs from S. moellendorffii. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that SmCCR2 (both SmCCR2-1 and 2-2) and SmCCR3 together with PpaCCR belong to a distinct subgroup of genuine CCRs with variations in the NAD(P)H-binding motif. Enzymatic assays showed detectable activity by both SmCCR1 and SmCCR2-1 toward four hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA esters. SmCCR1, which clustered with reported CCRs from angiosperms and gymnosperms, exhibited specificity toward feruloyl-CoA, while SmCCR2-1 showed a preference for sinapoyl-CoA. Interestingly, the reaction temperature profiles for SmCCR1 and SmCCR2-1 are complementary. Homology models and molecular simulations suggest that the variations in NADPH-binding motifs, especially R(X)<sub>6</sub>K instead of R(X)<sub>5</sub>K, affect the NADP<sup>+</sup> conformation. Notably, the signature motif NWYCY was replaced with NGYCL in SmCCR1 and with EWYCL in SmCCR2-1, while the signature residues H202 and R253, reported in a previous study, were conserved in SmCCR1 and SmCCR2-1 but varied in SmCCR-like genes. It is likely that NWYCY is not a reliable signature for CCRs in plants. The detectable activity of site-direct mutant S123T of SmCCR1 suggested that S123 which consists of catalytic triad is changeable. Possible evolution process for the emergence of two subgroups of genuine CCRs was also revealed. Altogether, these findings revise our understanding of CCRs with regard to divergence and active sites.

SmCCR2-1: !clustered into! new CCR subgroup
CCRs: !have critical functions in! monolignol biosynthesis
SmCCR2-1: !showed preference for! sinapoyl-CoA
NADPH-binding motifs: !affect! NADP+ conformation
NWYCY: !not reliable signature for! CCRs in plants
S123T: !detectable activity of! site-direct mutant