The downstream flux of carotenoid metabolism in grape berries includes the biosynthesis of norisoprenoids, a group of important aroma compounds, and the production of ABA, a well-known plant hormone. This study focused on the transcriptional profiling comparison of genes participating in the biosynthesis of carotenoids, norisoprenoids, and ABA in Vitis vinifera 'Cabernet Sauvignon' grapes at pea size, veraison, and ripening stages. The grapes were obtained from Changli (CL, eastern China) and Gaotai (GT, western China) regions and analyzed using RNA-sequencing technology. The transcripts required for the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway showed a coordinated expression pattern, mainly expressing at green stage for CL and at veraison for GT, respectively. However, the carotenoid content evolution was not coincident with the timing and pattern of related gene expressions, since more carotenoids were accumulated at veraison in CL relative to two weeks before veraison in GT. Interestingly, norisoprenoid content was higher in GT than in CL, particularly at veraison and ripening, while the key gene encoding carotenoid cleavage dioxygenases, VvCCD1, showed an inverse relationship within the two regions. Higher flux was expected through the carotenoid pathway into ABA production in GT, based on the higher expression level of 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase and drought growing conditions. Most components involved in ABA and ethylene signaling showed distinct expression profiles in the two regions. These results revealed that downstream flux of carotenoid metabolism in grape berries showed regional differences. This study lays a foundation for future research to explore the molecular basis of climatic influences on carotenoid, norisoprenoid, and ABA biosynthesis.

VvCCD1: !inversely related to! norisoprenoid content 
9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase: !higher expression in! GT 
carotenoid biosynthesis pathway: !coordinated expression pattern in! CL and GT 
carotenoid content: !not coincident with! related gene expressions 
ABA production: !higher flux expected through! carotenoid pathway in GT 
ABA and ethylene signaling: !distinct expression profiles in! CL and GT