Fine-tuned and coordinated regulation of transport, metabolism and redox homeostasis allows plants to acclimate to osmotic and ionic stress caused by high salinity. Sugar beet is a highly salt tolerant crop plant and is therefore an interesting model to study sodium chloride (NaCl) acclimation in crops. Sugar beet plants were subjected to a final level of 300 mM NaCl for up to 14 d in hydroponics. Plants acclimated to NaCl stress by maintaining its growth rate and adjusting its cellular redox and reactive oxygen species (ROS) network. In order to understand the unusual suppression of ROS accumulation under severe salinity, the regulation of elements of the redox and ROS network was investigated at the transcript level. First, the gene families of superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxiredoxins (Prx), alternative oxidase (AOX), plastid terminal oxidase (PTOX) and NADPH oxidase (RBOH) were identified in the sugar beet genome. Salinity induced the accumulation of Cu-Zn-SOD, Mn-SOD, Fe-SOD3, all AOX isoforms, 2-Cys-PrxB, PrxQ, and PrxIIF. In contrast, Fe-SOD1, 1-Cys-Prx, PrxIIB and PrxIIE levels decreased in response to salinity. Most importantly, RBOH transcripts of all isoforms decreased. This pattern offers a straightforward explanation for the low ROS levels under salinity. Promoters of stress responsive antioxidant genes were analyzed in silico for the enrichment of cis-elements, in order to gain insights into gene regulation. The results indicate that special cis-elements in the promoters of the antioxidant genes in sugar beet participate in adjusting the redox and ROS network and are fundamental to high salinity tolerance of sugar beet.

SOD: !accumulates in! response to salinity
Prx: !accumulates in! response to salinity
AOX: !accumulates in! response to salinity
PTOX: !accumulates in! response to salinity
RBOH: !decreases in! response to salinity
Fe-SOD1: !decreases in! response to salinity
1-Cys-Prx: !decreases in! response to salinity
PrxIIB: !decreases in! response to salinity
PrxIIE: !decreases in! response to salinity
cis-elements: !participate in! adjusting redox and ROS network