['28330558', 'Changes in the levels of polyamines are correlated with the activation or  repression of developmental response pathways, but the role of polyamine  transporters in the regulation of polyamine homeostasis and thus indirectly gene  expression, has not been previously addressed. Here we show that the A. thaliana  and rice transporters AtPUT5 and OsPUT1 were localized to the ER, while the  AtPUT2, AtPUT3, and OsPUT3 were localized to the chloroplast by transient  expression in N. benthamiana. A. thaliana plants that were transformed with  OsPUT1 under the control the PUT5 promoter were delayed in flowering by 16days.  In contrast, put5 mutants flowered four days earlier than WT plants. The delay of  flowering was associated with significantly higher levels of spermidine and  spermidine conjugates in the leaves prior to flowering. A similar delay in  flowering was also noted in transgenic lines with constitutive expression of  either OsPUT1 or OsPUT3. All three transgenic lines had larger rosette leaves,  thicker flowering stems, and produced more siliques than wild type plants. In  contrast, put5 plants had smaller leaves, thinner flowering stems, and produced  fewer siliques. Constitutive expression of PUTs was also associated with an  extreme delay in both plant senescence and maturation rate of siliques. These  experiments provide the first genetic evidence of polyamine transport in the  timing of flowering, and indicate the importance of polyamine transporters in the  regulation of flowering and senescence pathways.', '2017 May', 'Plant Sci', '10.1016/j.plantsci.2016.12.002', 'Morris']

AtPUT5: !localizes to! ER 
OsPUT1: !localizes to! ER 
AtPUT2: !localizes to! chloroplast 
AtPUT3: !localizes to! chloroplast 
OsPUT3: !localizes to! chloroplast 
OsPUT1: !enhances! delay in flowering 
PUT5: !represses! delay in flowering 
OsPUT1: !enhances! larger rosette leaves 
PUT5: !represses! larger rosette leaves 
OsPUT1: !enhances! thicker flowering stems 
PUT5: !represses! thicker flowering stems 
OsPUT1: !enhances! more siliques 
PUT5: !represses! more siliques 
OsPUT1: !enhances! delay in senescence 
PUT5: !represses! delay in senescence 
OsPUT1: !enhances! maturation rate of siliques 
PUT5: !represses! maturation rate of siliques