['28330936', 'The nonprotein amino acid pipecolic acid (Pip) regulates plant systemic acquired  resistance and basal immunity to bacterial pathogen infection. In Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana), the lysine (Lys) aminotransferase AGD2-LIKE DEFENSE  RESPONSE PROTEIN1 (ALD1) mediates the pathogen-induced accumulation of Pip in  inoculated and distal leaf tissue. Here, we show that ALD1 transfers the alpha-amino  group of l-Lys to acceptor oxoacids. Combined mass spectrometric and infrared  spectroscopic analyses of in vitro assays and plant extracts indicate that the  final product of the ALD1-catalyzed reaction is enaminic 2,3-dehydropipecolic  acid (DP), whose formation involves consecutive transamination, cyclization, and  isomerization steps. Besides l-Lys, recombinant ALD1 transaminates l-methionine,  l-leucine, diaminopimelate, and several other amino acids to generate oxoacids or  derived products in vitro. However, detailed in planta analyses suggest that the  biosynthesis of 2,3-DP from l-Lys is the major in vivo function of ALD1. Since  ald1 mutant plants are able to convert exogenous 2,3-DP into Pip, their Pip  deficiency relies on the inability to form the 2,3-DP intermediate. The  Arabidopsis reductase ornithine cyclodeaminase/mu-crystallin, alias SYSTEMIC  ACQUIRED RESISTANCE-DEFICIENT4 (SARD4), converts ALD1-generated 2,3-DP into Pip  in vitro. SARD4 significantly contributes to the production of Pip in  pathogen-inoculated leaves but is not the exclusive reducing enzyme involved in  Pip biosynthesis. Functional SARD4 is required for proper basal immunity to the  bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae Although SARD4 knockout plants show  greatly reduced accumulation of Pip in leaves distal to P. syringae inoculation,  they display a considerable systemic acquired resistance response. This suggests  a triggering function of locally accumulating Pip for systemic resistance  induction.', '2017 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.00222', 'ORCID:']

ALD1: !transfers! alpha-amino group of l-Lys 
ALD1: !synthesizes! 2,3-dehydropipecolic acid (DP) 
SARD4: !converts! 2,3-DP !into! Pip 
SARD4: !contributes to! production of Pip 
Pip: !regulates! plant systemic acquired resistance 
Pip: !triggers! systemic resistance induction