SWEET genes are a recently identified plant gene family that play an indispensable role in sugar efflux. However, no systematic study has been performed in pear. In this research, 18 SWEET transporters identified in pear, almost twice the number found in woodland strawberry and Japanese apricot, were divided into four clades. Conserved motifs and six exons of the SWEET transporters were found in six species. SWEET transporters contained seven transmembrane segments (TMSs) that evolved from an internal duplication of an ancestral three-TMSs unit, connected by TMS4. This is the first direct evidence identifying internal repeats through bioinformatics analysis. Whole-genome duplication (WGD) or segmental duplication and dispersed duplication represent the main driving forces for SWEET family evolution in six species, with former duplications more important in pear. Gene expression results suggested that PbSWEET15 and PbSWEET17 have no expression in any tissues because of critical lost residues and that 62.5% of PbSWEET duplicate gene pairs have functional divergence. Additionally, PbSWEET6, PbSWEET7 and PbSWEET14 were found to play important roles in sucrose efflux from leaves, and the high expression of PbSWEET1 and PbSWEET2 might contribute to unloading sucrose from the phloem in the stem. Finally, PbSWEET5, PbSWEET9 and PbSWEET10 might contribute to pollen development. Overall, our study provides important insights into the evolution of the SWEET gene family in pear and four other Rosaceae, and the important candidate PbSWEET genes involved in the development of different tissues were identified in pear.

SWEET genes: !play role in! sugar efflux 
SWEET transporters: !divided into! four clades 
Conserved motifs: !found in! six species 
TMSs: !evolved from! three-TMSs unit 
WGD/segmental duplication/dispersed duplication: !drive evolution of! SWEET family 
PbSWEET15/17: !have no expression due to! critical lost residues 
PbSWEET duplicate gene pairs: !show functional divergence! 
PbSWEET6/7/14: !contribute to! sucrose efflux from leaves 
PbSWEET1/2: !contribute to! unloading sucrose from phloem in stem 
PbSWEET5/9/10: !contribute to! pollen development