['28344583', 'Alternative splicing (AS) of pre-mRNAs is one of the most important  post-transcriptional regulations that enable a single gene to code for multiple  proteins resulting in the biodiversity of proteins in eukaryotes. Recently, we  have shown that an Arabidopsis thaliana RNA recognition motif-containing protein  RBM25 is a novel splicing factor to modulate plant response to ABA during seed  germination and post-germination through regulating HAB1 pre-mRNA AS. Here, we  show that RBM25 is preferentially expressed in stomata and vascular tissues in  Arabidopsis and is induced by ABA and abiotic stresses. Loss-of-function mutant  is highly tolerant to drought and sensitive to salt stress. Bioinformatic  analysis and expression assays reveal that Arabidopsis RBM25 is induced by  multiple abiotic stresses, suggesting a crucial role of RBM25 in Arabidopsis  responses to adverse environmental conditions. Furthermore, we provide a  comprehensive characterization of the homologous genes of Arabidopsis RBM25 based  on the latest plant genome sequences and public microarray databases. Fourteen  homologous genes are identified in different plant species which show similar  structure in gene and protein. Notably, the promoter analysis reveals that RBM25  homologs are likely controlled by the regulators involved in multiple plant  growth and abiotic stresses, such as drought and unfavorable temperature. The  comparative analysis of general and unique cis regulatory elements of the RBM25  homologs highlights the conserved and unique molecular processes that modulate  plant response to abiotic stresses through RBM25-mediated alternative splicing.', '2017', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2017.00292', 'Li']

RBM25: !affects! Plant response to ABA
RBM25: !localizes to! Stomata and vascular tissues
RBM25: !induced by! ABA and abiotic stresses
RBM25: !enhances! Tolerance to drought
RBM25: !represses! Sensitivity to salt stress
RBM25: !controlled by! Regulators involved in multiple plant growth and abiotic stresses