Leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula L.) is an herbaceous perennial weed that maintains its perennial growth habit through generation of underground adventitious buds (UABs) on the crown and lateral roots. These UABs undergo seasonal phases of dormancy under natural conditions, namely para-, endo-, and ecodormancy in summer, fall, and winter, respectively. These dormancy phases can also be induced in growth chambers by manipulating photoperiod and temperature. In this study, UABs induced into the three phases of dormancy under controlled conditions were used to compare changes in phytohormone and transcriptome profiles. Results indicated that relatively high levels of ABA, the ABA metabolite PA, and IAA were found in paradormant buds. When UABs transitioned from para- to endodormancy, ABA and PA levels decreased, whereas IAA levels were maintained. Additionally, transcript profiles associated with regulation of soluble sugars and ethylene activities were also increased during para- to endodormancy transition, which may play some role in maintaining endodormancy status. When crown buds transitioned from endo- to ecodormancy, the ABA metabolites PA and DPA decreased significantly along with the down-regulation of ABA biosynthesis genes, ABA2 and NCED3. IAA levels were also significantly lower in ecodormant buds than that of endodormant buds. We hypothesize that extended cold treatment may trigger physiological stress in endodormant buds, and that these stress-associated signals induced the endo- to ecodormancy transition and growth competence. The up-regulation of NAD/NADH phosphorylation and dephosphorylation pathway, and MAF3-like and GRFs genes, may be considered as markers of growth competency.

ABA: !increases! in paradormant buds
ABA: !decreases! when transitioning from para- to endodormancy
PA: !increases! in paradormant buds
PA: !decreases! when transitioning from endo- to ecodormancy
IAA: !maintained! when transitioning from para- to endodormancy
IAA: !decreases! when transitioning from endo- to ecodormancy
Soluble sugars: !increase! when transitioning from para- to endodormancy
Ethylene activities: !increase! when transitioning from para- to endodormancy
ABA2: !down-regulated! when transitioning from endo- to ecodormancy
NCED3: !down-regulated! when transitioning from endo- to ecodormancy
NAD/NADH phosphorylation and dephosphorylation pathway: !up-regulated! when transitioning from endo- to ecodormancy
MAF3-like genes: !up-regulated! when transitioning from endo- to ecodormancy
GRFs genes: !up-regulated! when transitioning from endo- to