During phosphate (Pi) starvation or leaf senescence, the accumulation of intracellular and extracellular purple acid phosphatases (PAPs) increases in plants in order to scavenge organic phosphorus (P). In this study, we demonstrated that a PAP-encoding gene in rice, OsPAP26, is constitutively expressed in all tissues. While the abundance of OsPAP26 transcript is not affected by Pi supply, it is up-regulated during leaf senescence. Furthermore, Pi deprivation and leaf senescence greatly increased the abundance of OsPAP26 protein. Overexpression or RNA interference (RNAi) of OsPAP26 in transgenic rice significantly increased or reduced APase activities, respectively, in leaves, roots and growth medium. Compared with wild-type (WT) plants, Pi concentrations of OsPAP26-overexpressing plants increased in the non-senescing leaves and decreased in the senescing leaves. The increased remobilization of Pi from the senescing leaves to non-senescing leaves in the OsPAP26-overexpressing plants resulted in better growth performance when plants were grown in Pi-depleted condition. In contrast, OsPAP26-RNAi plants retained more Pi in the senescing leaves, and were more sensitive to Pi starvation stress. OsPAP26 was found to localize to the apoplast of rice cells. Western blot analysis of protein extracts from callus growth medium confirmed that OsPAP26 is a secreted PAP. OsPAP26-overexpressing plants were capable of converting more ATP into inorganic Pi in the growth medium, which further supported the potential role of OsPAP26 in utilizing organic P in the rhizosphere. In summary, we concluded that OsPAP26 performs dual functions in plants: Pi remobilization from senescing to non-senescing leaves; and organic P utilization.

OsPAP26: !constitutively expressed in! all tissues
OsPAP26: !up-regulated during! leaf senescence
Pi deprivation: !increases! OsPAP26 protein abundance
Overexpression/RNAi of OsPAP26: !increases/reduces! APase activities
OsPAP26-overexpressing plants: !increase! Pi remobilization from senescing to non-senescing leaves
OsPAP26: !localizes to! apoplast of rice cells
OsPAP26: !secreted! PAP
OsPAP26-overexpressing plants: !convert! ATP into inorganic Pi