A better understanding of the mode of action of postharvest biocontrol agents on fruit surfaces is critical for the advancement of successful implementation of postharvest biocontrol products. This is due to the increasing importance of biological control of postharvest diseases over chemical and other control methods. However, most of the mechanisms involved in biological control remain unknown and need to be explored. Yarrowia lipolytica significantly inhibited blue mold decay of apples caused by Penicillium expansum. The findings also demonstrated that Y. lipolytica stimulated the activities of polyphenoloxidase, peroxidase, chitinase, l-phenylalanine ammonia lyase involved in enhancing defense responses in apple fruit tissue. Proteomic and transcriptomic analysis revealed a total of 35 proteins identified as up- and down-regulated in response to the Y. lipolytica inducement. These proteins were related to defense, biotic stimulus, and stress responses, such as pathogenesis-related proteins and dehydrin. The analysis of the transcriptome results proved that the induced resistance was mediated by a crosstalk between salicylic acid (SA) and ethylene/jasmonate (ET/JA) pathways. Y. lipolytica treatment activated the expression of isochorismate synthase gene in the SA pathway, which up-regulates the expression of PR4 in apple. The expression of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase gene and ET-responsive transcription factors 2 and 4, which are involved in the ET pathway, were also activated. In addition, cytochrome oxidase I, which plays an important role in JA signaling for resistance acquisition, was also activated. However, not all of the genes had a positive effect on the SA and ET/JA signal pathways. As transcriptional repressors in JA signaling, TIFY3B and TIFY11B were triggered by the yeast, but the gene expression levels were relatively low. Taken together, Y. lipolytica induced the SA and ET/JA signal mediating the defense pathways by stimulating defense response genes, such as peroxidase, thaumatin-like protein, and chitinase 4-like, which are involved in defense response in apple. [Formula: see text]

Y. lipolytica: !inhibits! blue mold decay
Y. lipolytica: !stimulates! polyphenoloxidase, peroxidase, chitinase, l-phenylalanine ammonia lyase
SA pathway: !upregulates! PR4
ET/JA pathway: !activates! isochorismate synthase gene, ET-responsive transcription factors 2 and 4, cytochrome oxidase I
TIFY3B, TIFY11B: !repress! JA signaling
defense response genes: !activated by! Y. lipolytica