Technologies enabling in situ metabolic profiling of living plant systems are invaluable for understanding physiological processes and could be used for rapid phenotypic screening (e.g., to produce plants with superior biological nitrogen-fixing ability). The symbiotic interaction between legumes and nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria results in a specialized plant organ (i.e., root nodule) where the exchange of nutrients between host and endosymbiont occurs. Laser-ablation electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (LAESI-MS) is a method that can be performed under ambient conditions requiring minimal sample preparation. Here, we employed LAESI-MS to explore the well characterized symbiosis between soybean (Glycine max L. Merr.) and its compatible symbiont, Bradyrhizobium japonicum. The utilization of ion mobility separation (IMS) improved the molecular coverage, selectivity, and identification of the detected biomolecules. Specifically, incorporation of IMS resulted in an increase of 153 differentially abundant spectral features in the nodule samples. The data presented demonstrate the advantages of using LAESI-IMS-MS for the rapid analysis of intact root nodules, uninfected root segments, and free-living rhizobia. Untargeted pathway analysis revealed several metabolic processes within the nodule (e.g., zeatin, riboflavin, and purine synthesis). Compounds specific to the uninfected root and bacteria were also detected. Lastly, we performed depth profiling of intact nodules to reveal the location of metabolites to the cortex and inside the infected region, and lateral profiling of sectioned nodules confirmed these molecular distributions. Our results established the feasibility of LAESI-IMS-MS for the analysis and spatial mapping of plant tissues, with its specific demonstration to improve our understanding of the soybean-rhizobial symbiosis.

Gene: !affects! Process
Process: !involves! Symbiotic interaction
Symbiotic interaction: !occurs in! Root nodule
Laser-ablation electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: !improves! Molecular coverage
Molecular coverage: !increases! Differentially abundant spectral features
Untargeted pathway analysis: !reveals! Metabolic processes
Metabolic processes: !include! Zeatin, riboflavin, and purine synthesis
Compounds: !specific to! Uninfected root and bacteria
Depth profiling: !reveals! Location of metabolites
Location of metabolites: !mapped to! Cortex and infected region