A novel tobacco mutant library was constructed, screened, and characterized as a crucial genetic resource for functional genomics and applied research. A comprehensive mutant library is a fundamental resource for investigating gene functions, especially after the completion of genome sequencing. A new tobacco mutant population induced by ethyl methane sulfonate mutagenesis was developed for functional genomics applications. We isolated 1607 mutant lines and 8610 mutant plants with altered morphological phenotypes from 5513 independent M2 families that consisted of 69,531 M2 plants. The 2196 mutations of abnormal phenotypes in the M2 putative mutants were classified into four groups with 17 major categories and 51 subcategories. More than 60% of the abnormal phenotypes observed fell within the five major categories including plant height, leaf shape, leaf surface, leaf color, and flowering time. The 465 M2 mutants exhibited multiple phenotypes, and 1054 of the 2196 mutations were pleiotropic. Verification of the phenotypes in advanced generations indicated that 70.63% of the M3 lines, 84.87% of the M4 lines, and 95.75% of the M5 lines could transmit original mutant phenotypes of the corresponding M2, M3, and M4 mutant plants. Along with the increased generation of mutants, the ratios of lines inheriting OMPs increased and lines with emerging novel mutant phenotypes decreased. Genetic analyses of 18 stably heritable mutants showed that two mutants were double recessive, five were monogenic recessive, eight presented monogenic dominant inheritance, and three presented semi-dominant inheritance. The pleiotropy pattern, saturability evaluation, research prospects of genome, and phenome of the mutant populations were also discussed. Simultaneously, this novel mutant library provided a fundamental resource for investigating gene functions in tobacco.

Gene: !affects! Morphological Phenotypes 
Gene: !inherits! OMPs 
Gene: !transmits! Mutant Phenotypes 
Gene: !exhibits! Pleiotropy 
Gene: !presents! Inheritance Patterns