29 Moso bamboo VQ proteins were genome-wide identified for the first time, and bioinformatics analysis was performed to investigate phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary divergence. The qRT-PCR data show that PeVQ genes response to different stress treatments. Accumulating evidence suggests that VQ motif-containing proteins in rice (Oryza sativa), Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), and maize (Zea mays) play fundamental roles in response to various biotic and abiotic stresses. However, little is known about the functions of VQ family proteins in Moso bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis). In this study, we performed a genome-wide bioinformatic analysis and expression profiling of PeVQ genes. A total of 29 VQ genes was identified and divided into seven subgroups (I-VII) based on phylogenetic analysis. Gene structure and conserved motif analysis revealed that 25 of 29 VQ genes contained no introns. Multiple sequence alignment showed that Moso bamboo VQ motif-containing proteins contained five variations of the conserved motif. The time of duplication and divergence of Moso bamboo from rice and maize was calculated using K <sub>s</sub> analysis. A heat map was generated using microarray data from 29 Moso bamboo VQ genes suggesting that these genes were expressed in different tissues or developmental stages. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and promoter analysis indicated that PeVQ genes were differentially regulated following treatment with polyethylene glycol, abscisic acid and salicylic acid. Our results provide a solid foundation for further research of the specific functions of VQ motif-containing proteins in Moso bamboo.

VQ proteins: !genome-wide identified! Moso bamboo 
VQ proteins: !divided into! seven subgroups 
VQ proteins: !contained! five variations of conserved motif 
VQ proteins: !duplicated and diverged from! rice and maize 
VQ proteins: !expressed in! different tissues/developmental stages 
VQ proteins: !regulated by! polyethylene glycol, abscisic acid, salicylic acid