The changes in the reproductive barrier between hexaploid wheat ( Triticum aestivum L.) and rye ( Secale cereale L.) can be induced using in situ embryo rescue of abnormal embryos, yielding stable fertile amphidiploid plants. In intergeneric crosses between hexaploid wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and rye (Secale cereale L.), postzygotic barriers may occur at different stages of hybrid development. One such mechanism is embryo lethality, which is genetically determined by the interaction and expression of two incompatible genes in wheat (Eml-A1) and rye (Eml-R1). Using in vitro culture methods as stressors, we overcame this hybrid lethality. Normal and abnormal embryos were observed to build embryogenic calli and produce regenerated plantlets in a similar manner. The high regenerative capacity of the abnormal embryos led us to conclude that the reproductive barrier in these intergeneric hybrids may have an epigenetic origin that can be easily overcome by culturing immature embryos via callus induction. After colchicine treatment during callus culture, amphidiploid plants were obtained. However, most of these plants did not produce seeds, due mainly to sterility of the pollen but also of the embryo sacs. These findings demonstrate that hybrid sterility affects both male and female gametophytes in plants obtained from abnormal embryos. The key roles of double fertilization and stress factors in the implementation of the apical meristem formation program in embryos from incompatible intergeneric crosses between hexaploid wheat and rye during in vitro culture are discussed. We also propose a hypothetical model for a wheat-rye lethality system involving differential expression of incompatible wheat Eml-A1 and rye Eml-R1b alleles in an identical genetic background.

Eml-A1: !interacts with! Eml-R1
Eml-A1: !represses! Eml-R1b
in situ embryo rescue: !overcomes! hybrid lethality
colchicine treatment: !produces! amphidiploid plants
hybrid sterility: !affects! male and female gametophytes
double fertilization: !implements! apical meristem formation program