Fluxes through metabolic pathways reflect the integration of genetic and metabolic regulations. While it is attractive to measure all the mRNAs (transcriptome), all the proteins (proteome), and a large number of the metabolites (metabolome) in a given cellular system, linking and integrating this information remains difficult. Measurement of metabolome-wide fluxes (termed the fluxome) provides an integrated functional output of the cell machinery and a better tool to link functional analyses to plant phenotyping. This review presents and discusses sets of methodologies that have been developed to measure the fluxome. First, the principles of metabolic flux analysis (MFA), its 'short time interval' version Inst-MFA, and of constraints-based methods, such as flux balance analysis and kinetic analysis, are briefly described. The use of these powerful methods for flux characterization at the cellular scale up to the organ (fruits, seeds) and whole-plant level is illustrated. The added value given by fluxomics methods for unravelling how the abiotic environment affects flux, the process, and key metabolic steps are also described. Challenges associated with the development of fluxomics and its integration with 'omics' for thorough plant and organ functional phenotyping are discussed. Taken together, these will ultimately provide crucial clues for identifying appropriate target plant phenotypes for breeding.

Metabolome-wide fluxes: !measured by! Metabolic Flux Analysis 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !measured by! Inst-MFA 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !measured by! Flux Balance Analysis 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !measured by! Kinetic Analysis 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !integrate! Genetic and Metabolic Regulations 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !provide! Functional Output of Cell Machinery 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !illustrated at! Cellular Scale to Whole Plant Level 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !unravel! Abiotic Environment Effects 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !integrate with! 'Omics' for Phenotyping 
Metabolome-wide fluxes: !identify! Appropriate Target Plant Phenotypes