['28441933', 'BACKGROUND: Fructose is an abundant sugar in plants as it is a breakdown product  of both major sucrose-cleaving enzymes. To enter metabolism, fructose is  phosphorylated by a fructokinase (FRK). Known FRKs are members of a diverse  family of carbohydrate/purine kinases known as the phosphofructokinase B (pfkB)  family. The complete complement of active fructokinases has not been reported for  any plant species. RESULTS: Protein sequence analysis of the 22 Arabidopsis  thaliana pfkB members identified eight highly related predicted proteins,  including one with previously demonstrated FRK activity. For one, At1g50390, the  predicted open reading frame is half the size of active FRKs, and only  incompletely spliced RNAs were identified, which led to a premature stop codon,  both indicating that this gene does not produce active FRK. The remaining seven  proteins were expressed in E. coli and phosphorylated fructose specifically in  vitro leading us to propose a unifying nomenclature (FRK1-7). Substrate  inhibition was observed for fructose in all FRKs except FRK1. Fructose binding  was on the same order of magnitude for FRK1-6, between 260 and 480 muM. FRK7 was  an outlier with a fructose Km of 12 muM. ATP binding was similar for all FRKs and  ranged between 52 and 280 muM. YFP-tagged AtFRKs were cytosolic, except plastidic  FRK3. T-DNA alleles with non-detectable wild-type RNAs in five of the seven  active FRK genes produced no overt phenotype. We extended our sequence  comparisons to include putative FRKs encoded in other plant sequenced genomes. We  observed that different subgroups expanded subsequent to speciation. CONCLUSIONS:  Arabidopsis thaliana as well as all other plant species analyzed contain multiple  copies of genes encoding FRK activity. Sequence comparisons among multiple  species identified a minimal set of three distinct FRKs present on all species  investigated including a plastid-localized form. The selective expansion of  specific isozymes results in differences in FRK gene number among species. AtFRKs  exhibit substrate inhibition, typical of their mammalian counterparts with the  single AtFRK1 lacking this property, suggesting it may have a distinct in vivo  role. Results presented here provide a starting point for the engineering of  specific FRKs to affect biomass production.', '2017 Apr 26', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-017-1031-5', 'ORCID:']

FRK: !phosphorylates! Fructose 
At1g50390: !inactive! FRK 
AtFRKs: !exhibit! Substrate Inhibition 
AtFRK1: !lacks! Substrate Inhibition 
FRKs: !expand! Post-Speciation 
FRKs: !differ! Among Species