Folates, termed from tetrahydrofolate (THF) and its derivatives, function as coenzymes in one-carbon transfer reactions and play a central role in synthesis of nucleotides and amino acids. Dysfunction of cellular folate metabolism leads to serious defects in plant development; however, the molecular mechanisms of folate-mediated cellular modifications and physiological responses in plants are still largely unclear. Here, we reported that THF controls flowering time by adjusting DNA methylation-regulated gene expression in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>). Wild-type seedlings supplied with THF as well as the high endogenous THF content mutant <i>dihydrofolate synthetase folypoly-Glu synthetase homolog B</i> exhibited significant up-regulation of the flowering repressor of <i>Flowering Wageningen</i> and thereby delaying floral transition in a dose-dependent manner. Genome-wide transcripts and DNA methylation profiling revealed that THF reduces DNA methylation so as to manipulate gene expression activity. Moreover, in accompaniment with elevated cellular ratios between monoglutamylated and polyglutamylated folates under increased THF levels, the content of <i>S</i>-adenosylhomo-Cys, a competitive inhibitor of methyltransferases, was obviously higher, indicating that enhanced THF accumulation may disturb cellular homeostasis of the concerted reactions between folate polyglutamylation and folate-dependent DNA methylation. In addition, we found that the loss-of-function mutant of CG DNA methyltransferase MET1 displayed much less responsiveness to THF-associated flowering time alteration. Taken together, our studies revealed a novel regulatory role of THF on epigenetic silencing, which will shed lights on the understanding of interrelations in folate homeostasis, epigenetic variation, and flowering control in plants.

THF: !controls! flowering time 
THF: !reduces! DNA methylation 
THF: !enhances! cellular ratios between monoglutamylated and polyglutamylated folates 
THF: !increases! S-adenosylhomo-Cys content 
DNA methyltransferase MET1: !inhibits! responsiveness to THF-associated flowering time alteration