Cuticular wax is the outermost thin hydrophobic layer covering the surface of aerial plant parts, which provides a primary waterproof barrier and protection against different environmental stresses. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of ethephon, as an ethylene-releasing compound, in counteracting drought stress by modulating cuticular wax biosynthesis, water balance, and antioxidant regulation in maize seedlings. Our results showed that ethephon significantly increased the ethylene evolution rate, regulate the expression of cuticular wax synthesis regulatory gene ZmERE and the wax biosynthetic genes ZmGL1, ZmGL15, ZmFDH1, and ZmFAE1, and promote cuticular wax accumulation in maize seedlings under normal or drought stress conditions. Moreover, ethephon was shown to might markedly reduce water loss and chlorophyll leaching in leaves, and maintain higher relative water content and leaf water potential under drought stress. Ethephon significantly decreased malondialdehyde and hydrogen peroxide concentrations and electrolyte leakage, but increased the accumulation of proline and the activities of SOD, POD, and CAT. In addition, ethephon resulted in an increase in the ratio of root and shoot under drought stress. These results indicated that ethephon could improve maize performance under drought stress by modulating cuticular wax synthesis to maintain water status and membrane stability for plant growth.

ethephon: !increases! ethylene evolution rate
ethephon: !regulates! ZmERE expression
ethephon: !regulates! wax biosynthetic genes
ethephon: !promotes! cuticular wax accumulation
ethephon: !reduces! water loss
ethephon: !reduces! chlorophyll leaching
ethephon: !maintains! relative water content
ethephon: !maintains! leaf water potential
ethephon: !decreases! malondialdehyde concentration
ethephon: !decreases! hydrogen peroxide concentration
ethephon: !decreases! electrolyte leakage
ethephon: !increases! proline accumulation
ethephon: !increases! SOD activity
ethephon: !increases! POD activity
ethephon: !increases! CAT activity
ethephon: !increases! root/shoot ratio