Fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins (FLAs) are involved in numerous important functions in plants but the relevance of their complex structure to physiological function and cellular fate is unresolved. Using a fully functional fluorescent version of Arabidopsis thaliana FLA4 we show that this protein is localized at the plasma membrane as well as in endosomes and soluble in the apoplast. FLA4 is likely to be GPI-anchored, is highly N-glycosylated and carries two O-glycan epitopes previously associated with arabinogalactan proteins. The activity of FLA4 was resistant against deletion of the amino-proximal fasciclin 1 domain and was unaffected by removal of the GPI-modification signal, a highly conserved N-glycan or the deletion of predicted O-glycosylation sites. Nonetheless these structural changes dramatically decreased endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-exit and plasma membrane localization of FLA4, with N-glycosylation acting at the level of ER-exit and O-glycosylation influencing post-secretory fate. We show that FLA4 acts predominantly by molecular interactions involving its carboxy-proximal fasciclin 1 domain and that its amino-proximal fasciclin 1 domain is required for stabilization of plasma membrane localization. FLA4 functions as a soluble glycoprotein via its carboxy-proximal Fas1 domain and its normal cellular trafficking depends on N- and O-glycosylation.

FLA4: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
FLA4: !localizes to! endosomes 
FLA4: !localizes to! apoplast 
FLA4: !is GPI-anchored! 
FLA4: !is N-glycosylated! 
FLA4: !carries two O-glycan epitopes! 
FLA4: !resists deletion of amino-proximal fasciclin 1 domain! 
FLA4: !unaffected by removal of GPI-modification signal! 
FLA4: !decreased ER-exit with N-glycosylation! 
FLA4: !decreased plasma membrane localization with O-glycosylation! 
FLA4: !acts predominantly by molecular interactions involving carboxy-proximal fasciclin 1 domain! 
FLA4: !stabilized at plasma membrane by amino-proximal fasciclin 1 domain! 
FLA4: !functions as soluble glycoprotein via carboxy-proximal Fas1 domain! 
FLA4: !normal cellular trafficking depends