Pepper leucine-rich repeat protein (CaLRR1) interacts with defense response proteins to regulate plant cell death and immunity. This review highlights the current understanding of the molecular functions of CaLRR1 and its interactor proteins. Plant cell death and immune responses to microbial pathogens are controlled by complex and tightly regulated molecular signaling networks. Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria (Xcv)-inducible pepper (Capsicum annuum) leucine-rich repeat protein 1 (CaLRR1) serves as a molecular marker for plant cell death and immunity signaling. In this review, we discuss recent advances in elucidating the functional roles of CaLRR1 and its interacting plant proteins, and understanding how they are involved in the cell death and defense responses. CaLRR1 physically interacts with pepper pathogenesis-related proteins (CaPR10 and CaPR4b) and hypersensitive-induced reaction protein (CaHIR1) to regulate plant cell death and defense responses. CaLRR1 is produced in the cytoplasm and trafficked to the extracellular matrix. CaLRR1 binds to CaPR10 in the cytoplasm and CaPR4b and CaHIR1 at the plasma membrane. CaLRR1 synergistically accelerates CaPR10-triggered hypersensitive cell death, but negatively regulates CaPR4b- and CaHIR1-triggered cell death. CaHIR1 interacts with Xcv filamentous hemagglutinin (Fha1) to trigger disease-associated cell death. The subcellular localization and cellular function of these CaLRR1 interactors during plant cell death and defense responses were elucidated by Agrobacterium-mediated transient expression, virus-induced gene silencing, and transgenic overexpression studies. CaPR10, CaPR4b, and CaHIR1 positively regulate defense signaling mediated by salicylic acid and reactive oxygen species, thereby activating hypersensitive cell death and disease resistance. A comprehensive understanding of the molecular functions of CaLRR1 and its interacting protein partners in cell death and defense responses will provide valuable information for the molecular genetics of plant disease resistance, which could be exploited as a sustainable disease management strategy.

CaLRR1: !interacts with! CaPR10 
CaLRR1: !interacts with! CaPR4b 
CaLRR1: !interacts with! CaHIR1 
CaLRR1: !synthesizes! cell death and immunity signaling 
CaPR10: !triggers! hypersensitive cell death 
CaPR4b: !triggers! cell death 
CaHIR1: !triggers! cell death 
CaHIR1: !interacts with! Fha1 
CaPR10, CaPR4b, CaHIR1: !regulate! defense signaling