Rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i>) leaf angle is determined by lamina joint and is an important agricultural trait determining leaf erectness and, hence, the photosynthesis efficiency and grain yield. Genetic studies reveal a complex regulatory network of lamina joint development; however, the morphological changes, cytological transitions, and underlying transcriptional programming remain to be elucidated. A systemic morphological and cytological study reveals a dynamic developmental process and suggests a common but distinct regulation of the lamina joint. Successive and sequential cell division and expansion, cell wall thickening, and programmed cell death at the adaxial or abaxial sides form the cytological basis of the lamina joint, and the increased leaf angle results from the asymmetric cell proliferation and elongation. Analysis of the gene expression profiles at four distinct developmental stages ranging from initiation to senescence showed that genes related to cell division and growth, hormone synthesis and signaling, transcription (transcription factors), and protein phosphorylation (protein kinases) exhibit distinct spatiotemporal patterns during lamina joint development. Phytohormones play crucial roles by promoting cell differentiation and growth at early stages or regulating the maturation and senescence at later stages, which is consistent with the quantitative analysis of hormones at different stages. Further comparison with the gene expression profile of <i>leaf inclination1</i>, a mutant with decreased auxin and increased leaf angle, indicates the coordinated effects of hormones in regulating lamina joint. These results reveal a dynamic cytology of rice lamina joint that is fine-regulated by multiple factors, providing informative clues for illustrating the regulatory mechanisms of leaf angle and plant architecture.

Cell division: !regulates! Leaf angle
Cell wall thickening: !regulates! Leaf angle
Programmed cell death: !regulates! Leaf angle
Cell differentiation: !promoted by! Phytohormones
Cell growth: !promoted by! Phytohormones
Maturation: !regulated by! Phytohormones
Senescence: !regulated by! Phytohormones
Auxin: !decreases! Leaf inclination1