['28510842', 'BACKGROUND: SFARs (seed fatty acid reducers) belonging to the GDSL  lipases/esterases family have been reported to reduce fatty acid storage and  composition in mature Arabidopsis seeds. GDSL lipases/esterases are hydrolytic  enzymes that possess multifunctional properties, such as broad substrate  specificity, regiospecificity, and stereoselectivity. Studies on the  physiological functions and biochemical characteristics of GDSL lipases/esterases  in plants are limited, so it is important to elucidate the molecular functions of  GDSL-type genes. RESULTS: We found that SFAR4 (At3g48460), a fatty acid reducer  belonging to the Arabidopsis GDSL lipases/esterases family, was intensely  expressed in embryo protrusion, early seedlings, and pollen. The characterization  of recombinant SFAR4 protein indicated that it has short-length p-nitrophenyl  esterase activity. In addition, SFAR4 enhanced the expression of genes involved  in fatty acid metabolism during seed germination and seedling development. SFAR4  elevated the expression of COMATOSE, which transports fatty acids into  peroxisomes, and of LACS6 and LACS7, which deliver long-chain acetyl-CoA for  beta-oxidation. Furthermore, SFAR4 increased the transcription of PED1 and PNC1,  which function in importing peroxisomal ATP required for fatty acid degradation.  SFAR4 has another function on tolerance to high glucose concentrations but had no  significant effects on the expression of the glucose sensor HXK1. CONCLUSIONS:  The results demonstrated that SFAR4 is a GDSL-type esterase involved in fatty  acid metabolism during post-germination and seedling development in Arabidopsis.  We suggested that SFAR4 plays an important role in fatty acid degradation, thus  reducing the fatty acid content.', '2015 Dec', 'Bot Stud', '10.1186/s40529-015-0114-6', 'Shaw']

SFAR4: !enhances! expression of genes involved in fatty acid metabolism
SFAR4: !increases! transcription of PED1 and PNC1
SFAR4: !elevates! expression of COMATOSE, LACS6 and LACS7
SFAR4: !affects! tolerance to high glucose concentrations