Salinity is a serious threat to plant growth and development worldwide reducing agricultural productivity each year. Ethylene is an important phytohormone that affects plants performance under normal and abiotic stress conditions. In this study, role of ethylene was investigated in mitigating salinity stress (100 mM NaCl) effects on photosynthesis in mustard plants subjected to different nitrogen (N; 5 and 10 mM) levels. Plants under salinity stress exhibited marked increase in proline and reduced glutathione (GSH) content and activity of antioxidant enzymes. Nitrogen supplementation at 10 mM was better than 200 µl l<sup>-1</sup> ethephon treatment under no stress. However, under salinity stress, both N and ethephon were equally effective. The combined application of 10 mM N and ethephon to salinity stressed plants produced greatest increase in photosynthesis by increasing proline and antioxidant metabolism. Ethylene evolution was high under salinity stress, but treatment of 10 mM N and 200 µl l<sup>-1</sup> ethephon greatly decreased ethylene evolution that was equivalent to the 10 mM N treatment alone. This concentration of ethylene decreased the oxidative stress and increased the photosynthetic nitrogen use efficiency (NUE) maximally to increase photosynthesis. The use of ethylene action inhibitor, norbornadiene (NBD) showed reduction in ethylene mediated effects in alleviating salinity. Norbornadiene decreased the photosynthetic-NUE, proline and GSH content that resulted in decrease in photosynthesis under salinity stress. This study indicated that ethylene regulated the proline and antioxidant metabolism under salinity stress to increase photosynthetic functions of mustard grown with low and optimum N. The modulation of ethylene could be adopted in agricultural practices to increase photosynthesis under salinity stress.

Salinity: !reduces! Agricultural productivity
Ethylene: !affects! Plant performance
Nitrogen: !increases! Photosynthesis
Ethephon: !combined with! Nitrogen
Norbornadiene: !inhibits! Ethylene action
Proline: !increased by! Ethylene
GSH: !increased by! Ethylene
Antioxidant enzymes: !increased by! Ethylene
Photosynthetic NUE: !increased by! Ethylene