Newly identified genes that are preferentially expressed in potato skin include genes that are associated with the secondary cell wall and stress-related activities and contribute to the skin's protective function. Microarrays were used to compare the skin and tuber-flesh transcriptomes of potato, to identify genes that contribute to the unique characteristics of the skin as a protective tissue. Functional gene analysis indicated that genes involved in developmental processes such as cell division, cell differentiation, morphogenesis and secondary cell wall formation (lignification and suberization), and stress-related activities, are more highly expressed in the skin than in the tuber flesh. Several genes that were differentially expressed in the skin (as verified by qPCR) and had not been previously identified in potato were selected for further analysis. These included the StKCS20-like, StFAR3, StCYP86A22 and StPOD72-like genes, whose sequences suggest that they may be closely related to known suberin-related genes; the StHAP3 transcription factor that directs meristem-specific expression; and the StCASP1B2-like and StCASP1-like genes, which are two orthologs of a protein family that mediates the formation of Casparian strips in the suberized endodermis of Arabidopsis roots. An examination of microtubers induced from transgenic plants carrying GUS reporter constructs of these genes indicated that these genes were expressed in the skin, with little to no expression in the tuber flesh. Some of the reporter constructs were preferentially expressed in the inner layers of the skin, the root endodermis, the vascular cambium and the epidermis of the stem. Cis-regulatory elements within the respective promoter sequences support this gene-expression pattern.

StKCS20-like: !enhances! Suberization 
StFAR3: !enhances! Suberization 
StCYP86A22: !enhances! Suberization 
StPOD72-like: !enhances! Suberization 
StHAP3: !directs! Meristem-specific expression 
StCASP1B2-like: !mediates! Casparian strip formation 
StCASP1-like: !mediates! Casparian strip formation 
GUS reporter constructs: !express in! Skin 
GUS reporter constructs: !express in! Root endodermis 
GUS reporter constructs: !express in! Vascular cambium 
GUS reporter constructs: !express in! Epidermis of stem