ABA is involved in anthocyanin synthesis through the regulation of microRNA156, augmenting the level of expression of anthocyanin synthesis-related genes and, therefore, increasing anthocyanin level. Drought stress is the main cause of agricultural crop loss in the world. However, plants have developed mechanisms that allow them to tolerate drought stress conditions. At cellular level, drought stress induces changes in metabolite accumulation, including increases in anthocyanin levels due to upregulation of the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway. Recent studies suggest that the higher anthocyanin content observed under drought stress conditions could be a consequence of a rise in the abscisic acid (ABA) concentration. This plant hormone crosses the plasma membrane by specific transporters, and it is recognized at the cytosolic level by receptors known as pyrabactin resistance (PYR)/regulatory component of ABA receptors (PYR/RCARs) that regulate downstream components. In this review, we discuss the hypothesis regarding the involvement of ABA in the regulation of microRNA156 (miRNA156), which is upregulated as part of dehydration stress responsiveness in different species. The miRNA156 upregulation produces a greater level of anthocyanin gene expression, forming the multienzyme complex that will synthesize an increased level of anthocyanins at the cytosolic face of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). After synthesis, anthocyanins are transported from the RER to the vacuole by two possible models of transport: (1) membrane vesicle-mediated transport, or (2) membrane transporter-mediated transport. Thus, the aim was to analyze the recent findings on synthesis, transport and the possible mechanism by which ABA could increase anthocyanin synthesis under drought stress conditions potentially throughout microRNA156 (miRNA156).

ABA: !regulates! microRNA156
microRNA156: !increases! anthocyanin gene expression
anthocyanin gene expression: !synthesizes! increased level of anthocyanins
anthocyanins: !transported from! RER to vacuole