Oil palm (Elaeis guineensis, Jacq.) is the most important source of edible oil. The improvement of oil yield is currently slow in conventional breeding programs due to long generation intervals. Marker-assisted selection (MAS) has the potential to accelerate genetic improvement. To identify DNA markers associated with oil content traits for MAS, we performed quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping using genotyping by sequencing (GBS) in a breeding population derived from a cross between Deli Dura and Ghana Pisifera, containing 153 F<sub>1</sub> trees. We constructed a high-density linkage map containing 1357 SNPs and 123 microsatellites. The 16 linkage groups (LGs) spanned 1527 cM, with an average marker space of 1.03 cM. One significant and three suggestive QTL for oil to bunch (O/B) and oil to dry mesocarp (O/DM) were mapped on LG1, LG8, and LG10 in a F<sub>1</sub> breeding population, respectively. These QTL explained 7.6-13.3% of phenotypic variance. DNA markers associated with oil content in these QTL were identified. Trees with beneficial genotypes at two QTL for O/B showed an average O/B of 30.97%, significantly (P < 0.01) higher than that of trees without any beneficial QTL genotypes (average O/B of 28.24%). QTL combinations showed that the higher the number of QTL with beneficial genotypes, the higher the resulting average O/B in the breeding population. A linkage map with 1480 DNA markers was constructed and used to identify QTL for oil content traits. Pyramiding the identified QTL with beneficial genotypes associated with oil content traits using DNA markers has the potential to accelerate genetic improvement for oil yield in the breeding population of oil palm.

Oil palm: !produces! edible oil 
QTL mapping: !performed using! GBS 
Linkage map: !contains! 1357 SNPs and 123 microsatellites 
QTL: !associated with! oil content traits 
QTL: !explain! 7.6-13.3% of phenotypic variance 
DNA markers: !associated with! oil content in QTL 
QTL combinations: !show! higher number of beneficial genotypes results in higher average O/B 
Linkage map: !used to! identify QTL for oil content traits 
Pyramiding: !has potential to! accelerate genetic improvement for oil yield