['28559313', 'The phytohormone jasmonic acid (JA) is vital in plant defense and development.  Although biosynthesis of JA and activation of JA-responsive gene expression by  the bioactive form JA-isoleucine have been well-studied, knowledge on JA  metabolism is incomplete. In particular, the enzyme that hydroxylates JA to  12-OH-JA, an inactive form of JA that accumulates after wounding and pathogen  attack, is unknown. Here, we report the identification of four paralogous  2-oxoglutarate/Fe(II)-dependent oxygenases in Arabidopsis thaliana as JA  hydroxylases and show that they down-regulate JA-dependent responses. Because  they are induced by JA we named them JASMONATE-INDUCED OXYGENASES (JOXs).  Concurrent mutation of the four genes in a quadruple Arabidopsis mutant resulted  in increased defense gene expression and increased resistance to the necrotrophic  fungus Botrytis cinerea and the caterpillar Mamestra brassicae In addition, root  and shoot growth of the plants was inhibited. Metabolite analysis of leaves  showed that loss of function of the four JOX enzymes resulted in overaccumulation  of JA and in reduced turnover of JA into 12-OH-JA. Transformation of the  quadruple mutant with each JOX gene strongly reduced JA levels, demonstrating  that all four JOXs inactivate JA in plants. The in vitro catalysis of 12-OH-JA  from JA by recombinant enzyme could be confirmed for three JOXs. The  identification of the enzymes responsible for hydroxylation of JA reveals a  missing step in JA metabolism, which is important for the inactivation of the  hormone and subsequent down-regulation of JA-dependent defenses.', '2017 Jun 13', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1701101114', 'ORCID:']

JASMONATE-INDUCED OXYGENASES (JOXs): !hydroxylates! JA 
JA: !down-regulates! JA-dependent responses 
JOXs: !induced by! JA 
quadruple Arabidopsis mutant: !increases! defense gene expression 
quadruple Arabidopsis mutant: !increases! resistance to Botrytis cinerea and Mamestra brassicae 
quadruple Arabidopsis mutant: !inhibits! root and shoot growth 
quadruple Arabidopsis mutant: !overaccumulates! JA 
quadruple Arabidopsis mutant: !reduces! turnover of JA into 12-OH-JA 
transformation with JOX gene: !reduces! JA levels 
recombinant enzyme: !catalyses! 12-OH-JA from JA