Short-term waterlogging and chronic elevated temperature occur concomitantly in the cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) growing season. While previous research about co-occurring waterlogging and elevated temperature has focused primarily on cotton fiber, no studies have investigated carbohydrate metabolism of the subtending leaf (a major source leaf for boll development) cross-acclimation to aforementioned stressors. To address this, plants were exposed to ambient (31.6/26.5°C) and elevated (34.1/29.0°C) temperatures during the whole flowering and boll formation stage, and waterlogging (0, 3, 6 days) beginning on the day of anthesis. Both waterlogging and high temperature limited boll biomass (reduced by 1.19-32.14%), but effects of different durations of waterlogging coupled with elevated temperature on carbohydrate metabolism in the subtending leaf were quite different. The 6-day waterlogging combined with elevated temperature had the most negative impact on net photosynthetic rate (Pn) and carbohydrate metabolism of any treatment, leading to upregulated GhSusA and GhSusC expression and enhanced sucrose synthase (SuSy, EC 2.4.1.13) activity for sucrose degradation. A prior exposure to waterlogging for 3 days improved subtending leaf performance under elevated temperature. Pn, sucrose concentrations, Rubisco (EC 4.1.1.39) activity, and cytosolic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (cy-FBPase, EC 3.1.3.11) activity in the subtending leaf significantly increased, while SuSy activity decreased under 3 days waterlogging and elevated temperature combined relative to elevated temperature alone. Thus, we concluded that previous exposure to a brief (3 days) waterlogging stress improved sucrose composition and accumulation cross-acclimation to high temperature later in development not only by promoting leaf photosynthesis but also inhibiting sucrose degradation.

GhSusA: !upregulated by! 6-day waterlogging + elevated temperature
GhSusC: !upregulated by! 6-day waterlogging + elevated temperature
SuSy: !enhanced by! 6-day waterlogging + elevated temperature
Pn: !limited by! 6-day waterlogging + elevated temperature
Rubisco: !increased by! 3-day waterlogging + elevated temperature
cy-FBPase: !increased by! 3-day waterlogging + elevated temperature
SuSy: !inhibited by! 3-day waterlogging + elevated temperature