Calcium dependent protein kinases (CDPK) are well established plant sensor and effectors for calcium ions and participate in regulation of multiple abiotic and biotic stress responses in plant cells. Here we present the identification and characterization of a new CDPK kinase gene from bulbous plant Hippeastrum x hybr. and examine the role of this kinase in stress responses leading to phytoalexin (PA) production in plant tissues. In the previous research, it was shown that Hippeastrum bulbs mechanically wounded or infected with Peyronellaea curtisii (=Phoma narcissi) are inducted to an antifungal red substance synthesis. In this research, we demonstrated Ca<sup>2+</sup> dependence of the phytoalexin production by wounded bulbs. Furthermore, the isolated HpCDPK1 cDNA for ORF was found to be 1596bp long and encoded 531 amino acid protein with CDPK kinase activity, as was shown by recombinant GST-HpCDPK1 enzyme production and analysis. HpCDPK1 transcript was present in all vegetative and chosen generative organs of Hippeastrum plant. The dynamics of the observed HpCDPK1 mRNA changes in bulbs depended on stressor type. The mechanical injury caused one wave of transcript increase while more complex transcript changes were observed within 48h after Peyronellaea inoculation. In plant bulbs already accumulating red phytoalexin, increases in HpCDPK1 mRNA level were observed at certain intervals within 48h whereas, in the case of fungal infection, only one big increment in the transcript amount at the 10th minute after inoculation was detected. The observed transcriptional response of HpCDPK1 gene to wounding and pathogen infection stress suggests a positive correlation with phytoalexin synthesis and maintenance in bulb tissues and puts more light on CDPK kinase role in the plant stress response regulation. This also bears some potential for understanding the mechanism of a phytoalexin formation.

HpCDPK1: !synthesizes! phytoalexin
HpCDPK1: !responds to! mechanical injury
HpCDPK1: !responds to! Peyronellaea curtisii infection
HpCDPK1: !enhances! phytoalexin production
HpCDPK1: !localizes to! vegetative and generative organs