The physiological phenotype of potato tubers afflicted by zebra chip disease is characterized by increased oxidative stress metabolism and upregulation of systems for its mitigation. Starch catabolism and extensive buildup of reducing sugars render potatoes infected with zebra chip (ZC) pathogen (Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum) unsuitable for fresh market and processing into chips/fries. Here we show that the disease inflicts considerable oxidative stress, which likely constitutes a substantial sink for metabolic energy, resulting in increased respiration rate of afflicted tubers. In contrast to healthy tubers, tissue from diseased tubers had greater ability to reduce 2,3,5-triphenyl-tetrazolium chloride to formazan, indicating enhanced dehydrogenase activity, probable disease-induced changes in cellular redox potential, and increased respiratory activity. The respiration rate of diseased tubers (cv. Atlantic) was 2.4-fold higher than healthy tubers and this correlated with increased activities of glucose-6-phosphate and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenases, key enzymes responsible for synthesis of cytosolic reducing equivalents. Wound-induced NADPH oxidase activity was greater for ZC than healthy tubers, but the resulting superoxide was rapidly catabolized by higher superoxide dismutase activity in ZC tubers. Peroxidase, catalase, glutathione reductase and ascorbate free radical reductase activities were also higher in diseased tubers, as was malondialdehyde, a biomarker of peroxidative damage and oxidative stress. Upregulation of the glutathione-ascorbate pathway is a direct response to (and indicator of) oxidative stress, which consumes reducing equivalents (NADPH) to catabolize reactive oxygen species and maintain cellular redox homeostasis. ZC disease substantially altered the oxidative metabolism of tubers, resulting in a physiological phenotype defined by metabolic changes directed toward mitigating oxidative stress. Paradoxically, the increased respiration rate of ZC tubers, which fuels the metabolic pathways responsible for attenuating oxidative stress, likely also contributes to oxidative stress.

ZC disease: !induces! oxidative stress
oxidative stress: !promotes! respiration rate
ZC tubers: !have higher! dehydrogenase activity
ZC tubers: !have higher! NADPH oxidase activity
ZC tubers: !have higher! superoxide dismutase activity
ZC tubers: !have higher! peroxidase activity
ZC tubers: !have higher! catalase activity
ZC tubers: !have higher! glutathione reductase activity
ZC tubers: !have higher! ascorbate free radical reductase activity
ZC tubers: !have higher! malondialdehyde levels
glutathione-ascorbate pathway: !responds to! oxidative stress
NADPH: !consumes! reactive oxygen species