Tension wood (TW) is a specialized tissue with contractile properties that is formed by the vascular cambium in response to gravitational stimuli. We quantitatively analysed the proteomes of Populus tremula cambium and its xylem cell derivatives in stems forming normal wood (NW) and TW to reveal the mechanisms underlying TW formation. Phloem-, cambium-, and wood-forming tissues were sampled by tangential cryosectioning and pooled into nine independent samples. The proteomes of TW and NW samples were similar in the phloem and cambium samples, but diverged early during xylogenesis, demonstrating that reprogramming is an integral part of TW formation. For example, 14-3-3, reactive oxygen species, ribosomal and ATPase complex proteins were found to be up-regulated at early stages of xylem differentiation during TW formation. At later stages of xylem differentiation, proteins involved in the biosynthesis of cellulose and enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of rhamnogalacturonan-I, rhamnogalacturonan-II, arabinogalactan-II and fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins were up-regulated in TW. Surprisingly, two isoforms of exostosin family proteins with putative xylan xylosyl transferase function and several lignin biosynthesis proteins were also up-regulated, even though xylan and lignin are known to be less abundant in TW than in NW. These data provided new insight into the processes behind TW formation.

14-3-3: !up-regulated! TW formation
Reactive oxygen species: !up-regulated! TW formation
Ribosomal proteins: !up-regulated! TW formation
ATPase complex proteins: !up-regulated! TW formation
Cellulose biosynthesis proteins: !up-regulated! TW formation
Rhamnogalacturonan-I biosynthesis enzymes: !up-regulated! TW formation
Rhamnogalacturonan-II biosynthesis enzymes: !up-regulated! TW formation
Arabinogalactan-II biosynthesis enzymes: !up-regulated! TW formation
Fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins: !up-regulated! TW formation
Exostosin family proteins: !up-regulated! TW formation
Xylan xylosyl transferase function: !up-regulated! TW formation
Lignin biosynthesis proteins: !up-regulated! TW formation