The resistance to leaf rust (Lr) caused by Puccinia triticina in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) has been well studied over the past decades with over 70 Lr genes being mapped on different chromosomes and numerous QTLs (quantitative trait loci) being detected or mapped using DNA markers. Such resistance is often divided into race-specific and race-nonspecific resistance. The race-nonspecific resistance can be further divided into resistance to most or all races of the same pathogen and resistance to multiple pathogens. At the molecular level, these three types of resistance may cover across the whole spectrum of pathogen specificities that are controlled by genes encoding different protein families in wheat. The objective of this study is to predict and analyze genes in three such families: NBS-LRR (nucleotide-binding sites and leucine-rich repeats or NLR), START (Steroidogenic Acute Regulatory protein [STaR] related lipid-transfer) and ABC (ATP-Binding Cassette) transporter. The focus of the analysis is on the patterns of relationships between these protein-coding genes within the gene families and QTLs detected for leaf rust resistance. We predicted 526 ABC, 1117 NLR and 144 START genes in the hexaploid wheat genome through a domain analysis of wheat proteome. Of the 1809 SNPs from leaf rust resistance QTLs in seedling and adult stages of wheat, 126 SNPs were found within coding regions of these genes or their neighborhood (5 Kb upstream from transcription start site [TSS] or downstream from transcription termination site [TTS] of the genes). Forty-three of these SNPs for adult resistance and 18 SNPs for seedling resistance reside within coding or neighboring regions of the ABC genes whereas 14 SNPs for adult resistance and 29 SNPs for seedling resistance reside within coding or neighboring regions of the NLR gene. Moreover, we found 17 nonsynonymous SNPs for adult resistance and five SNPs for seedling resistance in the ABC genes, and five nonsynonymous SNPs for adult resistance and six SNPs for seedling resistance in the NLR genes. Most of these coding SNPs were predicted to alter encoded amino acids and such information may serve as a starting point towards more thorough molecular and functional characterization of the designated Lr genes. Using the primer sequences of 99 known non-SNP markers from leaf rust resistance QTLs, we found candidate genes closely linked to these markers, including Lr34 with distances to its two gene-specific markers being 1212 bases (to cssfr1) and 2189 bases (to cssfr2). This study represents a comprehensive analysis of ABC, NLR and START genes in the hexaploid wheat genome and their physical relationships with QTLs for leaf rust resistance at seedling and adult stages. Our analysis suggests that the ABC (and START) genes are more likely to be co-located with QTLs for race-nonspecific, adult resistance whereas the NLR genes are more likely to be co-located with QTLs for race-specific resistance that would be often expressed at the seedling stage. Though our analysis was hampered by inaccurate or unknown physical positions of numerous QTLs due to the incomplete assembly of the complex hexaploid wheat genome that is currently available, the observed associations between (i) QTLs for race-specific resistance and NLR genes and (ii) QTLs for nonspecific resistance and ABC genes will help discover SNP variants for leaf rust resistance at seedling and adult stages. The genes containing nonsynonymous SNPs are promising candidates that can be investigated in future studies as potential new sources of leaf rust resistance in wheat breeding.

NBS-LRR: !localizes to! QTLs for race-specific resistance 
START: !localizes to! QTLs for race-nonspecific, adult resistance 
ABC: !localizes to! QTLs for race-nonspecific, adult resistance 
NLR: !enhances! Race-specific resistance 
ABC: !enhances! Race-nonspecific resistance 
SNP: !affects! Amino acid encoded