Phosphorus (P) deficiency limits plant growth and yield. Since plants can absorb only the inorganic form of P (Pi), a large portion of soil P (organic and inorganic P complexes) remains unused. Here, we identified and characterized a PHR2-regulated, novel low-Pi-responsive haloacid dehalogenase (HAD)-like hydrolase, <i>OsHAD1</i> While OsHAD1 is a functional HAD protein having both acid phosphatase and phytase activities, it showed little homology with other known low-Pi-responsive HAD superfamily members. Recombinant OsHAD1 is active at acidic pH and dephosphorylates a broad range of organic and inorganic P-containing substrates, including phosphorylated serine and sodium phytate. Exogenous application of recombinant OsHAD1 protein in growth medium supplemented with phytate led to marked increases in growth and total P content of Pi-deficient wild-type rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i>) seedlings. Furthermore, overexpression of <i>OsHAD1</i> in rice resulted in enhanced phosphatase activity, biomass, and total and soluble P contents in Pi-deficient transgenic seedlings treated with phytate as a restricted Pi source. Gene expression and metabolite profiling revealed enhanced Pi starvation responses, such as up-regulation of multiple genes involved in Pi uptake and solubilization, accumulation of organic acids, enhanced secretory phosphatase activity, and depletion of ATP in overexpression lines as compared with the wild type. To elucidate the underlying regulatory mechanisms of OsHAD1, we performed in vitro pull-down assays, which revealed the association of OsHAD1 with protein kinases such as OsNDPKs. We conclude that, besides dephosphorylation of cellular organic P, OsHAD1 in coordination with kinases may regulate the phosphorylation status of downstream targets to accomplish Pi homeostasis under limited Pi supply.

OsHAD1: !enhances! growth and total P content 
OsHAD1: !dephosphorylates! organic and inorganic P-containing substrates 
OsHAD1: !up-regulates! multiple genes involved in Pi uptake and solubilization 
OsHAD1: !accumulates! organic acids 
OsHAD1: !enhances! secretory phosphatase activity 
OsHAD1: !depletes! ATP 
OsHAD1: !associates with! protein kinases