Protein kinases regulate diverse physiological processes. Because many kinases preserve inherent autophosphorylation capability, autophosphorylation appears to be one of the most important mechanisms for cellular signaling. However, physiological functions of autophosphorylation are still largely unknown, other than the self-activation by phosphorylation of activation loop in the catalytic domain. REPRESSION OF SHOOT GROWTH (RSG) is the transcription factor involved in gibberellin (GA) feedback regulation. The tobacco (<i>Nicotiana tabacum</i>) Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent protein kinase, NtCDPK1, phosphorylates RSG, resulting in the negative regulation of RSG. NtCDPK1 was previously shown to be autophosphorylated in a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent manner. Here, we investigated the functional importance of autophosphorylation in NtCDPK1. Ser-6 and Thr-21 were identified as autophosphorylation sites of NtCDPK1. Autophosphorylation not only reduced the binding affinity of NtCDPK1 for RSG, but also inhibited the homodimerization of NtCDPK1. Furthermore, autophosphorylation decreased the phosphorylation efficiency of RSG yet increased that of myelin basic protein. Ser-6 and Thr-21 of NtCDPK1 were phosphorylated in response to GAs in plants. The substitution of these autophosphorylation sites with Ala enhanced the NtCDPK1 overexpression-induced sensitization of seeds to a GA biosynthetic inhibitor during germination. These results suggest new functions of autophosphorylation in CDPKs, namely, autophosphorylation can prevent the excessive phosphorylation of substrates and alter the substrate preference of CDPKs.

NtCDPK1: !autophosphorylates! Ser-6 and Thr-21 
Ser-6 and Thr-21: !inhibit! binding affinity of NtCDPK1 for RSG 
Ser-6 and Thr-21: !inhibit! homodimerization of NtCDPK1 
Ser-6 and Thr-21: !decrease! phosphorylation efficiency of RSG 
Ser-6 and Thr-21: !increase! phosphorylation efficiency of myelin basic protein 
Ser-6 and Thr-21: !phosphorylated! in response to GAs 
Ala substitution: !enhances! NtCDPK1 overexpression-induced sensitization of seeds