['28652362', 'Polar cellular localization of proteins is often associated with their function  and activity. In plants, relatively few polar-localized factors have been  described. Among them, the plasma membrane-associated Arabidopsis proteins  OCTOPUS (OPS) and BREVIS RADIX (BRX) display shootward and rootward polar  localization, respectively, in developing root protophloem cells. Both ops and  brx null mutants exhibit defects in protophloem differentiation. Here we show  that OPS and BRX act genetically in parallel in this process, although OPS dosage  increase mends defects caused by brx loss-of-function. OPS protein function is  ancient and conserved in the most basal angiosperms; however, many highly  conserved structural OPS features are not strictly required for OPS function.  They include a BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 2 (BIN2) interaction domain, which  supposedly mediates gain-of-function effects obtained through ectopic OPS  overexpression. However, engineering an increasingly positive charge in a  critical phosphorylation site, S318, progressively amplifies OPS activity. Such  hyperactive OPS versions can even complement the severe phenotype of brx ops  double mutants, and the most active variants eventually trigger gain-of-function  phenotypes. Finally, BRX-OPS as well as OPS-BRX fusion proteins localize to the  rootward end of developing protophloem cells, but complement ops mutants as  efficiently as shootward localized OPS. Thus, our results suggest that S318  phosphorylation status, rather than a predominantly shootward polar localization,  is a primary determinant of OPS activity.', '2017 Jul 11', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1703258114', 'Hardtke']

OPS: !localizes to! protophloem cells 
BRX: !localizes to! protophloem cells 
OPS: !interacts with! BIN2 
OPS: !enhances! protophloem differentiation 
S318: !amplifies! OPS activity 
BRX-OPS: !localizes to! rootward end of protophloem cells 
OPS-BRX: !localizes to! rootward end of protophloem cells