Grapevine (<i>Vitis vinifera</i>) berry development involves a succession of physiological and biochemical changes reflecting the transcriptional modulation of thousands of genes. Although recent studies have investigated the dynamic transcriptome during berry development, most have focused on a single grapevine variety, so there is a lack of comparative data representing different cultivars. Here, we report, to our knowledge, the first genome-wide transcriptional analysis of 120 RNA samples corresponding to 10 Italian grapevine varieties collected at four growth stages. The 10 varieties, representing five red-skinned and five white-skinned berries, were all cultivated in the same experimental vineyard to reduce environmental variability. The comparison of transcriptional changes during berry formation and ripening allowed us to determine the transcriptomic traits common to all varieties, thus defining the core transcriptome of berry development, as well as the transcriptional dynamics underlying differences between red and white berry varieties. A greater variation among the red cultivars than between red and white cultivars at the transcriptome level was revealed, suggesting that anthocyanin accumulation during berry maturation has a direct impact on the transcriptomic regulation of multiple biological processes. The expression of genes related to phenylpropanoid/flavonoid biosynthesis clearly distinguished the behavior of red and white berry genotypes during ripening but also reflected the differential accumulation of anthocyanins in the red berries, indicating some form of cross talk between the activation of stilbene biosynthesis and the accumulation of anthocyanins in ripening berries.

Grapevine: !involves! Transcriptional modulation
Varieties: !differ in! Transcriptomic traits
Red/White berries: !differ in! Anthocyanin accumulation
Phenylpropanoid/flavonoid biosynthesis: !distinguishes! Red/White berry genotypes
Stilbene biosynthesis: !cross talks with! Anthocyanin accumulation