Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans decreases growth of rice. Inoculation of rice with H. rubrisubalbicans increased the ACCO mRNA levels and ethylene production. The H. rubrisubalbicans rice interactions were further characterized by proteomic approach. Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans is a well-known growth-promoting rhizobacteria that can also act as a mild phyto-pathogen. During colonisation of rice, RT-qPCR analyses showed that H. rubrisubalbicans up-regulates the methionine recycling pathway as well as phyto-siderophore synthesis genes. mRNA levels of ACC oxidase and ethylene levels also increased in rice roots but inoculation with H. rubrisubalbicans impaired growth of the rice plant. A proteomic approach was used to identify proteins specifically modulated by H. rubrisubalbicans in rice and amongst the differentially expressed proteins a V-ATPase and a 14-3-3 protein were down-regulated. Several proteins of H. rubrisubalbicans were identified, including the type VI secretion system effector Hcp1, suggesting that protein secretion play a role colonisation in rice. Finally, the alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, a primary scavenger of endogenous hydrogen peroxide was also identified. Monitoring the levels of reactive oxygen species in the epiphytic bacteria by flow cytometry revealed that H. rubrisubalbicans is subjected to oxidative stress, suggesting that the alkyl hydroperoxide reductase is an important regulator of redox homeostasis in plant-bacteria interactions.

Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !decreases! growth of rice
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !up-regulates! methionine recycling pathway
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !up-regulates! phyto-siderophore synthesis genes
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !increases! ACCO mRNA levels
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !increases! ethylene production
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !down-regulates! V-ATPase
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !down-regulates! 14-3-3 protein
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !secretes! Hcp1
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !expresses! alkyl hydroperoxide reductase
Herbaspirillum rubrisubalbicans: !subjected to! oxidative stress