A comparative transcriptomic and genomic analysis between Arabidopsis thaliana and Glycine max root hair genes reveals the evolution of the expression of plant genes after speciation and whole genome duplication. Our understanding of the conservation and divergence of the expression patterns of genes between plant species is limited by the quality of the genomic and transcriptomic resources available. Specifically, the transcriptomes generated from plant organs are the reflection of the contribution of the different cell types composing the samples weighted by their relative abundances in the sample. These contributions can vary between plant species leading to the generation of datasets which are difficult to compare. To gain a deeper understanding of the evolution of gene transcription in and between plant species, we performed a comparative transcriptomic and genomic analysis at the level of one single plant cell type, the root hair cell, and between two model plants: Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and soybean (Glycine max). These two species, which diverged 90 million years ago, were selected as models based on the large amount of genomic and root hair transcriptomic information currently available. Our analysis revealed in detail the transcriptional divergence and conservation between soybean paralogs (i.e., the soybean genome is the product of two successive whole genome duplications) and between Arabidopsis and soybean orthologs in this single plant cell type. Taking advantage of this evolutionary study, we combined bioinformatics, molecular, cellular and microscopic tools to characterize plant promoter sequences and the discovery of two root hair regulatory elements (RHE1 and RHE2) consistently and specifically active in plant root hair cells.

Arabidopsis: !diverged from! Glycine max 
Glycine max: !has two successive whole genome duplications!
Arabidopsis: !orthologs of! Glycine max 
Bioinformatics: !used to! Characterize plant promoter sequences 
Root hair regulatory elements: !discovered in! Plant root hair cells