The normal growth of Rehmannia glutinosa, a widely used medicinal plant in China, is severely disturbed by replant disease. The formation of replant disease commonly involves interactions among plants, allelochemicals and microbes; however, these relationships remain largely unclear. As a result, no effective measures are currently available to treat replant disease. In this study, an integrated R. glutinosa transcriptome was constructed, from which an R. glutinosa protein library was obtained. iTRAQ technology was then used to investigate changes in the proteins in replanted R. glutinosa roots, and the proteins that were expressed in response to replant disease were identified. An integrated R. glutinosa transcriptome from different developmental stages of replanted and normal-growth R. glutinosa produced 65,659 transcripts, which were accurately translated into 47,818 proteins. Using this resource, a set of 189 proteins was found to be significantly differentially expressed between normal-growth and replanted R. glutinosa. Of the proteins that were significantly upregulated in replanted R. glutinosa, most were related to metabolism, immune responses, ROS generation, programmed cell death, ER stress, and lignin synthesis. By integrating these key events and the results of previous studies on replant disease formation, a new picture of the damaging mechanisms that cause replant disease stress emerged. Replant disease altered the metabolic balance of R. glutinosa, activated immune defence systems, increased levels of ROS and antioxidant enzymes, and initiated the processes of cell death and senescence in replanted R. glutinosa. Additionally, lignin deposition in R. glutinosa roots that was caused by replanting significantly inhibited tuberous root formation. These key processes provide important insights into the underlying mechanisms leading to the formation of replant disease and also for the subsequent development of new control measures to improve production and quality of replanted plants.

R. glutinosa: !affected by! replant disease 
metabolism: !altered by! replant disease 
immune responses: !activated by! replant disease 
ROS: !increased by! replant disease 
antioxidant enzymes: !increased by! replant disease 
cell death: !initiated by! replant disease 
senescence: !initiated by! replant disease 
lignin synthesis: !enhanced by! replant disease 
tuberous root formation: !inhibited by! lignin deposition