Bois noir is an important disease of grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.), caused by phytoplasmas. An interesting, yet elusive aspect of the bois noir disease is "recovery", i.e., the spontaneous and unpredictable remission of symptoms and damage. Because conventional pest management is ineffective against bois noir, deciphering the molecular bases of recovery is beneficial. The present study aimed to understand whether salicylate- and jasmonate-defence pathways might have a role in the recovery from the bois noir disease of grapevine. Leaves from healthy, bois noir-diseased and bois noir-recovered plants were compared, both in the presence (late summer) and absence (late spring) of bois noir symptoms on the diseased plants. Analyses of salicylate and jasmonate contents, as well as the expression of genes involved in their biosynthesis, signalling and action, were evaluated. In symptomatic diseased plants (late summer), unlike symptomless plants (late spring), salicylate biosynthesis was increased and salicylate-responsive genes were activated. In contrast, jasmonate biosynthesis and signalling genes were up-regulated both in recovered and diseased plants at all sampling dates. The activation of salicylate signalling in symptomatic plants might have antagonised the jasmonate-mediated defence response by suppressing the expression of jasmonate-responsive genes. Our results suggest that grapevine reacts to phytoplasma infection through salicylate-mediated signalling, although the resultant full activation of a salicylate-mediated response is apparently ineffective in conferring resistance against bois noir disease. Activation of the salicylate signalling pathway that is associated with the presence of bois noir phytoplasma seems to antagonise the jasmonate defence response, by failing to activate or suppressing both the expression of some jasmonate responsive genes that act downstream of the jasmonate biosynthetic pathway, as well as the first events of the jasmonate signalling pathway. On the other hand, activation of the entire jasmonate signalling pathway in recovered plants suggests the potential importance of jasmonate-regulated defences in preventing bois noir phytoplasma infections and the subsequent development of bois noir disease. Thus, on one hand, recovery could be achieved and maintained over time by preventing the activation of defence genes associated with salicylate signalling, and on the other hand, by activating jasmonate signalling and other defence responses.

gene: !synthesizes! salicylate 
gene: !activates! salicylate-responsive genes 
gene: !upregulates! jasmonate biosynthesis 
gene: !upregulates! jasmonate signalling genes 
gene: !antagonizes! jasmonate defence response 
gene: !prevents! activation of defence genes 
gene: !activates! jasmonate signalling 
gene: !maintains! recovery over time