The set of variables analyzed as integrated by multivariate analysis of principal components consistently showed a memory effect induced by the drought pre-treatment in AN Cambará plants. The effects of drought can vary ddepending on many factors. Among these the occurrence of a previous water stress may leave a residual effect (memory), influencing the future performance of a plant in response to a new drought event. This study tested the hypothesis that plants experiencing recurrent drought would show more active mechanisms of water deficit tolerance, mainly plants of the genotype that is cultivated often experiencing water shortages periods. Additionally, all the plants subjected to water deficit were rehydrated by 24 h and the expression of transcription factors related to drought responses was re-evaluated. To this end, the water status of two rice genotypes, BRS Querência (flooded) and AN Cambará (dryland), was evaluated to identify molecular alterations likely underpinning drought-memory. In growth stage V5, some plants were exposed to water stress (10% VWC soil moisture-pre-treatment). Thereafter, the pots were rehydrated at the same level as the control pots and maintained under this condition until drought was reapplied (10% VWC) at the reproductive stage (R1-R2). Then, the plants were rehydrated and maintained at pot capacity for 24 h. Overall, the set of variables analyzed integrally by multivariate analysis of principal components consistently showed a memory effect induced by the drought pre-treatment in AN Cambará plants (the dryland genotype). This conclusion, based on data of the biochemical and molecular analyses, was supported by the greater capacity of maintenance of the water status by stomatal regulation of the pre-treated and rehydrated plants after the second drought stimulus.

drought: !induces! memory effect 
drought: !affects! water status 
water stress: !influences! future performance 
genotype: !experiences! recurrent drought 
transcription factors: !related to! drought responses 
stomatal regulation: !maintains! water status