Senescence is the process that marks the end of a leaf's lifespan. As it progresses, the massive macromolecular catabolism dismantles the chloroplasts and, consequently, decreases the photosynthetic capacity of these organs. Thus, senescence manipulation is a strategy to improve plant yield by extending the leaf's photosynthetically active window of time. However, it remains to be addressed if this approach can improve fleshy fruit production and nutritional quality. One way to delay senescence initiation is by regulating key transcription factors (TFs) involved in triggering this process, such as the NAC TF ORESARA1 (ORE1). Here, three senescence-related NAC TFs from tomato (<i>Solanum lycopersicum</i>) were identified, namely SlORE1S02, SlORE1S03, and SlORE1S06. All three genes were shown to be responsive to senescence-inducing stimuli and posttranscriptionally regulated by the microRNA <i>miR164</i> Moreover, the encoded proteins interacted physically with the chloroplast maintenance-related TF SlGLKs. This characterization led to the selection of a putative tomato <i>ORE1</i> as target gene for RNA interference knockdown. Transgenic lines showed delayed senescence and enhanced carbon assimilation that, ultimately, increased the number of fruits and their total soluble solid content. Additionally, the fruit nutraceutical composition was enhanced. In conclusion, these data provide robust evidence that the manipulation of leaf senescence is an effective strategy for yield improvement in fleshy fruit-bearing species.

SlORE1S02: !regulates! Senescence 
SlORE1S03: !regulates! Senescence 
SlORE1S06: !regulates! Senescence 
miR164: !posttranscriptionally regulates! SlORE1S02, SlORE1S03, SlORE1S06 
SlGLKs: !interacts with! SlORE1S02, SlORE1S03, SlORE1S06 
ORE1: !target gene for! RNA interference knockdown 
Senescence: !delayed by! ORE1 knockdown 
Carbon assimilation: !enhanced by! ORE1 knockdown 
Fruits: !increased number of! by ORE1 knockdown 
Total soluble solid content: !increased by! ORE1 knockdown 
Nutraceutical composition: !enhanced by! ORE1 knockdown