['28733390', 'The triphosphate tunnel metalloenzyme (TTM) superfamily comprises a group of  enzymes that hydrolyze organophosphate substrates. They exist in all domains of  life, yet the biological role of most family members is unclear. Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) encodes three TTM genes. We have previously reported that  AtTTM2 displays pyrophosphatase activity and is involved in pathogen resistance.  Here, we report the biochemical activity and biological function of AtTTM1 and  diversification of the biological roles between AtTTM1 and 2 Biochemical analyses  revealed that AtTTM1 displays pyrophosphatase activity similar to AtTTM2, making  them the only TTMs characterized so far to act on a diphosphate substrate.  However, knockout mutant analysis showed that AtTTM1 is not involved in pathogen  resistance but rather in leaf senescence. AtTTM1 is transcriptionally  up-regulated during leaf senescence, and knockout mutants of AtTTM1 exhibit  delayed dark-induced and natural senescence. The double mutant of AtTTM1 and  AtTTM2 did not show synergistic effects, further indicating the diversification  of their biological function. However, promoter swap analyses revealed that they  functionally can complement each other, and confocal microscopy revealed that  both proteins are tail-anchored proteins that localize to the mitochondrial outer  membrane. Additionally, transient overexpression of either gene in Nicotiana  benthamiana induced senescence-like cell death upon dark treatment. Taken  together, we show that two TTMs display the same biochemical properties but  distinct biological functions that are governed by their transcriptional  regulation. Moreover, this work reveals a possible connection of immunity-related  programmed cell death and senescence through novel mitochondrial tail-anchored  proteins.', '2017 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.00700', 'ORCID:']

AtTTM1: !displays! pyrophosphatase activity 
AtTTM1: !localizes to! mitochondrial outer membrane 
AtTTM1: !up-regulates! during leaf senescence 
AtTTM1: !induces! senescence-like cell death 
AtTTM2: !displays! pyrophosphatase activity 
AtTTM2: !involved in! pathogen resistance 
AtTTM2: !localizes to! mitochondrial outer membrane 
AtTTM2 and AtTTM1: !diversify! biological functions