Rice being an important cereal crop is highly sensitive to salinity stress causing growth retardation and loss in productivity. However, certain rice genotypes like Nonabokra and Pokkali show a high level of tolerance towards salinity stress compared to IR64 variety. This differential response of tolerant varieties towards salinity stress may be a cumulative effect of genetic and epigenetic factors. In this study, we have compared the salinity-induced changes in chromatin modifications at the OsBZ8 locus in salt-tolerant Nonabokra and salt-sensitive IR64 rice varieties. Expression analysis indicates that the OsBZ8 gene is highly induced in Nonabokra plants even in the absence of salt stress, whereas in IR64, the expression significantly increases only during salt stress. Sequence analysis and nucleosomal arrangement within the region -2000 to +1000 of OsBZ8 gene show no difference between the two rice varieties. However, there was a considerable difference in histone modifications and DNA methylation at the locus between these varieties. In Nonabokra, the upstream region was hyperacetylated at H3K9 and H3K27, and this acetylation did not change during salt stress. However, in IR64, histone acetylation was observed only during salt stress. Moreover, the upstream region of OsBZ8 gene has highly dynamic nucleosome arrangement in Nonabokra, compared to IR64. Furthermore, loss of DNA methylation was observed at OsBZ8 locus in Nonabokra control plants along with low H3K27me3 and high H3K4me3. Control IR64 plants show high DNA methylation and enriched H3K27me3. Collectively these results indicate a significant difference in chromatin modifications between the rice varieties that regulates differential expression of OsBZ8 gene during salt stress.

OsBZ8: !highly induced in! Nonabokra 
OsBZ8: !significantly increases in! IR64 
Nonabokra: !hyperacetylated at H3K9 and H3K27! OsBZ8 
IR64: !histone acetylation observed only during salt stress! OsBZ8 
Nonabokra: !dynamic nucleosome arrangement! OsBZ8 
Nonabokra: !loss of DNA methylation! OsBZ8 
IR64: !high DNA methylation! OsBZ8 
Nonabokra: !low H3K27me3! OsBZ8 
IR64: !enriched H3K27me3! OsBZ8