Metabolites and lipids are the final products of enzymatic processes, distinguishing the different cellular functions and activities of single cells or whole tissues. Understanding these cellular functions within a well-established model system requires a systemic collection of molecular and physiological information. In the current report, the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii was selected to establish a comprehensive workflow for the detailed multi-omics analysis of a synchronously growing cell culture system. After implementation and benchmarking of the synchronous cell culture, a two-phase extraction method was adopted for the analysis of proteins, lipids, metabolites and starch from a single sample aliquot of as little as 10-15 million Chlamydomonas cells. In a proof of concept study, primary metabolites and lipids were sampled throughout the diurnal cell cycle. The results of these time-resolved measurements showed that single compounds were not only coordinated with each other in different pathways, but that these complex metabolic signatures have the potential to be used as biomarkers of various cellular processes. Taken together, the developed workflow, including the synchronized growth of the photoautotrophic cell culture, in combination with comprehensive extraction methods and detailed metabolic phenotyping has the potential for use in in-depth analysis of complex cellular processes, providing essential information for the understanding of complex biological systems.

Metabolites: !distinguish! Cellular functions
Lipids: !distinguish! Cellular functions
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: !selected for! Comprehensive workflow
Two-phase extraction method: !adopted for! Proteins, lipids, metabolites and starch
Primary metabolites and lipids: !sampled throughout! Diurnal cell cycle
Compounds: !coordinated with each other! Different pathways
Metabolic signatures: !potential to be used as! Biomarkers of various cellular processes
Synchronized growth: !potential for use in! In-depth analysis of complex cellular processes