Perennial trees require chilling, i.e. a period of cold temperature in the winter, for flowering next spring; sweet cherry is particularly prone to lack of chilling. The objective of this study is to identify possible transition points to clearly distinguish dormancy phases by relating carbohydrate and relative water content (RWC) in reproductive buds to concomitant chilling fulfilment. This contribution proposes the use of four transition points between the dormancy phases and their characterization in terms of carbohydrates, water contents in combination with chilling values and may allow upscaling to other dormancy studies in trees; two groups of cherry varieties were defined based on their different initial sorbitol and starch level in the autumn. The first separation between para- and (deep) d-endo-dormancy is characterized as a transition from a decrease (variety group 1) or a constant level (variety group 2) to a sharp increase in hexoses and sorbitol and a drop of starch content. The second transition point (d-endo- to f-endo-dormancy) is characterized as the changes in both hexoses (increase) and starch (decrease) terminate and ca. 650 Chilling Hours (CH), i.e. insufficient chilling in the concomitant forcing experiment with cut branches. This third transition point (f-endo- to eco-dormancy) was characterized by ca. 1000 CH, the minimum chilling requirement and restrained flowering (cut branches). The fourth transition point (forcing initiation) marked an increase in water content at ca. 1550 CH, optimum chilling for cherry and coincided with natural flowering. A ratio of hexoses (glucose plus fructose) to starch content (<2:1) appeared to be a potential indicator of the beginning of chilling (para-dormancy) and a ratio of 14-20:1 typical for endo-dormancy, whereas the release from dormancy was associated with a decline to less than 10:1 at the end of winter (eco-dormancy). To our knowledge, this is the first time that transition points are identified based on constituents (carbohydrates and relative water content) in floral buds related to current chilling status and dormancy phases and are also presented in a schematic diagram. The understanding of these changes in relative water content and carbohydrate levels may contribute to manage insufficient chilling in the orchard and support climate change studies with trees.

carbohydrates: !indicate! para-dormancy 
hexoses/starch ratio: !characterize! d-endo-dormancy 
water content: !signals! f-endo-dormancy 
chilling hours: !mark! eco-dormancy 
relative water content: !correlates with! chilling fulfilment