['28755319', 'The molecular actions of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are ultimately  accomplished by the substrate proteins where phosphorylation affects their  molecular properties and function(s), but knowledge regarding plant MAPK  substrates is currently still fragmentary. Here, we uncovered a previously  uncharacterized protein family consisting of three proline/serine-rich proteins  (PRPs) that are substrates of stress-related MAPKs. We demonstrated the  importance of a MAPK docking domain necessary for protein-protein interaction  with MAPKs and consequently also for phosphorylation. The main phosphorylated  site was mapped to a residue conserved between all three proteins, which when  mutated to a non-phosphorylatable form, differentially affected their protein  stability. Together with their distinct gene expression patterns, this  differential accumulation of the three proteins upon phosphorylation probably  contributes to their distinct function(s). Transgenic over-expression of PRP, the  founding member, led to plants with enhanced resistance to Pseudomonas syringae  pv. tomato DC3000. Older plants of the over-expressing lines have curly leaves  and were generally smaller in stature. This growth phenotype was lost in plants  expressing the phosphosite variant, suggesting a phosphorylation-dependent  effect. Thus, this novel family of PRPs may be involved in MAPK regulation of  plant development and / or pathogen resistance responses. As datamining  associates PRP expression profiles with hypoxia or oxidative stress and  PRP-overexpressing plants have elevated levels of reactive oxygen species, PRP  may connect MAPK and oxidative stress signaling.', '2017 Sep', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-017-0641-5', 'ORCID:']

MAPKs: !affects! Substrate proteins 
Substrate proteins: !interacts with! MAPKs 
PRPs: !localizes to! Stress-related MAPKs 
PRPs: !enhances! Resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 
PRP: !represses! Growth phenotype 
PRP: !synthesizes! Reactive oxygen species