Although sunlight provides the energy necessary for plants to survive and grow, light can also damage reaction centers of photosystem II (PSII) and reduce photochemical efficiency. To prevent damage, plants possess photoprotective mechanisms that dissipate excess excitation. A subset of these mechanisms is collectively referred to as NPQ, or nonphotochemical quenching of chlorophyll <i>a</i> fluorescence. The regulation of NPQ is intrinsically linked to the cycling of xanthophylls that affects the kinetics and extent of the photoprotective response. The violaxanthin cycle (VAZ cycle) and the lutein epoxide cycle (LxL cycle) are two xanthophyll cycles found in vascular plants. The VAZ cycle has been studied extensively, owing in large part to its presence in model plant species where mutants are available to aid in its characterization. In contrast, the LxL cycle is not found in model plants, and its role in photosynthetic processes has been more difficult to define. To address this challenge, we introduced the LxL cycle into <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> and functionally isolated it from the VAZ cycle. Using these plant lines, we showed an increase in dark-acclimated PSII efficiency associated with Lx accumulation and demonstrated that violaxanthin deepoxidase is responsible for the light-driven deepoxidation of Lx. Conversion of Lx to L was reversible during periods of low light and occurred considerably faster than rates previously described in nonmodel species. Finally, we present clear evidence of the LxL cycle's role in modulating a rapid component of NPQ that is necessary to prevent photoinhibition in excess light.

Sunlight: !provides energy for! plants
Light: !damages! PSII
NPQ: !prevents damage from! light
VAZ cycle: !regulates! NPQ
LxL cycle: !not found in! model plants
Arabidopsis thaliana: !introduced with! LxL cycle
PSII efficiency: !increased with! Lx accumulation
Violaxanthin deepoxidase: !responsible for! light-driven deepoxidation of Lx
Lx: !converted to! L in low light
LxL cycle: !modulates! rapid component of NPQ