['28821594', 'A rice (Oryza sativa) mutant led to the discovery of a plant-specific LAZY1  protein that controls the orientation of shoots. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) possesses six LAZY genes having spatially distinct expression patterns.  Branch angle phenotypes previously associated with single LAZY genes were here  studied in roots and shoots of single and higher-order atlazy mutants. The  results identify the major contributors to root and shoot branch angles and  gravitropic behavior of seedling hypocotyls and primary roots. AtLAZY1 is the  principal determinant of inflorescence branch angle. The weeping inflorescence  phenotype of atlazy1,2,4 mutants may be due at least in part to a reversal in the  gravitropism mechanism. AtLAZY2 and AtLAZY4 determined lateral root branch angle.  Lateral roots of the atlazy2,4 double mutant emerged slightly upward,  approximately 10 degrees  greater than perpendicular to the primary root axis, and they  were agravitropic. Etiolated hypocotyls of the quadruple atlazy1,2,3,4 mutant  were essentially agravitropic, but their phototropic response was robust. In  light-grown seedlings, the root of the atlazy2,3,4 mutant was also agravitropic  but when adapted to dim red light it displayed a reversed gravitropic response. A  reversed auxin gradient across the root visualized by a fluorescent signaling  reporter explained the reversed, upward bending response. We propose that AtLAZY  proteins control plant architecture by coupling gravity sensing to the formation  of auxin gradients that override a LAZY-independent mechanism that creates an  opposing gravity-induced auxin gradient.', '2017 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.00942', 'ORCID:']

AtLAZY1: !controls! inflorescence branch angle
AtLAZY2: !determines! lateral root branch angle
AtLAZY4: !determines! lateral root branch angle
atlazy1,2,4: !causes! weeping inflorescence phenotype
atlazy1,2,3,4: !results in! agravitropic hypocotyls
atlazy2,3,4: !displays! reversed gravitropic response
AtLAZY proteins: !couple! gravity sensing to auxin gradient formation