In maize seedlings, severe cold results in dysregulation of circadian pattern of gene expression causing profound modulation of transcription of genes related to photosynthesis and other key biological processes. Plants live highly cyclic life and their response to environmental stresses must allow for underlying biological rhythms. To study the interplay of a stress and a rhythmic cue we investigated transcriptomic response of maize seedlings to low temperature in the context of diurnal gene expression. Severe cold stress had pronounced effect on the circadian rhythm of a substantial proportion of genes. Their response was strikingly dual, comprising either flattening (partial or complete) of the diel amplitude or delay of expression maximum/minimum by several hours. Genes encoding central oscillator components behaved in the same dual manner, unlike their Arabidopsis counterparts reported earlier to cease cycling altogether upon cold treatment. Also numerous genes lacking circadian rhythm responded to the cold by undergoing up- or down-regulation. Notably, the transcriptome changes preceded major physiological manifestations of cold stress. In silico analysis of metabolic processes likely affected by observed gene expression changes indicated major down-regulation of photosynthesis, profound and multifarious modulation of plant hormone levels, and of chromatin structure, transcription, and translation. A role of trehalose and stachyose in cold stress signaling was also suggested. Meta-analysis of published transcriptomic data allowed discrimination between general stress response of maize and that unique to severe cold. Several cis- and trans-factors likely involved in the latter were predicted, albeit none of them seemed to have a major role. These results underscore a key role of modulation of diel gene expression in maize response to severe cold and the unique character of the cold-response of the maize circadian clock.

Gene: !affects! Circadian rhythm
Gene: !modulates! Photosynthesis
Gene: !modulates! Plant hormone levels
Gene: !modulates! Chromatin structure
Gene: !modulates! Transcription
Gene: !modulates! Translation
Gene: !suggests role of! Trehalose
Gene: !suggests role of! Stachyose
Gene: !predicts! Cis-factors
Gene: !predicts! Trans-factors