['28832648', 'Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are evolutionarily conserved and multifunctional  effector molecules playing pivotal roles in development and homeostasis. In this  study we explored the involvement of the five Arabidopsis thaliana At-MMPs in  plant defence against microbial pathogens. Expression of At2-MMP was most  responsive to inoculation with fungi and a bacterial pathogen followed by At3-MMP  and At5-MMP, while At1-MMP and At4-MMP were non-responsive to these biotic  stresses. Loss-of-function mutants for all tested At-MMPs displayed increased  susceptibility to the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis cinerea and double mutant  at2,3-mmp and triple mutant at2,3,5-mmp plants developed even stronger symptoms.  Consistent with this, transgenic Arabidopsis plants that expressed At2-MMP  constitutively under the Cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter showed enhanced  resistance to the necrotrophic pathogen. Similarly, resistance to the biotrophic  Arabidopsis powdery mildew fungus Golovinomyces orontii was also compromised  particularly in the at2,3-mmp / at2,3,5-mmp multiplex mutants, and increased in  At2-MMP overexpressor plants. The degree of disease resistance of at-mmp mutants  and At2-MMP overexpressor plants also correlated positively with the degree of  MAMP-triggered callose deposition in response to the bacterial flagellin peptide  flg22, suggesting that matrix metalloproteinases contribute to pattern-triggered  immunity (PTI) in interactions of Arabidopsis with necrotrophic and biotrophic  pathogens.', '2017', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0183577', 'Kogel']

At2-MMP: !enhances! Resistance to necrotrophic pathogen 
At3-MMP: !enhances! Resistance to necrotrophic pathogen 
At5-MMP: !enhances! Resistance to necrotrophic pathogen 
At1-MMP: !non-responsive! To biotic stresses 
At4-MMP: !non-responsive! To biotic stresses 
at2,3-mmp: !compromises! Resistance to biotrophic pathogen 
at2,3,5-mmp: !compromises! Resistance to biotrophic pathogen 
At2-MMP: !increases! Resistance to biotrophic pathogen 
At2-MMP: !correlates with! MAMP-triggered callose deposition