['28830938', 'The current model for vesicular traffic to and from the plasma membrane is  accepted, but the molecular requirements for this coordination are not well  defined. We have identified the hot ABA-deficiency suppressor1 mutant, which has  a stomatal function defect, as a clathrin heavy chain1 (CHC1) mutant allele and  show that it has a decreased rate of endocytosis and growth defects that are  shared with other chc1 mutant alleles. We used chc1 alleles and the related chc2  mutant as tools to investigate the effects that clathrin defects have on  secretion pathways and plant growth. We show that secretion and endocytosis at  the plasma membrane are sensitive to CHC1 and CHC2 function in seedling roots and  that chc mutants have physiological defects in stomatal function and plant growth  that have not been described previously. These findings suggest that clathrin  supports specific functions in multiple cell types. Stomata movement and gas  exchange are altered in chc mutants, indicating that clathrin is important for  stomatal regulation. The aberrant function of chc mutant stomata is consistent  with the growth phenotypes observed under different water and light conditions,  which also are similar to those of the secretory SNARE mutant, syp121 The syp121  and chc mutants have impaired endocytosis and exocytosis compared with the wild  type, indicating a link between SYP121-dependent secretion and clathrin-dependent  endocytosis at the plasma membrane. Our findings provide evidence that clathrin  and SYP121 functions are important for the coordination of endocytosis and  exocytosis and have an impact on stomatal function, gas exchange, and vegetative  growth in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana).', '2017 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.00970', 'ORCID:']

CHC1: !affects! Endocytosis 
CHC1: !affects! Stomatal function 
CHC2: !affects! Secretion pathways 
CHC2: !affects! Plant growth 
SYP121: !interacts with! CHC mutants 
SYP121: !affects! Endocytosis 
SYP121: !affects! Exocytosis 
SYP121: !affects! Stomatal function 
SYP121: !affects! Gas exchange 
SYP121: !affects! Vegetative growth