['28846731', 'Programmed cell death (PCD) is a prerequisite for successful development and it  limits the spread of biotrophic pathogens in a rapid hypersensitive response at  the site of infection. KDEL-tailed cysteine endopeptidases (KDEL CysEP) are a  subgroup of papain-type cysteine endopeptidases expressed in tissues undergoing  PCD. In Arabidopsis, three KDEL CysEPs (AtCEP1, AtCEP2, and AtCEP3) are  expressed. We have previously shown that AtCEP1 is a factor of basal resistance  to powdery mildew caused by the biotrophic ascomycete Erysiphe cruciferarum, and  is expressed in spatiotemporal association with the late fungal development on  Arabidopsis leaves. The endoplasmic reticulum-localized proenzyme of AtCEP1 was  further visualized at the haustorial complex encased with callose. The AtCPR5  gene (CONSTITUTIVE EXPRESSION OF PR GENES 5) is a regulator of expression of  pathogenesis related genes. Loss of AtCPR5 leads to spontaneous expression of  chlorotic lesions which was associated with enhanced expression of AtCEP1. We  used the atcpr5-2 mutant plants and the atcep1 atcpr5-2 double mutants harboring  a non-functional reporter (PCEP1::pre-pro-3xHA-EGFP-KDEL) for visualization of  AtCEP1 promoter activity. We found the specific up-regulation of AtCEP1 in direct  neighborhood of spreading leaf lesions thus likely representing cells undergoing  PCD. Furthermore, we found a strong resistance of atcpr5 mutant plants against  infection with E. cruciferarum. Loss of AtCEP1 had no obvious influence on the  strong resistance of atcpr5-2 mutant plants against infection with E.  cruciferarum. However, the area of necrotic leaf lesions associated with E.  cruciferarum colonies was significantly larger in atcpr5-2 as compared to atcep1  atcpr5-2 double mutant plants. The presence of AtCEP1 thus contributes to  AtCPR5-controlled PCD at the sites of powdery mildew infection.', '2017', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0183870', 'ORCID:']

AtCEP1: !affects! Basal resistance 
AtCEP1: !localizes to! Haustorial complex 
AtCPR5: !regulates! Pathogenesis related genes 
AtCPR5: !enhances! AtCEP1 expression 
AtCEP1: !represses! Spread of E. cruciferarum 
AtCEP1: !contributes to! AtCPR5-controlled PCD