['28857190', 'The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) plays a crucial role in regulating plant  responses to environmental stresses. Interplay of several different proteins  including the PYR/PYL/RCAR receptors, A-group PP2C protein phosphatases, SnRK2  protein kinases, and downstream transcription factors regulates ABA signalling.  We report here the identification of a family of ABA-induced transcription  repressors (AITRs) that act as feedback regulators in ABA signalling. We found  that the expression of all the 6 Arabidopsis AITR genes was induced by  exogenously ABA, and their expression levels were decreased in ABA biosynthesis  mutant aba1-5. BLAST searches showed that AITRs are exclusively present in  angiosperms. When recruited to the promoter region of a reporter gene by a fused  DNA binding domain, all AITRs inhibited reporter gene expression in transfected  protoplasts. In Arabidopsis, aitr mutants showed reduced sensitivity to ABA and  to stresses such as salt and drought. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis demonstrated  that the ABA-induced response of PP2C and some PYR/PYL/RCAR genes was reduced in  AITR5 transgenic plants but increased in an aitr2 aitr5 aitr6 triple mutant.  These results provide important new insights into the regulation of ABA  signalling in plants, and such information may lead to the production of plants  with enhanced resistance to environmental stresses.', '2017 Dec', 'Plant Cell Environ', '10.1111/pce.13058', 'ORCID:']

ABA: !regulates! Plant responses 
PYR/PYL/RCAR receptors: !interplay with! A-group PP2C protein phosphatases 
SnRK2 protein kinases: !interplay with! A-group PP2C protein phosphatases 
Downstream transcription factors: !interplay with! A-group PP2C protein phosphatases 
ABA-induced transcription repressors (AITRs): !inhibit! Reporter gene expression 
AITRs: !present in! Angiosperms 
Aitr mutants: !show reduced sensitivity to! ABA and environmental stresses 
PP2C genes: !respond to! ABA-induced response of AITR5 transgenic plants 
PYR/PYL/RCAR genes: !respond to! ABA-induced response of AITR5 transgenic plants