['28865150', 'In plants, intercellular communication and exchange are highly dependent on cell  wall bridging structures between adhering cells, so-called plasmodesmata (PD). In  our previous genetic screen for PD-deficient Arabidopsis mutants, we described  choline transporter-like 1 (CHER1) being important for PD genesis and maturation.  Leaves of cher1 mutant plants have up to 10 times less PD, which do not develop  to complex structures. Here we utilize the T-DNA insertion mutant cher1-4 and  report a deep comparative proteomic workflow for the identification of  cell-wall-embedded PD-associated proteins. Analyzing triplicates of  cell-wall-enriched fractions in depth by fractionation and quantitative  high-resolution mass spectrometry, we compared > 5000 proteins obtained from  fully developed leaves. Comparative data analysis and subsequent filtering  generated a list of 61 proteins being significantly more abundant in Col-0. This  list was enriched for previously described PD-associated proteins. To validate PD  association of so far uncharacterized proteins, subcellular localization analyses  were carried out by confocal laser-scanning microscopy. This study confirmed the  association of PD for three out of four selected candidates, indicating that the  comparative approach indeed allowed identification of so far undescribed  PD-associated proteins. Performing comparative cell wall proteomics of Nicotiana  benthamiana tissue, we observed an increase in abundance of these three selected  candidates during sink to source transition. Taken together, our comparative  proteomic approach revealed a valuable data set of potential PD-associated  proteins, which can be used as a resource to unravel the molecular composition of  complex PD and to investigate their function in cell-to-cell communication.', '2017 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13702', 'Sonnewald']

CHER1: !affects! PD genesis and maturation 
T-DNA insertion mutant cher1-4: !reveals! PD-associated proteins 
Comparative proteomic approach: !identifies! PD-associated proteins 
Confocal laser-scanning microscopy: !confirms! PD association of uncharacterized proteins 
Nicotiana benthamiana tissue: !observes! increase in abundance of selected candidates