['28866761', 'T-protein is present in large excess over the other proteins of the glycine  cleavage system in leaves of Arabidopsis and therefore, exerts little control  over the photorespiratory pathway. T-protein is the aminomethyltransferase of the  glycine cleavage multienzyme system (GCS), also known as the glycine  decarboxylase complex, and essential for photorespiration and one-carbon  metabolism. Here, we studied what effects varying levels of the GCS T-protein  would have on GCS activity, the operation of the photorespiratory pathway,  photosynthesis, and plant growth. To this end, we examined Arabidopsis thaliana  T-protein overexpression lines with up to threefold higher amounts of leaf  T-protein as well as one knockdown mutant with about 5% residual leaf T-protein  and one knockout mutant. Overexpression did not alter photosynthetic CO(2) uptake  and plant growth, and the knockout mutation was lethal even in the  non-photorespiratory environment of air enriched to 1% CO(2). Unexpectedly in  light of this very low T-protein content, however, the knockdown mutant was able  to grow and propagate in normal air and displayed only some minor changes, such  as a moderate glycine accumulation in combination with somewhat delayed growth.  Neither overexpression nor the knockdown of T-protein altered the amounts of the  other three GCS proteins, suggesting that the biosynthesis of the GCS proteins is  not synchronized at this level. We also observed that the knockdown causes less  T-protein mostly in leaf mesophyll cells, but not so much in the vasculature, and  discuss this phenomenon in light of the dual involvement of the GCS and hence  T-protein in plant metabolism. Collectively, this work shows that T-protein is  present in large excess over the other proteins of the glycine cleavage system in  leaves of Arabidopsis and therefore exerts little control over the  photorespiratory pathway.', '2018 Jan', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-017-2767-8', 'ORCID:']

T-protein: !exerts little control over! photorespiratory pathway
T-protein: !present in large excess over! other proteins of glycine cleavage system
T-protein: !overexpression does not alter! photosynthetic CO2 uptake and plant growth
T-protein: !knockdown causes less! mostly in leaf mesophyll cells
T-protein: !biosynthesis not synchronized! at this level