A conserved reaction of all organisms exposed to heat stress is an increased expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs). Several studies have proposed that HSP expression in heat-stressed plant cells is triggered by an increased fluidity of the plasma membrane. Among the main lines of evidence in support of this model are as follows: (a) the degree of membrane lipid saturation was higher in cells grown at elevated temperatures and correlated with a lower amplitude of HSP expression upon a temperature upshift, (b) membrane fluidizers induce HSP expression at physiological temperatures, and (c) membrane rigidifier dimethylsulfoxide dampens heat-induced HSP expression. Here, we tested whether this holds also for Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. We show that heat-induced HSP expression in cells grown at elevated temperatures was reduced because they already contained elevated levels of cytosolic HSP70A/90A that apparently act as negative regulators of heat shock factor 1. We find that membrane rigidifier dimethylsulfoxide impaired translation under heat stress conditions and that membrane fluidizer benzyl alcohol not only induced HSP expression but also caused protein aggregation. These findings support the classical model for the cytosolic unfolded protein response, according to which HSP expression is induced by the accumulation of unfolded proteins. Hence, the membrane fluidity model should be reconsidered.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs): !increased expression of! elevated temperatures 
degree of membrane lipid saturation: !correlated with! lower amplitude of HSP expression 
membrane fluidizers: !induce! HSP expression 
membrane rigidifier dimethylsulfoxide: !dampens! heat-induced HSP expression 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: !reduced! heat-induced HSP expression 
cytosolic HSP70A/90A: !act as negative regulators of! heat shock factor 1 
membrane rigidifier dimethylsulfoxide: !impaired! translation under heat stress 
membrane fluidizer benzyl alcohol: !induced! HSP expression & !caused! protein aggregation