During leaf senescence resources are managed, with nutrients mobilized from older leaves to new sink tissues. The latter implies a dilemma in terms of resource utilization, the leaf senescence should increase seed quality whereas delay in senescence should improve the seed yield. Increased knowledge about nutrient recycling during leaf senescence could lead to advances in agriculture and improved seed quality. Macromolecules mobilized during leaf senescence include proteins and nucleic acids. Although nucleic acids have been less well studied than protein degradation, they are possible reservoirs of nitrogen and phosphorous. The present study investigated nuclease activities and gene expression patterns of five members of the S1/P1 family in French bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L. cv.)Page: 2 during leaf senescence. An in-gel assay was used to detect nuclease activity during natural and dark-induced senescence, with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) used as a substrate. The results revealed two nucleases (glycoproteins), with molecular masses of 34 and 39kDa in the senescent leaves. The nuclease activities were higher at a neutral than at an acidic pH. EDTA treatment inhibited the activities of the nucleases, and the addition of zinc resulted in the recovery of these activities. Both the 34 and 39kDa nucleases were able to use RNA and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) as substrates, although their activities were low when dsDNA was used as a substrate. In addition, two ribonucleases with molecular masses of 14 and 16kDa, both of which could only utilize RNA as a substrate, were detected in the senescent leaves. Two members of the S1/P1 family, PVN2 and PVN5, were expressed under the experimental conditions, suggesting that these two genes were involved in senescence. The nuclease activity of the glycoproteins and gene expression were similar under both natural senescence and dark-induced senescence conditions.

PVN2: !expressed under! natural and dark-induced senescence conditions
PVN5: !expressed under! natural and dark-induced senescence conditions
34kDa nuclease: !utilizes! RNA and dsDNA as substrates
39kDa nuclease: !utilizes! RNA and dsDNA as substrates
14kDa ribonuclease: !utilizes! RNA as substrate
16kDa ribonuclease: !utilizes! RNA as substrate
EDTA: !inhibits! nuclease activities
Zinc: !recovers! nuclease activities