Geminiviruses are DNA viruses that cause severe crop losses in different parts of the world, and there is a need for genetic sources of resistance to help combat them. Arabidopsis has been used as a source for virus-resistant genes that derive from alterations in essential host factors. We used a virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) vector derived from the geminivirus Cabbage leaf curl virus (CaLCuV) to assess natural variation in virus-host interactions in 190 Arabidopsis accessions. Silencing of CH-42, encoding a protein needed to make chlorophyll, was used as a visible marker to discriminate asymptomatic accessions from those showing resistance. There was a wide range in symptom severity and extent of silencing in different accessions, but two correlations could be made. Lines with severe symptoms uniformly lacked extensive VIGS, and lines that showed attenuated symptoms over time (recovery) showed a concomitant increase in the extent of VIGS. One accession, Pla-1, lacked both symptoms and silencing, and was immune to wild-type infectious clones corresponding to CaLCuV or Beet curly top virus (BCTV), which are classified in different genera in the Geminiviridae. It also showed resistance to the agronomically important Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV). Quantitative trait locus mapping of a Pla-1 X Col-0 F<sub>2</sub> population was used to detect a major peak on chromosome 1, which is designated gip-1 (geminivirus immunity Pla-1-1). The recessive nature of resistance to CaLCuV and the lack of obvious candidate genes near the gip-1 locus suggest that a novel resistance gene(s) confers immunity.

Geminiviruses: !cause! Crop losses
Arabidopsis: !provides! Virus-resistant genes
CH-42: !encodes! Protein needed to make chlorophyll
VIGS vector: !discriminates! Asymptomatic accessions from resistant ones
Symptoms: !correlate with! Extent of silencing
Pla-1: !lacks! Symptoms and silencing
Pla-1: !shows resistance to! Wild-type infectious clones
QTL mapping: !detects! Major peak on chromosome 1