['28904073', 'Wounding is a primary trigger of organ regeneration, but how wound stress  reactivates cell proliferation and promotes cellular reprogramming remains  elusive. In this study, we combined transcriptome analysis with quantitative  hormonal analysis to investigate how wounding induces callus formation in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Our time course RNA-seq analysis revealed  that wounding induces dynamic transcriptional changes, starting from rapid stress  responses followed by the activation of metabolic processes and protein synthesis  and subsequent activation of cell cycle regulators. Gene ontology analyses  further uncovered that wounding modifies the expression of hormone biosynthesis  and response genes, and quantitative analysis of endogenous plant hormones  revealed accumulation of cytokinin prior to callus formation. Mutants defective  in cytokinin synthesis and signaling display reduced efficiency in callus  formation, indicating that de novo synthesis of cytokinin is critical for  wound-induced callus formation. We further demonstrate that type-B ARABIDOPSIS  RESPONSE REGULATOR-mediated cytokinin signaling regulates the expression of  CYCLIN D3;1 (CYCD3;1) and that mutations in CYCD3;1 and its homologs CYCD3;2 and  3 cause defects in callus formation. In addition to these hormone-mediated  changes, our transcriptome data uncovered that wounding activates multiple  developmental regulators, and we found novel roles of ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR  115 and PLETHORA3 (PLT3), PLT5, and PLT7 in callus generation. All together,  these results provide novel mechanistic insights into how wounding reactivates  cell proliferation during callus formation.', '2017 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01035', 'ORCID:']

Wounding: !induces! Dynamic transcriptional changes 
Dynamic transcriptional changes: !activates! Metabolic processes 
Metabolic processes: !promotes! Protein synthesis 
Protein synthesis: !activates! Cell cycle regulators 
Wounding: !modifies! Expression of hormone biosynthesis and response genes 
Expression of hormone biosynthesis and response genes: !accumulates! Cytokinin 
Cytokinin: !regulates! Expression of CYCD3;1 
CYCD3;1: !controls! Callus formation 
Wounding: !activates! Multiple developmental regulators 
Multiple developmental regulators: !involve! ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 115 and PLETHORA3, PLT5, and PLT7