In this study we systematically identified and classified PKs in Triticum aestivum, Triticum urartu and Aegilops tauschii. Domain distribution and exon-intron structure analyses of PKs were performed, and we found conserved exon-intron structures within the exon phases in the kinase domain. Collinearity events were determined, and we identified various T. aestivum PKs from polyploidizations and tandem duplication events. Global expression pattern analysis of T. aestivum PKs revealed that some PKs might participate in the signaling pathways of stress response and developmental processes. QRT-PCR of 15 selected PKs were performed under drought treatment and with infection of Fusarium graminearum to validate the prediction of microarray. The protein kinase (PK) gene superfamily is one of the largest families in plants and participates in various plant processes, including growth, development, and stress response. To better understand wheat PKs, we conducted genome-wide identification, classification, evolutionary analysis and expression profiles of wheat and Ae. tauschii PKs. We identified 3269, 1213 and 1448 typical PK genes in T. aestivum, T. urartu and Ae. tauschii, respectively, and classified them into major groups and subfamilies. Domain distributions and gene structures were analyzed and visualized. Some conserved intron-exon structures within the conserved kinase domain were found in T. aestivum, T. urartu and Ae. tauschii, as well as the primitive land plants Selaginella moellendorffii and Physcomitrella patens, revealing the important roles and conserved evolutionary history of these PKs. We analyzed the collinearity events of T. aestivum PKs and identified PKs from polyploidizations and tandem duplication events. Global expression pattern analysis of T. aestivum PKs revealed tissue-specific and stress-specific expression profiles, hinting that some wheat PKs may regulate abiotic and biotic stress response signaling pathways. QRT-PCR of 15 selected PKs were performed under drought treatment and with infection of F. graminearum to validate the prediction of microarray. Our results will provide the foundational information for further studies on the molecular functions of wheat PKs.

PK: !participates in! various plant processes
PK: !classified into! major groups and subfamilies
PK: !conserved exon-intron structures within! kinase domain
PK: !identified from! polyploidizations and tandem duplication events
PK: !regulate! abiotic and biotic stress response signaling pathways