Nitric oxide (NO) is an intermediate of the nitrogen cycle, an industrial pollutant, and a marker of climate change. NO also acts as a gaseous transmitter in a variety of biological processes. The impact of environmental NO needs to be addressed. In diatoms, a dominant phylum in phytoplankton, NO was reported to mediate programmed cell death in response to diatom-derived polyunsaturated aldehydes. Here, using the <i>Phaeodactylum</i> Pt1 strain, 2E,4E-decadienal supplied in the micromolar concentration range led to a nonspecific cell toxicity. We reexamined NO biosynthesis and response in <i>Phaeodactylum</i> NO inhibits cell growth and triggers triacylglycerol (TAG) accumulation. Feeding experiments indicate that NO is not produced from Arg but via conversion of nitrite by the nitrate reductase. Genome-wide transcriptional analysis shows that NO up-regulates the expression of the plastid nitrite reductase and genes involved in the subsequent incorporation of ammonium into amino acids, via both Gln synthesis and Orn-urea pathway. The phospho<i>enol</i>pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is also up-regulated, leading to the production of acetyl-CoA, which can feed TAG accumulation upon exposure to NO. Transcriptional reprogramming leading to higher TAG content is balanced with a decrease of monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG) in the plastid via posttranslational inhibition of MGDG synthase enzymatic activity by NO. Intracellular and transient NO emission acts therefore at the basis of a nitrite-sensing and acclimating system, whereas a long exposure to NO can additionally induce a redirection of carbon to neutral lipids and a stress response.

NO: !inhibits! Cell Growth 
NO: !triggers! TAG Accumulation 
NO: !up-regulates! Nitrite Reductase 
NO: !up-regulates! Gln Synthesis 
NO: !up-regulates! Orn-Urea Pathway 
NO: !up-regulates! Phosphoenolpyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex 
NO: !inhibits! MGDG Synthase Enzymatic Activity 
NO: !induces! Carbon Redirection to Neutral Lipids 
NO: !induces! Stress Response