['28936218', 'Compared with yeast, our knowledge on members of the ATP-independent plant  mitochondrial proteolytic machinery is rather poor. In the present study, using  confocal microscopy and immunoblotting, we proved that homologs of yeast Oma1,  Atp23, Imp1, Imp2, and Oct1 proteases are localized in Arabidopsis mitochondria.  We characterized these components of the ATP-independent proteolytic system as  well as the earlier identified protease, AtICP55, with an emphasis on their  significance in plant growth and functionality in the OXPHOS system. A functional  complementation assay demonstrated that out of all the analyzed proteases, only  AtOMA1 and AtICP55 could substitute for a lack of their yeast counterparts. We  did not observe any significant developmental or morphological changes in plants  lacking the studied proteases, either under optimal growth conditions or after  exposure to stress, with the only exception being retarded root growth in oma1-1,  thus implying that the absence of a single mitochondrial ATP-independent protease  is not critical for Arabidopsis growth and development. We did not find any  evidence indicating a clear functional complementation of the missing protease by  any other protease at the transcript or protein level. Studies on the impact of  the analyzed proteases on mitochondrial bioenergetic function revealed that out  of all the studied mutants, only oma1-1 showed differences in activities and  amounts of OXPHOS proteins. Among all the OXPHOS disorders found in oma1-1, the  complex V deficiency is distinctive because it is mainly associated with  decreased catalytic activity and not correlated with complex abundance, which has  been observed in the case of supercomplex I + III(2) and complex I deficiencies.  Altogether, our study indicates that despite the presence of highly conservative  homologs, the mitochondrial ATP-independent proteolytic system is not  functionally conserved in plants as compared with yeast. Our findings also  highlight the importance of AtOMA1 in maintenance of proper function of the  OXPHOS system as well as in growth and development of Arabidopsis thaliana.', '2017', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2017.01543', 'Janska']

AtOMA1: !substitutes for! yeast Oma1
AtICP55: !substitutes for! yeast Atp23
AtOMA1: !maintains! proper function of OXPHOS system
AtOMA1: !affects! root growth
AtOMA1: !influences! activities and amounts of OXPHOS proteins
AtOMA1: !important for! growth and development of Arabidopsis thaliana