Plant plastids and mitochondria have dynamic proteomes. Protein homeostasis in these organelles is maintained by a proteostasis network containing protein chaperones, peptidases, and their substrate recognition factors. However, many peptidases, as well as their functional connections and substrates, are poorly characterized. This review provides a systematic insight into the organellar peptidase network in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> We present a compendium of known and putative Arabidopsis peptidases and inhibitors, and compare the distribution of plastid and mitochondrial peptidases to the total peptidase complement. This comparison shows striking biases, such as the (near) absence of cysteine and aspartic peptidases and peptidase inhibitors, whereas other peptidase families were exclusively organellar; reasons for such biases are discussed. A genome-wide mRNA-based coexpression data set was generated based on quality controlled and normalized public data, and used to infer additional plastid peptidases and to generate a coexpression network for 97 organellar peptidase baits (1742 genes, making 2544 edges). The graphical network includes 10 modules with specialized/enriched functions, such as mitochondrial protein maturation, thermotolerance, senescence, or enriched subcellular locations such as the thylakoid lumen or chloroplast envelope. The peptidase compendium, including the autophagy and proteosomal systems, and the annotation based on the MEROPS nomenclature of peptidase clans and families, is incorporated into the Plant Proteome Database.

Plant plastids/mitochondria: !maintain! Protein homeostasis
Protein chaperones/peptidases: !recognize! Substrates
Arabidopsis peptidases/inhibitors: !compared! Distribution
Cysteine/aspartic peptidases: !absent from! Organelles
Genome-wide mRNA data: !generated! Coexpression network
97 organellar peptidase baits: !made! 2544 edges
10 modules: !specialized in! Functions
MEROPS nomenclature: !annotated! Plant Proteome Database