Light is a key environmental factor affecting anthocyanin biosynthesis. Our previous study demonstrated that "Lanshan Hexian" is a light-sensitive eggplant cultivar, but its regulatory mechanism is unknown. Here, delphinidin-3-[4-(cis-p-coumaroyl)-rhamnosyl-glucopyranoside]-5-glucopyranoside and delphinidin-3-[4-(trans-p-coumaroyl)-rhamnosyl-glucopyranoside]-5-glucopyranoside were identified as the main anthocyanin components in Lanshan Hexian by ultra-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Three time points of anthocyanin accumulation, including the start point (0 day), fastest point (5 days), and highest point (12 day), were investigated by using ribonucleic acid sequencing and iTRAQ technology. The corresponding correlation coefficients of differentially expressed genes, and differentially expressed proteins were 0.6936, 0.2332, and 0.6672. Anthocyanin biosynthesis was a significantly enriched pathway, and CHI, F3H, 3GT, 5GT, and HY5 were regulated at both transcriptional and translational levels. Moreover, some transcription factors and photoreceptors may participate in light-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis like the known transcription factors MYB113 and TT8. The transient expression assay indicated that SmMYB35, SmMYB44, and a SmMYB86 isoform might involve in the light-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway. Finally, a regulatory model for light-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis in eggplant was constructed. Our work provides a new direction for the study of the molecular mechanisms of light-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis in eggplant.

Light: !affects! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
CHI: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
F3H: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
3GT: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
5GT: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
HY5: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
MYB113: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
TT8: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
SmMYB35: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
SmMYB44: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
SmMYB86: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis