Extensive de novo vascularization of leafy galls emerging upon Rhodococcus fascians infection is achieved by fascicular/interfascicular cambium activity and transdifferentiation of parenchyma cells correlated with increased auxin signaling. A leafy gall consisting of fully developed yet growth-inhibited shoots, induced by the actinomycete Rhodococcus fascians, differs in structure compared to the callus-like galls induced by other bacteria. To get insight into the vascular development accompanying the emergence of the leafy gall, the anatomy of infected axillary regions of the inflorescence stem of wild-type Arabidopsis thaliana accession Col-0 plants and the auxin response in pDR5:GUS-tagged plants were followed in time. Based on our observations, three phases can be discerned during vascularization of the symptomatic tissue. First, existing fascicular cambium becomes activated and interfascicular cambium is formed giving rise to secondary vascular elements in a basipetal direction below the infection site in the main stem and in an acropetal direction in the entire side branch. Then, parenchyma cells in the region between both stems transdifferentiate acropetally towards the surface of the developing symptomatic tissue leading to the formation of xylem and vascularize the hyperplasia as they expand. Finally, parenchyma cells in the developing gall also transdifferentiate to vascular elements without any specific direction resulting in excessive vasculature disorderly distributed in the leafy gall. Prior to any apparent anatomical changes, a strong auxin response is mounted, implying that auxin is the signal that controls the vascular differentiation induced by the infection. To conclude, we propose the "sidetracking gall hypothesis" as we discuss the mechanisms driving the formation of superfluous vasculature of the emerging leafy gall.

fascicular/interfascicular cambium: !activates! secondary vascular elements 
parenchyma cells: !transdifferentiate to! xylem 
auxin: !signals! vascular differentiation 
infection: !induces! hyperplasia 
symptomatic tissue: !vascularizes! parenchyma cells