Contents Summary 432 I. Introduction 433 II. Preparation of plant samples for X-ray micro-analysis 433 III. X-ray elemental mapping techniques 438 IV. X-ray data analysis 442 V. Case studies 443 VI. Conclusions 446 Acknowledgements 449 Author contributions 449 References 449 SUMMARY: Hyperaccumulators are attractive models for studying metal(loid) homeostasis, and probing the spatial distribution and coordination chemistry of metal(loid)s in their tissues is important for advancing our understanding of their ecophysiology. X-ray elemental mapping techniques are unique in providing in situ information, and with appropriate sample preparation offer results true to biological conditions of the living plant. The common platform of these techniques is a reliance on characteristic X-rays of elements present in a sample, excited either by electrons (scanning/transmission electron microscopy), protons (proton-induced X-ray emission) or X-rays (X-ray fluorescence microscopy). Elucidating the cellular and tissue-level distribution of metal(loid)s is inherently challenging and accurate X-ray analysis places strict demands on sample collection, preparation and analytical conditions, to avoid elemental redistribution, chemical modification or ultrastructural alterations. We compare the merits and limitations of the individual techniques, and focus on the optimal field of applications for inferring ecophysiological processes in hyperaccumulator plants. X-ray elemental mapping techniques can play a key role in answering questions at every level of metal(loid) homeostasis in plants, from the rhizosphere interface, to uptake pathways in the roots and shoots. Further improvements in technological capabilities offer exciting perspectives for the study of hyperaccumulator plants into the future.

X-ray elemental mapping techniques: !provide in situ information! hyperaccumulator plants 
sample preparation: !offers results true to biological conditions! living plant 
X-ray analysis: !places strict demands on sample collection! elemental redistribution 
X-ray elemental mapping techniques: !can play a key role! metal(loid) homeostasis 
rhizosphere interface: !to uptake pathways! roots and shoots