Chloroplasts are believed to be descendants of ancestral cyanobacteria that have a peptidoglycan layer between the outer and the inner membranes. In particular, cyanelles having peptidoglycan in Cyanophora paradoxa are considered as evidence for the endosymbiotic origin of chloroplasts. The moss Physcomitrella patens has a complete set of genes involved in the synthesis of peptidoglycan, but a peptidoglycan layer has not been observed by conventional electron microscopy to date. Recently, a new metabolic labeling technique using a fluorescent probe was applied to visualize putative peptidoglycan surrounding the chloroplasts. The exact localization of the peptidoglycan, however, has not been clearly identified. Here we examined conventional electron micrographs of two types of moss materials (mutants or ampicillin-treated plants), one presumably having peptidoglycan and the other presumably lacking peptidoglycan, and analyzed in detail, by single-pixel densitometry, the electron density of the chloroplast envelope membranes and the intermembrane space. Statistical analysis showed that the relative electron density within the intermembrane space with respect to that of the envelope membranes was significantly higher in the materials presumably having peptidoglycan than in the materials presumably devoid of peptidoglycan. We consider this difference as bona fide evidence for the presence of peptidoglycan between the outer and the inner envelope membranes in the wild-type chloroplasts of the moss, although its density is lower than that in bacteria and cyanelles. We will also discuss this low-density peptidoglycan in the light of the phylogenetic origin of peptidoglycan biosynthesis enzymes.

Chloroplasts: !believed to be descendants of! ancestral cyanobacteria 
Cyanophora paradoxa: !considered as evidence for! endosymbiotic origin of chloroplasts 
Physcomitrella patens: !has genes involved in! synthesis of peptidoglycan 
Fluorescent probe: !used to visualize! putative peptidoglycan surrounding chloroplasts 
Mutants/ampicillin-treated plants: !presumably having/lacking! peptidoglycan 
Envelope membranes/intermembrane space: !examined by single-pixel densitometry! to identify peptidoglycan localization 
Materials presumably having peptidoglycan: !showed significantly higher! electron density than materials lacking peptidoglycan 
Wild-type chloroplasts of moss: !considered to have! low-density peptidoglycan