Phytochelatin (PC) synthesis has been well demonstrated as a major metal tolerance mechanism in Arabidopsis thaliana, whereas its contribution to long-distance element transport especially in monocots remains elusive. Using rice as a cereal model, we examined physiological roles of Oryza sativa phytochelatin synthase 1 (OsPCS1) in the distribution and detoxification of arsenic (As) and cadmium (Cd), two toxic elements associated with major food safety concerns. First, we isolated four different transcript variants of OsPCS1 as well as one from OsPCS2. Quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) of each OsPCS transcript in rice seedlings suggested that expression of OsPCS1full, the longest OsPCS1 variant, was most abundant, followed by OsPCS2. Heterologous expression of OsPCS variants in PCS-deficient mutants of Schizosaccharomyces pombe and A. thaliana suggested that OsPCS1full possessed PCS activity in response to As(III) and Cd while the activity of other PCS variants was very low. To address physiological functions in toxic element tolerance and accumulation, two independent OsPCS1 mutant rice lines (a T-DNA and a Tos17 insertion line) were identified. The OsPCS1 mutants exhibited increased sensitivity to As(III) and Cd in hydroponic experiments, showing the importance of OsPCS1-dependent PC synthesis for rice As(III) and Cd tolerance. Elemental analyses of rice plants grown in soil with environmentally relevant As and Cd concentrations showed increased As accumulation and decreased Cd accumulation in grains of the T-DNA line. The Tos17 mutant also exhibited the reduced Cd accumulation phenotype. These contrasting effects on As and Cd distribution to grains suggest the existence of at least partially distinct PC-dependent pathways for As and Cd.

OsPCS1: !synthesizes! Phytochelatin
OsPCS1: !affects! As and Cd tolerance
OsPCS2: !expresses! after OsPCS1
OsPCS1 variants: !possess! PCS activity
OsPCS1 mutants: !exhibit! increased sensitivity to As(III) and Cd
T-DNA line: !accumulates! more As in grains
Tos17 mutant: !accumulates! less Cd in grains