MYB transcription factors are widespread in plants and play key roles in plant development. Although MYB transcription factors have been thoroughly characterized in many plants, genome-wide analysis of the MYB gene family has not yet been undertaken in Brachypodium distachyon. In this study, 122 BdMYB transcription factors were identified, comprising 85 MYB-R2R3, 34 MYB-related and three MYB-R1R2R3. Phylogenetic analysis showed that BdMYBs, OsMYBs and AtMYBs with similar functions were clustered in the same subgroup, and the phylogenetic relationships of BdMYB transcription factors were supported by highly conserved motifs and gene structures. Two cis-elements were found in the promoters of BdMYB genes. One is related to plant growth/development, the other is related to stress responses. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis indicated that most of the BdMYB genes are involved in various biological processes. The chromosome distribution pattern strongly indicated that genome-wide tandem and segment duplication mainly contributed to the expansion of the BdMYB gene family. Synteny analysis showed that 56, 58 and 61 BdMYB genes were orthologous to rice, maize and sorghum, respectively. We further demonstrated that BdMYB genes have evolved under strong purifying selection. The expression profiles indicated that most BdMYB genes might participate in floral development and respond to abiotic stresses. Additionally, 338 pairs of proteins were predicted to interact by constructing the interaction network. This work laid the foundation and provided clues for understanding the biological functions of these transcription factors.

MYB transcription factors: !are widespread in! plants 
MYB transcription factors: !play key roles in! plant development 
MYB-R2R3, MYB-related and MYB-R1R2R3: !were identified in! Brachypodium distachyon 
Phylogenetic analysis: !showed that! BdMYBs, OsMYBs and AtMYBs were clustered in the same subgroup 
Two cis-elements: !were found in! promoters of BdMYB genes 
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis: !indicated that! most of the BdMYB genes are involved in various biological processes 
Genome-wide tandem and segment duplication: !mainly contributed to! expansion of the BdMYB gene family 
56, 58 and 61 BdMYB genes: !were orthologous to! rice, maize and sorghum respectively 
Strong purifying selection: !evolved under! BdMYB genes 
Expression profiles: !indicated that! most BdMYB genes might participate in floral development and respond to abiotic stresses 
Interaction network: !was constructed to! predict 338 pairs