Treatment with aluminum triggers a unique response in tea seedlings resulting in biochemical modification of the cell wall, regulation of the activity of the loosening agents, and elongation of root. Unlike most terrestrial plants, tea (Camellia sinensis L.) responds to aluminum (Al) through the promotion of its root elongation; but the real mechanism(s) behind this phenomenon is not well understood. A plausible relationship between the modifications of the cell wall and the promotion of root elongation was examined in tea seedlings treated for 8 days with 400 µM Al. The mechanical properties of the cell wall, the composition of its polysaccharides and their capacity to absorb Al, the expression of genes, and the activities of the wall-modifying proteins were studied. With 6 h of the treatment, about 40% of the absorbed Al was bound to the cell wall; however, the amount did not increase thereafter. Meanwhile, the activity of pectin methylesterase, the level of pectin demethylation, the amounts and the average molecular mass of xyloglucan in the root apices significantly decreased upon exposure to Al, resulting in the reduction of Al binding sites. On the other hand, the activity and the gene expression of peroxidase decreased, whereas the activity and gene expression of xyloglucan-degrading enzymes, the expression of expansin A and the H <sup>+</sup>-ATPase4 genes increased in the Al-treated plants. Interestingly, it was accompanied by the increase of elastic and viscous extensibility of the root apices. From the results, it can be suggested that the biochemical modification of the cell walls reduces sites of Al binding to roots and triggers the activity of the loosening agents, thereby increasing the length of tea roots.

Al: !triggers! Response 
Al: !binds to! Cell Wall 
Pectin Methylesterase: !decreases activity! Al-treated Plants 
Pectin Demethylation: !decreases level! Al-treated Plants 
Xyloglucan: !decreases amount & average molecular mass! Al-treated Plants 
Peroxidase: !decreases activity & gene expression! Al-treated Plants 
Xyloglucan-degrading Enzymes: !increases activity & gene expression! Al-treated Plants 
Expansin A: !increases expression! Al-treated Plants 
H+-ATPase4 Genes: !increases expression! Al-treated Plants 
Cell Wall: !modifies biochemically! Al-treated Plants 
Loosening Agents: !regulates activity! Al-treated Plants 
Root Elongation: !enhances! Al-treated Plants