['29023459', 'M18 aspartyl aminopeptidases (DAPs) are well characterized in microbes and  animals with likely functions in peptide processing and vesicle trafficking. In  contrast, there is a dearth of knowledge on plant aminopeptidases with a  preference for proteins and peptides with N-terminal acidic residues. During  evolution of the Plantae, there was an expansion and diversification of the M18  DAPs. After divergence of the ancestral green algae from red and glaucophyte  algae, a duplication yielded the DAP1 and DAP2 lineages. Subsequently DAP1 genes  were lost in chlorophyte algae. A duplication of DAP2-related genes occurred  early in green plant evolution. DAP2 genes were retained in land plants and  picoeukaryotic algae and lost in green algae. In contrast, DAP2-like genes  persisted in picoeukaryotic and green algae, while this lineage was lost in land  plants. Consistent with this evolutionary path, Arabidopsis thaliana has two DAP  gene lineages (AtDAP1 and AtDAP2). Similar to animal and yeast DAPs, AtDAP1 is  localized to the cytosol or vacuole; while AtDAP2 harbors an N-terminal transit  peptide and is chloroplast localized. His6-DAP1 and His6-DAP2 expressed in  Escherichia coli were enzymatically active and dodecameric with masses exceeding  600 kDa. His6-DAP1 and His6-DAP2 preferentially hydrolyzed Asp-p-nitroanilide and  Glu-p-nitroanilide. AtDAPs are highly conserved metallopeptidases activated by  MnCl2 and inhibited by ZnCl2 and divalent ion chelators. The protease inhibitor  PMSF inhibited and DTT stimulated both His6-DAP1 and His6-DAP2 activities  suggesting a role for thiols in the AtDAP catalytic mechanism. The enzymes had  distinct pH and temperature optima, as well as distinct kinetic parameters. Both  enzymes had high catalytic efficiencies (kcat/Km) exceeding 1.0 x 107 M-1 sec-1.  Using established molecular chaperone assays, AtDAP1 and AtDAP2 prevented thermal  denaturation. AtDAP1 also prevented protein aggregation and promoted protein  refolding. Collectively, these data indicate that plant DAPs have a complex  evolutionary history and have evolved new biochemical features that may enable  their role in vivo.', '2017', 'PLoS One', '10.1371/journal.pone.0185492', 'ORCID:']

M18 DAPs: !evolved from! ancestral green algae 
DAP1: !lost in! chlorophyte algae 
DAP2: !duplicated in! green plant evolution 
AtDAP1: !localized to! cytosol/vacuole 
AtDAP2: !localized to! chloroplast 
His6-DAP1/2: !activated by! MnCl2 
His6-DAP1/2: !inhibited by! ZnCl2 
PMSF: !inhibited! His6-DAP1/2 
DTT: !stimulated! His6-DAP1/2 
AtDAP1/2: !prevented! thermal denaturation 
AtDAP1: !prevented! protein aggregation