['29038916', 'Plant RbgA GTPase is targeted to chloroplasts and co-fractionated with  chloroplast ribosomes, and plays a role in chloroplast rRNA processing and/or  ribosome biogenesis. Ribosome Biogenesis GTPase A (RbgA) homologs are  evolutionarily conserved GTPases that are widely distributed in both prokaryotes  and eukaryotes. In this study, we investigated functions of chloroplast-targeted  RbgA. Nicotiana benthamiana RbgA (NbRbgA) and Arabidopsis thaliana RbgA (AtRbgA)  contained a conserved GTP-binding domain and a plant-specific C-terminal domain.  NbRbgA and AtRbgA were mainly localized in chloroplasts, and possessed GTPase  activity. Since Arabidopsis rbgA null mutants exhibited an embryonic lethal  phenotype, virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) of NbRbgA was performed in N.  benthamiana. NbRbgA VIGS resulted in a leaf-yellowing phenotype caused by  disrupted chloroplast development. NbRbgA was mainly co-fractionated with 50S/70S  ribosomes and interacted with the chloroplast ribosomal proteins cpRPL6 and  cpRPL35. NbRbgA deficiency lowered the levels of mature 23S and 16S rRNAs in  chloroplasts and caused processing defects. Sucrose density gradient  sedimentation revealed that NbRbgA-deficient chloroplasts contained reduced  levels of mature 23S and 16S rRNAs and diverse plastid-encoded mRNAs in the  polysomal fractions, suggesting decreased protein translation activity in the  chloroplasts. Interestingly, NbRbgA protein was highly unstable under high light  stress, suggesting its possible involvement in the control of chloroplast  ribosome biogenesis under environmental stresses. Collectively, these results  suggest a role for RbgA GTPase in chloroplast rRNA processing/ribosome  biogenesis, affecting chloroplast protein translation in higher plants.', '2017 Nov', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-017-0664-y', 'ORCID:']

RbgA: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
RbgA: !interacts with! cpRPL6 
RbgA: !interacts with! cpRPL35 
RbgA: !enhances! mature 23S and 16S rRNA levels 
RbgA: !enhances! protein translation activity 
RbgA: !represses! leaf-yellowing phenotype 
RbgA: !represses! processing defects 
RbgA: !unstable under! high light stress