During leaf senescence and fruit ripening, chlorophyll is degraded in a multistep pathway into linear tetrapyrroles called phyllobilins. A key feature of chlorophyll breakdown is the removal of the hydrophobic phytol chain that renders phyllobilins water soluble, an important prerequisite for their ultimate storage in the vacuole of senescent cells. Chlorophyllases had been considered for more than a century to catalyze dephytylation in vivo; however, this was recently refuted. Instead, pheophytinase was discovered as a genuine in vivo phytol hydrolase. While chlorophyllase acts rather unspecifically towards different porphyrin substrates, pheophytinase was shown to specifically dephytylate pheophytin, namely Mg-free chlorophyll. The aim of this work was to elucidate in detail the biochemical and structural properties of pheophytinase. By testing different porphyrin substrates with recombinant pheophytinase from Arabidopsis thaliana we show that pheophytinase has high specificity for the acid moiety of the ester bond, namely the porphyrin ring, while the nature of the alcohol, namely the phytol chain in pheophytin, is irrelevant. In silico modelling of the 3-dimensional structure of pheophytinase and subsequent analysis of site-directed pheophytinase mutant forms allowed the identification of the serine, histidine, and aspartic acid residues that compose the catalytic triad, a classical feature of serine-type hydrolases to which both pheophytinase and chlorophyllase belong. Based on substantial structural differences in the models of Arabidopsis pheophytinase and chlorophyllase 1, we discuss potential differences in the catalytic properties of these two phytol hydrolases.

Chlorophyllase: !acts unspecifically towards! porphyrin substrates
Pheophytinase: !specifically dephytylates! pheophytin
Pheophytinase: !has high specificity for! acid moiety of ester bond
Serine, Histidine, Aspartic Acid: !compose! catalytic triad
Pheophytinase: !structurally different from! Chlorophyllase 1