['29042459', 'A P-type H(+)-ATPase is the primary transporter that converts ATP to  electrochemical energy at the plasma membrane of higher plants. Its product, the  proton-motive force, is composed of an electrical potential and a pH gradient.  Many studies have demonstrated that this proton-motive force not only drives the  secondary transporters required for nutrient uptake, but also plays a direct role  in regulating cell expansion. Here, we have generated a transgenic Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) plant expressing H(+)-ATPase isoform 2 (AHA2) that is  translationally fused with a fluorescent protein and examined its cellular  localization by live-cell microscopy. Using a 3D imaging approach with seedlings  grown for various times under a variety of light intensities, we demonstrate that  AHA2 localization at the plasma membrane of root cells requires light. In dim  light conditions, AHA2 is found in intracellular compartments, in addition to the  plasma membrane. This localization profile was age-dependent and specific to cell  types found in the transition zone located between the meristem and elongation  zones. The accumulation of AHA2 in intracellular compartments is consistent with  reduced H(+) secretion near the transition zone and the suppression of root  growth. By examining AHA2 localization in a knockout mutant of a receptor protein  kinase, FERONIA, we found that the intracellular accumulation of AHA2 in the  transition zone is dependent on a functional FERONIA-dependent inhibitory  response in root elongation. Overall, this study provides a molecular  underpinning for understanding the genetic, environmental, and developmental  factors influencing root growth via localization of the plasma membrane  H(+)-ATPase.', '2018 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01126', 'ORCID:']

AHA2: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
AHA2: !requires! light 
AHA2: !accumulates in! intracellular compartments 
AHA2: !dependent on! FERONIA-dependent inhibitory response 
FERONIA: !regulates! root growth 
light: !affects! AHA2 localization