Light-dependent electron transfer is necessary for photosynthesis, but light also damages PSII. Light-induced damage to PSII is called photoinhibition, and the damaging reactions of photoinhibition are still under debate. Diatoms possess an exotic combination of light-harvesting pigments, Chls a/c and fucoxanthin, making them an interesting platform for studying the photoreceptors of photoinhibition. We first confirmed the direct proportionality of photoinhibition to the photon flux density of incident light in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Phaeodactylum is known for its efficient non-photochemical quenching, and the effect of this photoprotective mechanism on photoinhibition was tested. Photoinhibition proceeded essentially at the same rate in blue-light-grown Phaeodactylum cells that are capable of non-photochemical quenching and in red-light-grown, non-photochemical quenching-deficient cells. To obtain more insight into how the pigment composition of diatoms affects photoinhibition, we measured the action spectrum of photoinhibition in Phaeodactylum. In visible light, the action spectrum resembled the absorption spectrum of Phaeodactylum, and UV radiation caused much more photoinhibition than visible light. Comparison of the action spectrum of photoinhibition with the absorption spectrum and the excitation spectrum of 77 K PSII fluorescence emission confirmed that photosynthetic pigments are involved in photoinhibition, but the photoinhibitory efficiency of red light is weak, suggesting that the role of light-harvesting pigments as light receptors of photoinhibition is secondary. Finally, we compared photoinhibition in Phaeodactylum with that in other photosynthetic organisms, and our data indicate that the PSII reaction centers of Phaeodactylum are not particularly well protected against the primary damage of photoinhibition.

Light: !induces! Photoinhibition 
Photon flux density: !directly proportional to! Photoinhibition 
Non-photochemical quenching: !affects! Photoinhibition 
Action spectrum of photoinhibition: !resembles! Absorption spectrum 
UV radiation: !causes more! Photoinhibition 
Light-harvesting pigments: !involved in! Photoinhibition 
Red light: !weak role in! Photoinhibition 
PSII reaction centers: !not well protected against! Primary damage