['29066669', 'The Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome contains nine beta-amylase (BAM)  genes, some of which play important roles in starch hydrolysis. However, little  is known about BAM2, a plastid-localized enzyme reported to have extremely low  catalytic activity. Using conservation of intron positions, we determined that  the nine Arabidopsis BAM genes fall into two distinct subfamilies. A similar  pattern was found in each major lineage of land plants, suggesting that these  subfamilies diverged prior to the origin of land plants. Moreover, phylogenetic  analysis indicated that BAM2 is the ancestral member of one of these subfamilies.  This finding, along with the conservation of amino acids in the active site of  BAM2, suggested that it might be catalytically active. We then identified KCl as  necessary for BAM2 activity. Unlike BAM1, BAM3, and BAM5, three Arabidopsis BAMs  that all exhibited hyperbolic kinetics, BAM2 exhibited sigmoidal kinetics with a  Hill coefficient of over 3. Using multi-angle light scattering, we determined  that BAM2 was a tetramer, whereas BAM5 was a monomer. Conserved residues from a  diverse set of BAM2 orthologs were mapped onto a homology model of the protein,  revealing a large, conserved surface away from the active site that we  hypothesize is a secondary carbohydrate-binding site. Introduction of bulky  methionine for glycine at two points on this surface reduced catalytic activity  significantly without disrupting the tetrameric structure. Expression analysis  indicated that BAM2 is more closely coexpressed with other starch degradation  enzymes than any other BAM, suggesting that BAM2 may play an important role in  starch degradation in plants.', '2017 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01506', 'ORCID:']

BAM2: !localizes to! plastid 
BAM2: !diverged prior to! land plants 
BAM2: !requires! KCl 
BAM2: !exhibits! sigmoidal kinetics 
BAM2: !is a! tetramer 
BAM2: !has a! secondary carbohydrate-binding site 
BAM2: !coexpressed with! starch degradation enzymes