Pyrimidine dimers are the most important DNA lesions induced by UVB irradiation. They can be repaired directly by photoreactivation or indirectly by the excision repair pathways. Photoreactivation is carried out by photolyases, enzymes which bind to the dimers and use the energy of blue light or UVA to split bonds between adjacent pyrimidines. Arabidopsis thaliana has three known photolyases: AtPHR1, AtCRY3 and AtUVR3. Little is known about the cellular localization and regulation of AtUVR3 expression. We have found that its transcript level is down-regulated by light (red, blue or white) in a photosynthesis-dependent manner. The down-regulatory effect of red light is absent in mature leaves of the phyB mutant, but present in leaves of phyAphyB. UVB irradiation does not increase AtUVR3 expression in leaves. Transiently expressed AtUVR3-green fluorescent protein (GFP) is found in the nuclei, chloroplasts and mitochondria of Nicotiana benthamiana epidermal cells. In the nucleoplasm, AtUVR3-GFP is distributed uniformly, while in the nucleolus it forms speckles. Truncated AtUVR3 and muteins were used to identify the sequences responsible for its subcellular localization. Mitochondrial and chloroplast localization of AtUVR3 is independent of its N-terminal sequence. Amino acids located at the C-terminal loop of the protein are involved in its transport into chloroplasts and its retention inside the nucleolus.

AtPHR1: !repairs! Pyrimidine dimers 
AtCRY3: !repairs! Pyrimidine dimers 
AtUVR3: !repairs! Pyrimidine dimers 
Light: !down-regulates! AtUVR3 expression 
Photosynthesis: !down-regulates! AtUVR3 expression 
UVB irradiation: !does not increase! AtUVR3 expression 
AtUVR3-GFP: !localizes to! Nuclei, chloroplasts and mitochondria 
AtUVR3-GFP: !forms speckles in! Nucleolus 
Truncated AtUVR3: !identifies! Sequences responsible for subcellular localization 
N-terminal sequence: !independent of! Mitochondrial and chloroplast localization of AtUVR3 
C-terminal loop: !involved in! Transport into chloroplasts and retention inside nucleolus