['29076025', 'The two novel CCCH zinc-finger and K-homolog (KH) proteins, KHZ1 and KHZ2, play  important roles in regulating flowering and senescence redundantly in  Arabidopsis. The CCCH zinc-finger proteins and K-homolog (KH) proteins play  important roles in plant development and stress responses. However, the  biological functions of many CCCH zinc-finger proteins and KH proteins remain  uncharacterized. In Arabidopsis, KHZ1 and KHZ2 are characterized as two novel  CCCH zinc-finger and KH domain proteins which belong to subfamily VII in CCCH  family. We obtained khz1, khz2 mutants and khz1 khz2 double mutants, as well as  overexpression (OE) lines of KHZ1 and KHZ2. Compared with the wild type (WT), the  khz2 mutants displayed no defects in growth and development, and the khz1 mutants  were slightly late flowering, whereas the khz1 khz2 double mutants showed a  pronounced late flowering phenotype. In contrast, artificially overexpressing  KHZ1 and KHZ2 led to the early flowering. Consistent with the late flowering  phenotype, the expression of flowering repressor gene FLC was up-regulated, while  the expression of flowering integrator and floral meristem identity (FMI) genes  were down-regulated significantly in khz1 khz2. In addition, we also observed  that the OE plants of KHZ1 and KHZ2 showed early leaf senescence significantly,  whereas the khz1 khz2 double mutants showed delayed senescence of leaf and the  whole plant. Both KHZ1 and KHZ2 were ubiquitously expressed throughout the  tissues of Arabidopsis. KHZ1 and KHZ2 were localized to the nucleus, and  possessed both transactivation activities and RNA-binding abilities. Taken  together, we conclude that KHZ1 and KHZ2 have redundant roles in the regulation  of flowering and senescence in Arabidopsis.', '2017 Dec', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-017-0667-8', 'ORCID:']

KHZ1: !affects! flowering
KHZ2: !affects! flowering
KHZ1: !localizes to! nucleus
KHZ2: !localizes to! nucleus
KHZ1: !interacts with! FLC
KHZ2: !interacts with! FLC
KHZ1: !enhances! senescence
KHZ2: !enhances! senescence
KHZ1: !represses! FMI
KHZ2: !represses! FMI
KHZ1: !synthesizes! transactivation activity
KHZ2: !synthesizes! RNA-binding ability