We report a transcriptome assembly and expression profiles from RNA-Seq data and identify genes responsible for culm gall formation in Zizania latifolia induced by Ustilago esculenta. The smut fungus Ustilago esculenta can induce culm gall in Zizania latifolia, which is used as a vegetable in Asian countries. However, the underlying molecular mechanism of culm gall formation is still unclear. To characterize the processes underlying this host-fungus association, we performed transcriptomic and expression profiling analyses of culms from Z. latifolia infected by the fungus U. esculenta. Transcriptomic analysis detected U. esculenta induced differential expression of 19,033 and 17,669 genes in Jiaobai (JB) and Huijiao (HJ) type of gall, respectively. Additionally, to detect the potential gall inducing genes, expression profiles of infected culms collected at -7, 1 and 10 DAS of culm gall development were  analyzed. Compared to control, we detected 8089 genes (4389 up-regulated, 3700 down-regulated) and 5251 genes (3121 up-regulated, 2130 down-regulated) were differentially expressed in JB and HJ, respectively. And we identified 376 host and 187 fungal candidate genes that showed stage-specific expression pattern, which are  possibly responsible for gall formation at the initial and later phases, respectively. Our results indicated that cytokinins play more prominent roles in regulating gall formation than do auxins. Together, our work provides general implications for the understanding of gene regulatory networks for culm gall development in Z. latifolia, and potential targets for genetic manipulation to improve the future yield   of  this crop.

Ustilago esculenta: !induces! culm gall in Zizania latifolia
19,033 genes: !differentially expressed! in Jiaobai type of gall
17,669 genes: !differentially expressed! in Huijiao type of gall
8089 genes: !differentially expressed! in JB compared to control
5251 genes: !differentially expressed! in HJ compared to control
376 host genes: !show stage-specific expression pattern! for gall formation
187 fungal genes: !show stage-specific expression pattern! for gall formation
Cytokinins: !play more prominent roles! than auxins