Polar nuclear migration is crucial during the development of diverse eukaryotes. In plants, root hair growth requires polar nuclear migration into the outgrowing hair. However, knowledge about the dynamics and the regulatory mechanisms underlying nuclear movements in root epidermal cells remains limited. Here, we show that both auxin and Rho-of-Plant (ROP) signaling modulate polar nuclear position at the inner epidermal plasma membrane domain oriented to the cortical cells during cell elongation as well as subsequent polar nuclear movement to the outer domain into the emerging hair bulge in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>). Auxin signaling via the nuclear AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR7 (ARF7)/ARF19 and INDOLE ACETIC ACID7 pathway ensures correct nuclear placement toward the inner membrane domain. Moreover, precise inner nuclear placement relies on SPIKE1 Rho-GEF, SUPERCENTIPEDE1 Rho-GDI, and ACTIN7 (ACT7) function and to a lesser extent on VTI11 vacuolar SNARE activity. Strikingly, the directionality and/or velocity of outer polar nuclear migration into the hair outgrowth along actin strands also are ACT7 dependent, auxin sensitive, and regulated by ROP signaling. Thus, our findings provide a founding framework revealing auxin and ROP signaling of inner polar nuclear position with some contribution by vacuolar morphology and of actin-dependent outer polar nuclear migration in root epidermal hair cells.

ARF7/ARF19: !affects! Nuclear position 
INDOLE ACETIC ACID7: !affects! Nuclear position 
SPIKE1 Rho-GEF: !affects! Nuclear position 
SUPERCENTIPEDE1 Rho-GDI: !affects! Nuclear position 
ACTIN7 (ACT7): !affects! Nuclear position 
VTI11 vacuolar SNARE: !affects! Nuclear position 
Auxin signaling: !affects! Nuclear position 
Rho-of-Plant (ROP) signaling: !affects! Nuclear position 
Auxin signaling: !affects! Directionality and velocity of outer polar nuclear migration 
Rho-of-Plant (ROP) signaling: !affects! Directionality and velocity of outer polar nuclear migration 
ACTIN7 (ACT7): !affects! Directionality and velocity of outer polar nuclear migration