['29083105', "Cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LDs) are found in all types of plant cells; they are  derived from the endoplasmic reticulum and function as a repository for neutral  lipids, as well as serving in lipid remodelling and signalling. However, the  mechanisms underlying the formation, steady-state maintenance and turnover of  plant LDs, particularly in non-seed tissues, are relatively unknown. Previously,  we showed that the LD-associated proteins (LDAPs) are a family of plant-specific,  LD surface-associated coat proteins that are required for proper biogenesis of  LDs and neutral lipid homeostasis in vegetative tissues. Here, we screened a  yeast two-hybrid library using the Arabidopsis LDAP3 isoform as 'bait' in an  effort to identify other novel LD protein constituents. One of the candidate  LDAP3-interacting proteins was Arabidopsis At5g16550, which is a plant-specific  protein of unknown function that we termed LDIP (LDAP-interacting protein). Using  a combination of biochemical and cellular approaches, we show that LDIP targets  specifically to the LD surface, contains a discrete amphipathic alpha-helical  targeting sequence, and participates in both homotypic and heterotypic  associations with itself and LDAP3, respectively. Analysis of LDIP T-DNA  knockdown and knockout mutants showed a decrease in LD abundance and an increase  in variability of LD size in leaves, with concomitant increases in total neutral  lipid content. Similar phenotypes were observed in plant seeds, which showed  enlarged LDs and increases in total amounts of seed oil. Collectively, these data  identify LDIP as a new player in LD biology that modulates both LD size and  cellular neutral lipid homeostasis in both leaves and seeds.", '2017 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.13754', 'Mullen']

LDAP3: !interacts with! LDIP
LDIP: !targets to! LD surface
LDIP: !participates in! homotypic and heterotypic associations
LDIP: !modulates! LD size and cellular neutral lipid homeostasis
LDIP: !increases! variability of LD size in leaves
LDIP: !enlarges! LDs in seeds