Drought is a crucial limiting factor for tea yield and quality. To systematically characterize the molecular response of tea plants to drought stress and its capacity to recover, we used iTRAQ-based comparative proteomic approach to investigate the effects of drought on protein expression profiles in tea seedlings subjected to different drought treatments. A total of 3274 proteins were identified, of which 2169 and 2300 showed differential expressions during drought and recovery, respectively. Functional annotation showed that multiple biological processes were regulated, suggesting that tea plants probably employed multiple and synergistic resistance mechanisms in dealing with drought stress. Hierarchical clustering showed that chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins were up-regulated in DB and RE, suggesting that tea plants might regulate expression of chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins to maintain the photosystem II function during drought stress. Abundant proteins involved in sulfur-containing metabolite pathways, such as glutathione, taurine, hypotaurine, methionine, and cysteine, changed significantly during drought stress. Among them, TL29 interacted with LHCb6 to connect S-containing metabolites with chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins. This suggests that sulfur-containing compounds play important roles in the response to drought stress in tea plants. In addition, the expression of PAL was up-regulated in DA and down-regulated in DB. Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase, caffeic acid O-methyltransferase, and 4-coumarate-CoA ligase also showed significant changes in expression levels, which regulated the biosynthesis of polyphenols. The results indicate that slight drought stress might promote polyphenol biosynthesis, while serious drought stress leads to inhibition. The expression of lipoxygenase and short-chain dehydrogenase increased during slight drought stress and some volatile metabolite pathways were enriched, indicating that drought stress might affect the tea aroma. The study provides valuable information that will lay the foundation for studies investigating the functions of drought response genes in tea leaves.

TL29: !interacts with! LHCb6
PAL: !enhances! DA, !represses! DB
Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase: !synthesizes! polyphenols
Lipoxygenase: !enhances! slight drought stress