Guayule biosynthesizes and accumulates rubber particles predominantly in epithelial cells in the parenchyma tissue, and this biosynthesis and accumulation is accompanied by remodeling of the roles of epithelial cells. The mechanism underlying the biosynthesis and accumulation of large quantities of rubber particles and resin in the parenchyma tissue of the stem bark of guayule (Parthenium argentatum Gray) remained unanswered up to now. Here, we focused on rubber particle biosynthesis and accumulation in guayule and performed histochemical analyses using a lipophilic fluorescent dye specific for lipids and spectral confocal laser scanning microscopy. Unmixing images were constructed based on specific spectra of cis-polyisoprene and resin and showed that guayule accumulates a large amount of resin in the resin canals in parenchyma tissue and in pith. Interestingly, the fluorescence signals of rubber were predominantly detected in a specific single layer of epithelial cells around the resin canals. These epithelial cells accumulated large rubber particles and essentially no resin. Immunoblotting and immunostaining of guayule homologue of small rubber particle proteins (GHS), which contributes to the biosynthesis of rubber in guayule, showed that GHS is one of several small rubber particle proteins and is localized around rubber particles in epithelial cells. De novo sequencing of the rubber particle proteins showed the presence of all known organelle proteins, suggesting that epithelial cells biosynthesize rubber particles, followed by remodeling of the cells for the accumulation of rubber particles with subsequent decomposition of the organelles. These results indicate that epithelial cells around resin canals are bifunctional cells dedicated to the biosynthesis and accumulation of rubber particles.

GHS: !localizes to! epithelial cells 
epithelial cells: !biosynthesize! rubber particles 
rubber particles: !accumulate in! epithelial cells 
epithelial cells: !remodel for! accumulation of rubber particles 
GHS: !contributes to! biosynthesis of rubber