Antimicrobial photodynamic treatment (APDT) based on the use of a photosensitizer to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) that induce cell death could be envisaged to fight against plant pathogens. For setting this strategy, we want to study how plants themselves respond to photodynamic treatment. In previous work we showed that tomato plantlets were able to resist photoactivated tetra (N-methylpyridyl) porphyrin (CP) or the zinc metalated form (CP-Zn). To enlarge our plant expertise related to exogenous porphyrins treatment and to further defend this approach, we studied how a weed like Arabidopsis thaliana responded to exogenous supply of anionic and cationic porphyrins. Both types of photosensitizers had no negative effect on seed germination and did not hamper the development etiolated Arabidopsis plantlet under dark conditions. Thus, post-emergence effects of porphyrin photoactivation on the development of 14 day-old in vitro Arabidopsis plantlet under light were observed. CP-Zn was the most efficient photosensitizer to kill Arabidopsis plantlets while anionic tetra (4-sulfonatophenyl) porphyrin only delayed their growth and development. Indeed only 7% of plantlets could be rescued after CP-Zn treatment. Furthermore, non-enzymatic and enzymatic defense components involved in detoxification of ROS generated by CP-Zn under illumination were downregulated or stable with the exception of sevenfold increase in proline content. As previously demonstrated in the literature for microbial agents and in the present work for Arabidopsis, CP-Zn was efficient enough to eradicate unwanted vegetation and plant pathogens without at the same time killing plants of agronomic interest such as tomato plantlets.

CP-Zn: !kills! Arabidopsis plantlets 
CP-Zn: !downregulates! non-enzymatic and enzymatic defense components 
CP-Zn: !increases! proline content 
CP-Zn: !does not kill! tomato plantlets 
anionic tetra (4-sulfonatophenyl) porphyrin: !delays! growth and development of Arabidopsis plantlets