['29122987', 'Glutathione (GSH) and indole glucosinolates (IGs) exert key functions in the  immune system of the model plant Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Appropriate  GSH levels are important for execution of both pre- and postinvasive disease  resistance mechanisms to invasive pathogens, whereas an intact PENETRATION2  (PEN2)-pathway for IG metabolism is essential for preinvasive resistance in this  species. Earlier indirect evidence suggested that the latter pathway involves  conjugation of GSH with unstable products of IG metabolism and further processing  of the resulting adducts to biologically active molecules. Here we describe the  identification of Glutathione-S-Transferase class-tau member 13 (GSTU13) as an  indispensable component of the PEN2 immune pathway for IG metabolism. gstu13  mutant plants are defective in the pathogen-triggered biosynthesis of end  products of the PEN2 pathway, including 4-O-beta-d-glucosyl-indol-3-yl formamide,  indole-3-ylmethyl amine, and raphanusamic acid. In line with this metabolic  defect, lack of functional GSTU13 results in enhanced disease susceptibility  toward several fungal pathogens including Erysiphe pisi, Colletotrichum  gloeosporioides, and Plectosphaerella cucumerina Seedlings of gstu13 plants fail  also to deposit the (1,3)-beta-glucan cell wall polymer, callose, after recognition  of the bacterial flg22 epitope. We show that GSTU13 mediates specifically the  role of GSH in IG metabolism without noticeable impact on other immune functions  of this tripeptide. We postulate that GSTU13 connects GSH with the  pathogen-triggered PEN2 pathway for IG metabolism to deliver metabolites that may  have numerous functions in the innate immune system of Arabidopsis.', '2018 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01455', 'ORCID:']

Glutathione: !connects with! PEN2 pathway 
GSTU13: !mediates! GSH role in IG metabolism 
GSTU13: !synthesizes! end products of PEN2 pathway 
GSTU13: !enhances! callose deposition 
GSTU13: !represses! disease susceptibility