Inhibition of lettuce plant growth under increased planting density was accompanied by accumulation of abscisic acid (ABA) in the shoots of competing plants. To check causal relationship between these responses we studied the effect of decreased synthesis of ABA on growth indexes and hormonal balance of lettuce plants under elevated density of their planting (one (single) or three (competing) plants per pot). Herbicide fluridone was used to inhibit ABA synthesis. Preliminary experiments with single plants showed that presence of fluridone in the soil solution at rather low concentration (0.001mg/L) did not affect either chlorophyll content or growth rate of shoots and roots during at least one week. Treatment of competing (grouped) plants with this concentration of fluridone prevented both accumulation of ABA and competition induced growth inhibition. These results confirm important role of this hormone in the growth inhibiting effect of increased planting density. Furthermore, as in the case of ABA, fluridone prevented allocation of indoleacetic acid (IAA) to the shoots of competing plants likely contributing to leveling off the increase in the ratio of leaf area to their mass that is characteristic effect of shading in the dense plant populations. The results suggest involvement of ABA in allocation of IAA in competing plants. Application of fluridone did not influence the concentration of cytokinins in the shoots, whose level was decreased by competition either in fluridone treated or control (untreated with fluridone) plants. Accumulation of ABA in the shoots of competing plants accompanied by inhibition of their growth and the absence of either accumulation of ABA or inhibition of their growth in fluridone treated grouped plants confirms importance of ABA synthesis for growth response to competition.

ABA: !accumulates in! shoots of competing plants
ABA: !inhibits! growth of lettuce plants
Fluridone: !inhibits! ABA synthesis
Fluridone: !prevents! competition-induced growth inhibition
IAA: !allocated to! shoots of competing plants
IAA: !leveled off by! shading in dense plant populations
Cytokinins: !decreased by! competition
ABA: !important for! growth response to competition