['29142022', 'The development of functional chloroplasts relies on the fine coordination of  expressions of both nuclear and chloroplast genomes. We have been using the  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) yellow variegated (var2) leaf variegation  mutant as a tool to dissect the regulation of chloroplast development. In this  work, we screened for var2 genetic enhancer modifiers termed enhancer of  variegation (evr) mutants and report the characterization of the first EVR locus,  EVR1 We showed that EVR1 encodes the cytosolic 80S ribosome 40S small subunit  protein RPS21B and the loss of EVR1 causes the enhancement of var2 leaf  variegation. We further demonstrated that combined S21 activities from EVR1 and  its close homolog, EVR1L1, are essential for Arabidopsis, and they act  redundantly in regulating leaf development and var2 leaf variegation. Moreover,  using additional cytosolic ribosomal protein mutants, we showed that although  mutations in cytosolic ribosomal proteins all enhance var2 leaf variegation to  varying degrees, the 40S subunit appears to have a more profound role over the  60S subunit in regulating VAR2-mediated chloroplast development. Comprehensive  genetic analyses with var2 suppressors that are defective in chloroplast  translation established that the enhancement of var2 leaf variegation by  cytosolic ribosomal protein mutants is dependent on chloroplast translation.  Based on our data, we propose a model that incorporates the suppression and  enhancement of var2 leaf variegation, and hypothesize that VAR2/AtFtsH2 may be  intimately involved in the balancing of cytosolic and chloroplast translation  programs during chloroplast biogenesis.', '2018 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.00673', 'ORCID:']

EVR1: !encodes! RPS21B 
RPS21B: !regulates! leaf development 
EVR1: !acts redundantly with! EVR1L1 
cytosolic ribosomal proteins: !enhance! var2 leaf variegation 
40S subunit: !has more profound role than! 60S subunit 
cytosolic ribosomal protein mutants: !depend on! chloroplast translation 
VAR2/AtFtsH2: !involved in balancing! cytosolic and chloroplast translation programs