Elytrigia Desv. is a genus with a varied array of morphology, cytology, ecology, and distribution in Triticeae. Classification and systematic position of Elytrigia remain controversial. We used nuclear internal-transcribed spacer (nrITS) sequences and chloroplast trnL-F region to study the relationships of phylogenetic and maternal genome donor of Elytrigia Desv. sensu lato. (1) E, F, P, St, and W genomes bear close relationship with one another and are distant from H and Ns genomes. E<sup>e</sup> and E<sup>b</sup> are homoeologous. (2) In ESt genome species, E genome is the origin of diploid Elytrigia species with E genome, St genome is the origin of Pseudoroegneria. (3) Diploid species Et. elongata were differentiated. (4) Et. stipifolia and Et. varnensis sequences are diverse based on nrITS data. (5) Et. lolioides contains St and H genomes and belongs to Elymus s. l. (6) E genome diploid species in Elytrigia serve as maternal donors of E genome for Et. nodosa (PI547344), Et. farcta, Et. pontica, Et. pycnantha, Et. scirpea, and Et. scythica. At least two species act as maternal donor of allopolyploids (ESt and EStP genomes). Our results suggested that Elytrigia s. l. species contain different genomes, which should be divided into different genera. However, the genomes of Elytrigia species had close relationships with one another. Diploid species were differentiated, because of introgression and different geographical sources. The results also suggested that the same species and the same genomes of different species have different maternal donor. Further study of molecular biology and cytology could facilitate the evaluation of our results of phylogenetic in a more specific and accurate way.

E<sup>e</sup>: !close relationship with! E<sup>b</sup>
E, F, P, St, W: !close relationship with! one another
H, Ns: !distant from! E, F, P, St, W
E genome: !origin of! diploid Elytrigia species
St genome: !origin of! Pseudoroegneria
Et. elongata: !differentiated!
Et. lolioides: !contains! St and H genomes
E genome diploid species: !maternal donor of! E genome for Et. nodosa, Et. farcta, Et. pontica, Et. pycnantha, Et. scirpea, and Et. scythica
Elytrigia s. l.: !divided into! different genera