Glycine max (soybean) is an extremely important crop, representing a major source of oil and protein for human beings. Heterodera glycines (soybean cyst nematode, SCN) infection severely reduces soybean production; therefore, protecting soybean from SCN has become an issue for breeders. Black soybean has exhibited a different grade of resistance to SCN. However, the underlying mechanism of Huipizhi Heidou resistance against SCN remains elusive. The Huipizhi Heidou (ZDD2315) and race 3 of Heterodera glycines were chosen to study the mechanism of resistance via examination of transcriptomic changes. After 5, 10, and 15days of SCN infection, whole roots were sampled for RNA extraction, and uninfected samples were simultaneously collected as a control. 740, 1413, and 4925 genes were isolated by padj (p-value adjusted)<0.05 after 5, 10, and 15days of the infection, respectively, and 225 differentially expressed genes were overlapped at all the time points. We found that the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) at 5, 10, and 15days after infection were involved in various biological function categories; in particular, induced genes were enriched in defense response, hormone mediated signaling process, and response to stress. To verify the pathways observed in the GO and KEGG enrichment results, effects of hormonal signaling in cyst-nematode infection were further examined via treatment with IAA (indo-3-acetic acid), salicylic acid (SA), gibberellic acid (GA), jasmonic acid (JA), and ethephon, a precursor of ethylene. The results indicate that five hormones led to a significant reduction of J2 number in the roots of Huipizhi Heidou and Liaodou15, representing SCN-resistant and susceptible lines, respectively. Taken together, our analyses are aimed at understanding the resistance mechanism of Huipizhi Heidou against the SCN race 3 via the dissection of transcriptomic changes upon J2 infection. The data presented here will help further research on the basis of soybean and cyst-nematode interaction.

Gene: !affects! Defense response 
Gene: !affects! Hormone mediated signaling process 
Gene: !affects! Response to stress 
Gene: !enhances! Resistance against SCN 
Gene: !represses! J2 number