['29165363', '(1) Background: Plant pathogenic fungi often display high levels of host  specificity and biotrophic fungi; in particular, they must manipulate their hosts  to avoid detection and to complete their obligate pathogenic lifecycles. One  important strategy of such fungi is the secretion of small proteins that serve as  effectors in this process. Microbotryum violaceum is a species complex whose  members infect members of the Caryophyllaceae; M. lychnidis-dioicae, a parasite  on Silene latifolia, is one of the best studied interactions. We are interested  in identifying and characterizing effectors of the fungus and possible  corresponding host targets; (2) Methods: In silico analysis of the M.  lychnidis-dioicae genome and transcriptomes allowed us to predict a pool of small  secreted proteins (SSPs) with the hallmarks of effectors, including a lack of  conserved protein family (PFAM) domains and also localized regions of disorder.  Putative SSPs were tested for secretion using a yeast secretion trap method. We  then used yeast two-hybrid analyses for candidate-secreted effectors to probe a  cDNA library from a range of growth conditions of the fungus, including infected  plants; (3) Results: Roughly 50 SSPs were identified by in silico analysis. Of  these, 4 were studied further and shown to be secreted, as well as examined for  potential host interactors. One of the putative effectors, MVLG_01732, was found  to interact with Arabidopsis thaliana calcium-dependent lipid binding protein  (AtCLB) and with cellulose synthase interactive protein 1 orthologues; and (4)  Conclusions: The identification of a pool of putative effectors provides a  resource for functional characterization of fungal proteins that mediate the  delicate interaction between pathogen and host. The candidate targets of  effectors, e.g., AtCLB, involved in pollen germination suggest tantalizing  insights that could drive future studies.', '2017 Nov 22', 'Int J Mol Sci', '10.3390/ijms18112489', 'ORCID:']

M. lychnidis-dioicae: !secretes! small proteins 
small proteins: !serve as! effectors 
in silico analysis: !predicts! pool of SSPs 
SSPs: !tested for! secretion 
candidate-secreted effectors: !probed with! yeast two-hybrid analyses 
MVLG_01732: !interacts with! AtCLB 
MVLG_01732: !interacts with! cellulose synthase interactive protein 1 orthologues