Jasmonic acid (JA) and arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbioses are known to protect plants against abiotic and biotic stresses, but are also involved in the regulation of root hydraulic conductance (L). The objective of this experiment was to elucidate the role of JA in the water relations and hormonal regulation of AM plants under drought by using tomato plants defective in the synthesis of JA (def-1). Our results showed that JA is involved in the uptake and transport of water through its effect on both physiological parameters (stomatal conductance and L) and molecular parameters, mainly by controlling the expression and abundance of aquaporins. We observed that def-1 plants increased the expression of seven plant aquaporin genes under well-watered conditions in the absence of AM fungus, which partly explain the increment of L by this mutation under well-watered conditions. In addition, the effects of the AM symbiosis on plants were modified by the def-1 mutation, with the expression of some aquaporins and plant hormone concentration being disturbed. On the other hand, methyl salicylate (MeSA) content was increased in non-mycorrhizal def-1 plants, suggesting that MeSA and JA can act together in the regulation of L. In a complementary experiment, it was found that exogenous MeSA increased L, confirming our hypothesis. Likewise, we confirmed that JA, ABA and SA are hormones involved in plant mechanisms to cope with stressful situations, their concentrations being controlled by the AM symbiosis. In conclusion, under well-watered conditions, the def-1 mutation mimics the effects of AM symbiosis, but under drought conditions the def-1 mutation changed the effects of the AM symbiosis on plants.

Jasmonic acid: !affects! Aquaporin expression
Jasmonic acid: !controls! Plant hormone concentration
Arbuscular mycorrhizal: !modifies! Effects of JA on plants
Methyl salicylate: !increases! L
Exogenous MeSA: !confirms! Hypothesis
JA, ABA and SA: !involved in! Plant mechanisms to cope with stress