Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is a unicellular chlorophyte alga that is widely studied as a reference organism for understanding photosynthesis, sensory and motile cilia, and for development of an algal-based platform for producing biofuels and bio-products. Its highly repetitive, ~205-kbp circular chloroplast genome and ~15.8-kbp linear mitochondrial genome were sequenced prior to the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies. Here, high coverage shotgun sequencing was used to assemble both organellar genomes de novo. These new genomes correct dozens of errors in the prior genome sequences and annotations. Genome sequencing coverage indicates that each cell contains on average 83 copies of the chloroplast genome and 130 copies of the mitochondrial genome. Using protocols and analyses optimized for organellar transcripts, RNA-Seq was used to quantify their relative abundances across 12 different growth conditions. Forty-six percent of total cellular mRNA is attributable to high expression from a few dozen chloroplast genes. RNA-Seq data were used to guide gene annotation, to demonstrate polycistronic gene expression, and to quantify splicing of psaA and psbA introns. In contrast to a conclusion from a recent study, we found that chloroplast transcripts are not edited. Unexpectedly, cytosine-rich polynucleotide tails were observed at the 3'-end of all mitochondrial transcripts. A comparative genomics analysis of eight laboratory strains and 11 wild isolates of C. reinhardtii identified 2658 variants in the organellar genomes, which is 1/10th as much genetic diversity as is found in the nucleus.

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: !contains! 83 copies of chloroplast genome
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: !contains! 130 copies of mitochondrial genome
RNA-Seq: !quantifies! relative abundances of organellar transcripts
RNA-Seq: !guides! gene annotation
RNA-Seq: !demonstrates! polycistronic gene expression
RNA-Seq: !quantifies! splicing of psaA and psbA introns
Chloroplast transcripts: !not edited!
Comparative genomics analysis: !identifies! 2658 variants in organellar genomes