['29180381', 'Damaged cells send various signals to stimulate defense responses. Recent  identification and genetic studies of the plant purinoceptor, P2K1 (also known as  DORN1), have demonstrated that extracellular ATP is a signal involved in plant  stress responses, including wounding, perhaps to evoke plant defense. However, it  remains largely unknown how extracellular ATP induces plant defense responses.  Here, we demonstrate that extracellular ATP induces plant defense mediated  through activation of the intracellular signaling of jasmonate (JA), a  well-characterized defense hormone. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) leaves,  ATP pretreatment induced resistance against the necrotrophic fungus, Botrytis  cinerea The induced resistance was enhanced in the P2K1 receptor overexpression  line, but reduced in the receptor mutant, dorn1-3 Mining the transcriptome data  revealed that ATP induces a set of JA-induced genes. In addition, the  P2K1-associated coexpression network contains defense-related genes, including  those encoding jasmonate ZIM-domain (JAZ) proteins, which play key roles as  repressors of JA signaling. We examined whether extracellular ATP impacts the  stability of JAZ1 in Arabidopsis. The results showed that the JAZ1 stability  decreased in response to ATP addition in a proteasome-dependent manner. This  reduction required intracellular signaling via second messengers-cytosolic  calcium, reactive oxygen species, and nitric oxide. Interestingly, the  ATP-induced JAZ1 degradation was attenuated in the JA receptor mutant, coi1, but  not in the JA biosynthesis mutant, aos, or upon addition of JA biosynthesis  inhibitors. Immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that ATP increases the  interaction between COI1 and JAZ1, suggesting direct cross talk between  extracellular ATP and JA in intracellular signaling events. Taken together, these  results suggest that extracellular ATP signaling directly impacts the JA  signaling pathway to maximize plant defense responses.', '2018 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01477', 'ORCID:']

P2K1: !stimulates! Plant defense
ATP: !induces! JA signaling
JAZ1: !decreases in stability! ATP addition
COI1: !interacts with! JAZ1