The foliar exogenous application of kaolin, a radiation-reflecting inert mineral, has proven to be an effective short-term climate change mitigation strategy for Mediterranean vineyards. In this work, we address the hypothesis that kaolin could improve both the hormonal dynamics and physiological responses of grapevines growing in Douro Region, northern Portugal. For this purpose, the leaf water potential, gas exchange and chlorophyll a fluorescence parameters were monitored, as well as the abscisic acid (ABA) and indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) quantification and immunolocalization were assessed. The study revealed a slight decrease in ABA and an increase in IAA in the kaolin treatment, which in turn were associated with the improvement of physiological performance. A month after spraying, kaolin improves the water potential respectively, 30% and 17% in the predawn and midday periods. Besides, plants treated with kaolin showed higher values of stomatal conductance, net CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation rate and intrinsic water use efficiency. Kaolin also ameliorates the effective PSII efficiency (67%), as well as the maximum quantum efficiency of photosystem II and the photosynthetic electron transport rate (>73%). These results were consistent with the higher photochemical quenching and the lower non-photochemical quenching observed in treated leaves and with the better performance obtained by the JIP test parameters. Physiological and hormonal analysis confirmed that kaolin effectively enhance grapevine summer stress tolerance.

Kaolin: !enhances! Stress Tolerance
ABA: !decreases! in Kaolin Treatment
IAA: !increases! in Kaolin Treatment
Water Potential: !improves! with Kaolin Treatment
Stomatal Conductance: !increases! with Kaolin Treatment
CO<sub>2</sub> Assimilation Rate: !increases! with Kaolin Treatment
Intrinsic Water Use Efficiency: !increases! with Kaolin Treatment
PSII Efficiency: !improves! with Kaolin Treatment
Photochemical Quenching: !increases! with Kaolin Treatment
Non-Photochemical Quenching: !decreases! with Kaolin Treatment