Contents Summary 995 I. Introduction 995 II. The plant Ub machinery 996 III. From Ub to Ub linkage types in plants 997 IV. Increasing analytical resolution for K63 polyUb in plants 998 V. How to build K63 polyUb chains? 998 VI. Cellular roles of K63 polyUb in plants 999 VII. Physiological roles of K63 polyUb in plants 1004 VIII. Future perspectives: towards the next level of the Ub code 1006 Acknowledgements 1006 References 1007 SUMMARY: Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification essential for the regulation of eukaryotic proteins, having an impact on protein fate, function, localization or activity. What originally appeared to be a simple system to regulate protein turnover by the 26S proteasome is now known to be the most intricate regulatory process cells have evolved. Ubiquitin can be arranged in countless chain assemblies, triggering various cellular outcomes. Polyubiquitin chains using lysine-63 from ubiquitin represent the second most abundant type of ubiquitin modification. Recent studies have exposed their common function in proteasome-independent functions in non-plant model organisms. The existence of lysine-63 polyubiquitination in plants is, however, only just emerging. In this review, we discuss the recent advances on the characterization of ubiquitin chains and the molecular mechanisms driving the formation of lysine-63-linked ubiquitin modifications. We provide an overview of the roles associated with lysine-63 polyubiquitination in plant cells in the light of what is known in non-plant models. Finally, we review the crucial roles of lysine-63 polyubiquitin-dependent processes in plant growth, development and responses to environmental conditions.

Ubiquitination: !regulates! Protein Fate 
Lysine-63 Polyubiquitin: !triggers! Cellular Outcomes 
Lysine-63 Polyubiquitin: !functions in! Proteasome-Independent Processes 
Lysine-63 Polyubiquitin: !associated with! Plant Growth & Development 
Lysine-63 Polyubiquitin: !involved in! Environmental Responses