Hydraulic architecture imposes a fundamental control on water transport, underpinning plant productivity, and survival. The extent to which hydraulic architecture of mature trees acclimates to chronic drought is poorly understood, limiting accuracy in predictions of forest responses to future droughts. We measured seasonal shoot hydraulic performance for multiple years to assess xylem acclimation in mature piñon (Pinus edulis) and juniper (Juniperus monosperma) after 3+ years of precipitation manipulation. Our treatments consisted of water addition (+20% ambient precipitation), partial precipitation-exclusion (-45% ambient precipitation), and exclusion-structure control. Supplemental watering elevated leaf water potential, sapwood-area specific hydraulic conductivity, and leaf-area specific hydraulic conductivity relative to precipitation exclusion. Shifts in allocation of leaf area to sapwood area enhanced differences between irrigated and droughted K<sub>L</sub> in piñon but not juniper. Piñon and juniper achieved similar K<sub>L</sub> under ambient conditions, but juniper matched or outperformed piñon in all physiological measurements under both increased and decreased precipitation treatments. Embolism vulnerability and xylem anatomy were unaffected by treatments in either species. Absence of significant acclimation combined with inferior performance for both hydraulic transport and safety suggests piñon has greater risk of local extirpation if aridity increases as predicted in the southwestern USA.

water addition: !elevates! leaf water potential 
water addition: !increases! sapwood-area specific hydraulic conductivity 
water addition: !enhances! leaf-area specific hydraulic conductivity 
allocation of leaf area: !enhances! differences between irrigated and droughted K<sub>L</sub> in piñon 
juniper: !matches or outperforms! piñon in all physiological measurements 
treatments: !unaffected by! embolism vulnerability and xylem anatomy 
piñon: !greater risk of local extirpation! if aridity increases