Despite the importance of plant-plant interactions on crop yield and plant community dynamics, our understanding of the genetic and molecular bases underlying natural variation of plant-plant interactions is largely limited in comparison with other types of biotic interactions. By listing 63 quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping and global gene expression studies based on plants directly challenged by other plants, we explored whether the genetic architecture and the function of the candidate genes underlying natural plant-plant interactions depend on the type of interactions between two plants (competition versus commensalism versus reciprocal helping versus asymmetry). The 16 transcriptomic studies are unevenly distributed between competitive interactions (n = 12) and asymmetric interactions (n = 4, all focusing on response to parasitic plants). By contrast, 17 and 30 QTL studies were identified for competitive interactions and asymmetric interactions (either weed suppressive ability or response to parasitic plants), respectively. Surprisingly, no studies have been carried out on the identification of genetic and molecular bases underlying natural variation in positive interactions. The candidate genes underlying natural plant-plant interactions can be classified into seven categories of plant function that have been identified in artificial environments simulating plant-plant interactions either frequently (photosynthesis, hormones), only recently (cell wall modification and degradation, defense pathways against pathogens) or rarely (ABC transporters, histone modification and meristem identity/life history traits). Finally, we introduce several avenues that need to be explored in the future to obtain a thorough understanding of the genetic and molecular bases underlying plant-plant interactions within the context of realistic community complexity.

QTL: !maps to! plant-plant interactions 
transcriptomic studies: !unevenly distributed between! competitive interactions & asymmetric interactions 
candidate genes: !classified into! seven categories of plant function 
photosynthesis: !frequently identified in! artificial environments 
hormones: !frequently identified in! artificial environments 
cell wall modification/degradation: !recently identified in! artificial environments 
defense pathways: !recently identified in! artificial environments 
ABC transporters: !rarely identified in! artificial environments 
histone modification: !rarely identified in! artificial environments 
meristem identity/life history traits: !rarely identified in! artificial environments