A deep bibliometric analysis has been carried out, obtaining valuable parameters that facilitate the understanding around the research in plant using molecular markers. The evolution of the improvement in the field of agronomy is fundamental for its adaptation to the new exigencies that the current world context raises. In addition, within these improvements, this article focuses on those related to the biotechnology sector. More specifically, the use of DNA markers that allow the researcher to know the set of genes associated with a particular quantitative trait or QTL. The use of molecular markers is widely extended, including: restriction fragment length polymorphism, random-amplified polymorphic DNA, amplified fragment length polymorphism, microsatellites, and single-nucleotide polymorphisms. In addition to classical methodology, new approaches based on the next generation sequencing are proving to be fundamental. In this article, a historical review of the molecular markers traditionally used in plants, since its birth and how the new molecular tools facilitate the work of plant breeders is carried out. The evolution of the most studied cultures from the point of view of molecular markers is also reviewed and other parameters whose prior knowledge can facilitate the approach of researchers to this field of research are analyzed. The bibliometric analysis of molecular markers in plants shows that top five countries in this research are: US, China, India, France, and Germany, and from 2013, this research is led by China. On the other hand, the basic research using Arabidopsis is deeper in France and Germany, while other countries focused its efforts in their main crops as the US for wheat or maize, while China and India for wheat and rice.

DNA markers: !allow! researcher 
QTL: !associated with! genes 
Restriction fragment length polymorphism: !used for! molecular markers 
Random-amplified polymorphic DNA: !used for! molecular markers 
Amplified fragment length polymorphism: !used for! molecular markers 
Microsatellites: !used for! molecular markers 
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms: !used for! molecular markers 
Next generation sequencing: !facilitates! work of plant breeders 
US: !leads research in! wheat or maize 
China: !leads research in! wheat and rice 
India: !leads research in! wheat and rice 
France: !deeper research in! Arabidopsis 
Germany: !deeper research in! Arabidopsis