['29247559', 'In plants, melatonin production is strictly regulated, unlike the production of  its precursor, serotonin, which is highly inducible in response to stimuli, such  as senescence and pathogen exposure. Exogenous serotonin treatment does not  greatly induce the production of N-acetylserotonin (NAS) and melatonin in plants,  which suggests the possible existence of one or more regulatory genes in the  pathway for the biosynthesis of melatonin from serotonin. In this report, we  found that NAS was rapidly and abundantly converted into serotonin in rice  seedlings, indicating the presence of an N-acetylserotonin deacetylase (ASDAC).  To clone the putative ASDAC gene, we screened 4 genes that were known as histone  deacetylase (HDAC) genes, but encoded proteins targeted into chloroplasts or  mitochondria rather than nuclei. Of 4 recombinant Escherichia coli strains  expressing these genes, one E. coli strain expressing the rice HDAC10 gene was  found to be capable of producing serotonin in response to treatment with NAS. The  recombinant purified rice HDAC10 (OsHDAC10) protein exhibited ASDAC enzyme  activity toward NAS, N-acetyltyramine (NAT), N-acetyltryptamine, and melatonin,  with the highest ASDAC activity for NAT. In addition, its Arabidopsis ortholog,  AtHDAC14, showed similar ASDAC activity to that of OsHDAC10. Both OsHDAC10 and  AtHDAC14 were found to be expressed in chloroplasts. Phylogenetic analysis  indicated that ASDAC homologs were present in archaea, but not in cyanobacteria,  which differs from the distribution of serotonin N-acetyltransferase (SNAT). This  suggests that SNAT and ASDAC may have evolved differently from ancestral  eukaryotic cells.', '2018 Mar', 'J Pineal Res', '10.1111/jpi.12460', 'ORCID:']

serotonin: !induces! NAS production 
NAS: !converted to! serotonin 
rice HDAC10 gene: !encodes! protein targeted into chloroplasts 
E. coli strain: !expresses! rice HDAC10 gene 
OsHDAC10 protein: !exhibits! ASDAC enzyme activity 
AtHDAC14: !shows! similar ASDAC activity 
OsHDAC10/AtHDAC14: !expressed in! chloroplasts 
ASDAC homologs: !present in! archaea 
SNAT: !evolved differently from! ancestral eukaryotic cells