Autophagy is involved in cytoplasmic degradation through directly engulfing cytosol and organelles by autophagosomes and then fusing with lysosome-like vesicles during the development of nonarticulated laticifers in Euphorbia kansui Liou. Autophagy has been reported to play an important role in a wide range of eukaryotic organisms during responses to various abiotic and biotic stresses. However, until recently, the functions of autophagy in normal plant differentiation and development were still in their infancy. Nonarticulated laticifers, a type of secretory tissue in plants, undergo the degradation of cytosol and organelles during their development. However, little evidence of autophagy in laticifer differentiation has been provided. In the present study, using anti-ATG8 antibody-Alexa Fluor 488, Lyso-Tracker Red (LTR) and monodansylcadaverine (MDC) as markers for detecting autophagosomes, as well as autophagy-related structures, we observed that the green fluorescence of ATG8a largely colocalized with the red fluorescence of LTR and purple fluorescence of MDC and the quantity of autophagosomes experienced a trend from less to more to less during laticifer development. Additionally, we described the autophagy process during the development of nonarticulated laticifers in Euphorbia kansui Liou at the ultrastructural level in detail. In addition, further immunogold TEM studies also verified the presence of autophagosomes, autolysosomes and lysosome-like structures in laticifers. Taken together, these results suggest that autophagy contributes to the development of the nonarticulated laticifers in E. kansui Liou and that autophagosomes fuse with lysosome-like structures for degradation. These results will lay an important foundation for further studies on laticifer regulation.

Autophagy: !involves! Cytoplasmic degradation 
Autophagy: !plays role in! Plant differentiation and development 
ATG8a: !colocalizes with! LTR and MDC 
Autophagosomes: !fuse with! Lysosome-like structures 
Autophagy: !contributes to! Laticifer development