Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD), which catalyzes the reduction of cinnamaldehydes to their alcohol derivatives, is represented by a large family of proteins. The aim of the study was to identify the CAD isoforms in flax (Linum usitatissimum L.) - LuCADs - and to determine their specificity to enhance knowledge of the mechanisms controlling cell wall lignification in flax under environmental stresses. On the basis of genome-wide analysis, we identified 15 isoforms (one in two copies) belonging to three major classes of the CAD protein family. Their specificity was determined at the transcriptomic level in different tissues/organs, under Fusarium infection and abiotic stresses. Considering the function of particular LuCADs, it was established that LuCAD1 and 2 belong to Class I and they take part in the lignification of maturing stem and in the response to cold and drought stress. The Class II members LuCAD3, LuCAD4, LuCAD5 and LuCAD6 play various roles in flax being putatively responsible for lignin synthesis in different organs or under certain conditions. The obtained results indicate that within Class II, LuCAD6 was the most abundant in seedlings and maturing stems, LuCAD3 in leaves, and LuCAD4 in stems. Comparative analysis showed that expression of LuCAD genes in roots after F. oxysporum infection had the greatest contribution to differentiation of LuCAD expression patterns. Surprisingly, most of the analyzed LuCAD isoforms had reduced expression after pathogen infection. The decrease in mRNA level was primarily observed for LuCAD6 and LuCAD4, but also LuCAD1 and 8. However, the induction of LuCAD expression was mostly characteristic for Class I LuCAD1 and 2 in leaves. For cold stress, a clear correlation with phylogenic class membership was observed. Low temperatures caused induction of CAD isoforms belonging to Class I and repression of LuCADs from Class III.

LuCAD1: !enhances! lignification of maturing stem
LuCAD2: !enhances! response to cold and drought stress
LuCAD3: !localizes to! leaves
LuCAD4: !localizes to! stems
LuCAD5: !putatively responsible for! lignin synthesis
LuCAD6: !most abundant in! seedlings and maturing stems
LuCAD6: !repressed by! F. oxysporum infection
LuCAD1: !induced by! F. oxysporum infection
LuCAD4: !repressed by! F. oxysporum infection
LuCAD1: !induced by! cold stress
LuCAD3: !repressed by! cold stress