37 unconditional QTLs, 51 conditional QTLs and considerable epistatic QTLs were detected for waterlogging tolerance, and six favourable combinations were selected accelerating the possible application of MAS in chrysanthemum breeding. Chrysanthemum is seriously impacted by soil waterlogging. To determine the genetic characteristics of waterlogging tolerance (WAT) in chrysanthemum, a population of 162 F<sub>1</sub> lines was used to construct a genetic map to identify the dynamic and epistatic quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for four WAT traits: wilting index (WI), dead leaf ratio (DLR), chlorosis score (Score) and membership function value of waterlogging (MFVW). The h <sub>B</sub><sup>2</sup> for the WAT traits ranged from 0.49 to 0.64, and transgressive segregation was observed in both directions. A total of 37 unconditional consensus QTLs with 5.81-18.21% phenotypic variation explanation (PVE) and 51 conditional consensus QTLs with 5.90-24.56% PVE were detected. Interestingly, three unconditional consensus QTLs were consistently identified across different stages, whereas no conditional consensus QTLs were consistently expressed. In addition, considerable epistatic QTLs, all with PVE values ranging from 0.01 to 8.87%, were detected by a joint analysis of WAT phenotypes. These results illustrated that the QTLs (genes) controlling WAT were environmentally dependent and selectively expressed at different times and indicated that both additive and epistatic effects underlie the inheritance of WAT in chrysanthemum. The findings of the current study provide insights into the complex genetic architecture of WAT, and the identification of favourable alleles represents an important step towards the application of molecular marker-assisted selection (MAS) and QTL pyramiding in chrysanthemum WAT breeding programmes.

Gene: !affects! WAT
Gene: !explains! PVE
Gene: !consistently identified! across stages
Gene: !selectively expressed! at different times
Gene: !underlies inheritance of! WAT
Gene: !provides insights into! complex genetic architecture
Gene: !identifies! favourable alleles
Gene: !enables! MAS and QTL pyramiding