Light and temperatures of germination greatly affect germination of several Cucurbitaceae species. Environmental conditions prevailing at seed maturation time can affect dormancy and germination requirements. Citrullus colocynthis seeds have a deep dormancy. This perennial prostrate shrub grows all over the year in the arid Arabian deserts. We explored if seed dormancy and germination requirements of C. colocynthis depend on time of fruit collection. Matured seeds were collected at five different times during 2014/2015 year from a population around Dubai city. Fresh seeds were germinated at three temperature regimes in both continuous darkness and alternating 12 h light/12 h darkness. Impacts of seed storage and other treatments on germination were applied on seeds collected in March and exhibited deep dormancy. March collected seeds almost did not germinate in both light and dark at the three temperatures, but those of the other collections responded differently to both light and temperatures. At the lowest temperatures, seeds of all collections did not germinate in light, but those of June, October and December collections germinated in dark. There were negative correlations between final germination and seed length, width, mass and coat thickness. Physical scarification, water soaking and seed storage did not break dormancy of March collection. Germination of C. colocynthis is very sensitive to light and incubation temperature as well as to the environmental conditions associated with the time of seed maturation. It is important to investigate the effects of environmental factors prevailing during seed maturation under controlled conditions to understand exact reasons for unusual seed dormancy and germination requirements of C. colocynthis, which seems to be very sensitive to maternal environment.

Light: !affects! Germination 
Temperature: !affects! Germination 
Seed maturation time: !affects! Dormancy & Germination requirements 
Seed length: !correlates with! Final germination 
Seed width: !correlates with! Final germination 
Seed mass: !correlates with! Final germination 
Coat thickness: !correlates with! Final germination 
Physical scarification: !does not break! Dormancy 
Water soaking: !does not break! Dormancy 
Seed storage: !does not break! Dormancy