Comprehensive transcriptome analysis of leaf and root tissues of Nothapodytes nimmoniana unravels several putative pathway genes, transcription factors and CYPs related to camptothecin (CPT) biosynthesis. Additionally, post-transcriptional suppression by artificial microRNA (aMIR) of NnCYP76B6 (geraniol 10-hydroxylase) suggests its role in CPT biosynthesis. Tissue-specific LC-MS/MS analysis revealed the presence of secologanin as the central intermediate of MIA pathway in N. nimmoniana. Nothapodytes nimmoniana is a rich source of potent anticancer drug camptothecin (CPT) whose biosynthetic pathway is unresolved due to the lack of genomic and transcriptomic information. Present investigation entails deep transcriptome analysis of N. nimmoniana which led to identification of putative pathway genes and regulatory components involved in CPT biosynthesis. Using Illumina HiSeq 2500 sequencing platform a total of 31,172,889 (6.23 Gb) and 31,218,626 (6.24 Gb) raw reads were generated from leaf and root wood, respectively. These were assembled de novo into 138,183 unique contigs. Additionally, 16 cytochrome P450 transcripts related to secondary metabolism were also identified. Further, transcriptome data pool presented 1683 putative transcription factors of which transcripts corresponding to WRKY TFs were the most abundant (14.14%). A total of 2741 transcripts were differentially expressed out of which 478 contigs showed downregulation in root wood and 2263 contigs were up-regulated. Further, comparative analyses of 17 genes involved in CPT biosynthetic pathway were validated by qRT-PCR. On basis of intermediates, two distinct seco-iridoid pathways are involved in the biosynthesis of monoterpene indole alkaloids either through multiple isomers of strictosidinic acid or strictosidine. Tissue-specific LC-MS/MS analysis revealed the presence of secologanin as the central intermediate of MIA pathway in N. nimmoniana. Geraniol-10 hydroxylase (NnCYP76B6) an important enzyme in CPT biosynthesis which specifically shunts geraniol into the secologanin pathway was also cloned from the trancriptome resource. In planta transient expression of NnCYP76B6 showed a significant enhancement in mRNA transcript levels coincident with enhanced CPT accumulation. Further, artificial microRNA (aMIR) mediated downregulation of NnCYP76B6 resulted in reduction of mRNA transcript levels as well as CPT content in comparison to control. These empirical results suggest a plausible regulatory role for NnCYP76B6 in CPT biosynthesis and also establish a valuable repository for deciphering various structural, rate limiting and regulatory genes of CPT biosynthetic pathway.

NnCYP76B6: !enhances! CPT accumulation
NnCYP76B6: !represses! CPT content
WRKY TFs: !localizes to! secondary metabolism
secologanin: !synthesizes! monoterpene indole alkaloids
aMIR: !suppresses! NnCYP76B6