['29272523', 'The cysteine-rich transmembrane module (CYSTM) is comprised of a small molecular  protein family that is found in a diversity of tail-anchored membrane proteins  across eukaryotes. This protein family belongs to novel uncharacteristic  non-secreted cysteine-rich peptides (NCRPs) according to their conserved domain  and small molecular weight, and genome-wide analysis of this family has not yet  been undertaken in plants. In this study, 13 CYSTM genes were identified and  located on five chromosomes with diverse densities in Arabidopsis thaliana. The  CYSTM proteins could be classified into four subgroups based on domain similarity  and phylogenetic topology. Encouragingly, the CYSTM members were expressed in at  least one of the tested tissues and dramatically responded to various abiotic  stresses, indicating that they played vital roles in diverse developmental  processes, especially in stress responses. CYSTM peptides displayed a complex  subcellular localization, and most were detected at the plasma membrane and  cytoplasm. Of particular interest, CYSTM members could dimerize with themselves  or others through the C-terminal domain, and we built a protein-protein  interaction map between CYSTM members in Arabidopsis for the first time. In  addition, an analysis of CYSTM3 overexpression lines revealed negative regulation  for this gene in salt stress responses. We demonstrate that the CYSTM family, as  a novel and ubiquitous non-secreted cysteine-rich peptide family, plays a vital  role in resistance to abiotic stress. Collectively, our comprehensive analysis of  CYSTM members will facilitate future functional studies of the small peptides.', '2018 Feb 1', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcx202', 'Zheng']

CYSTM: !belongs to! novel uncharacteristic non-secreted cysteine-rich peptides 
CYSTM: !located on! five chromosomes 
CYSTM: !classified into! four subgroups 
CYSTM: !expressed in! at least one of the tested tissues 
CYSTM: !responds to! various abiotic stresses 
CYSTM: !localized to! plasma membrane and cytoplasm 
CYSTM: !dimerizes with! itself or others 
CYSTM: !negatively regulated by! CYSTM3 overexpression lines 
CYSTM: !plays a role in! resistance to abiotic stress