Facing adverse conditions such as nitrogen (N) deprivation, microalgae enter cellular quiescence, a reversible cell cycle arrest with drastic changes in metabolism allowing cells to remain viable. Recovering from N deprivation and quiescence is an active and orderly process as we are showing here for <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> We conducted comparative transcriptomics on this alga to discern processes relevant to quiescence in the context of N deprivation and recovery following refeeding. A mutant with slow recovery from N deprivation, <i>compromised hydrolysis of triacylglycerols7</i> (<i>cht7</i>), was included to better define the regulatory processes governing the respective transitions. We identified an ordered set of biological processes with expression patterns that showed sequential reversal following N resupply and uncovered acclimation responses specific to the recovery phase. Biochemical assays and microscopy validated selected inferences made based on the transcriptional analyses. These comprise (1) the restoration of N source preference and cellular bioenergetics during the early stage of recovery; (2) flagellum-based motility in the mid to late stage of recovery; and (3) recovery phase-specific gene groups cooperating in the rapid replenishment of chloroplast proteins. In the <i>cht7</i> mutant, a large number of programmed responses failed to readjust in a timely manner. Finally, evidence is provided for the involvement of the cAMP-protein kinase A pathway in gating the recovery. We conclude that the recovery from N deprivation represents not simply a reversal of processes directly following N deprivation, but a distinct cellular state.

N deprivation: !causes! quiescence 
transcriptomics: !reveals! processes relevant to quiescence 
mutant: !reveals! regulatory processes governing transitions 
N resupply: !reverses! biological processes 
biochemical assays: !validate! inferences made from transcriptomics 
motility: !restored! mid-late stage of recovery 
chloroplast proteins: !replenished! by gene groups 
cht7 mutant: !fails to readjust! in timely manner 
cAMP-protein kinase A pathway: !involved in! gating recovery