Strigolactones (SLs), comprising compounds with diverse but related chemical structures, are determinant signals in elicitation of germination in root parasitic Orobanchaceae and in mycorrhization in plants. Further, SLs are a novel class of plant hormones that regulate root and shoot architecture. Dissecting common and divergent biosynthetic pathways of SLs may provide avenues for modulating their production in planta. Biosynthesis of SLs in various SL-producing plant species was inhibited by fluridone, a phytoene desaturase inhibitor. The plausible biosynthetic precursors of SLs were exogenously applied to plants, and their conversion to canonical and non-canonical SLs was analysed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The conversion of carlactone (CL) to carlactonoic acid (CLA) was a common reaction in all investigated plants. Sorghum converted CLA to 5-deoxystrigol (5-DS) and sorgomol, and 5-DS to sorgomol. One sorgomol-producing cotton cultivar had the same SL profile as sorghum in the feeding experiments. Another cotton cultivar converted CLA to 5-DS, strigol, and strigyl acetate. Further, 5-DS was converted to strigol and strigyl acetate. Moonseed converted CLA to strigol, but not to 5-DS. The plant did not convert 5-DS to strigol, suggesting that 5-DS is not a precursor of strigol in moonseed. Similarly, 4-deoxyorobanchol was not a precursor of orobanchol in cowpea. Further, sunflower converted CLA to methyl carlactonoate and heliolactone. These results indicated that the biosynthetic pathways of hydroxy SLs do not necessarily involve their respective deoxy SL precursors.

Strigolactones: !determine! germination 
Strigolactones: !regulate! root/shoot architecture 
Fluridone: !inhibits! biosynthesis 
Precursors: !convert to! canonical/non-canonical SLs 
Carlactone: !converts to! carlactonoic acid 
Sorghum: !converts! carlactonoic acid to 5-deoxystrigol/sorgomol 
Cotton: !converts! carlactonoic acid to 5-deoxystrigol/strigol/strigyl acetate 
Moonseed: !converts! carlactonoic acid to strigol 
Cowpea: !does not convert! 4-deoxyorobanchol to orobanchol 
Sunflower: !converts! carlactonoic acid to methyl carlactonoate/heliolactone