['29301953', 'Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding (G) proteins are composed of Galpha, Gbeta,  and Ggamma subunits and function as molecular switches in signal transduction. In  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), there are one canonical Galpha (GPA1), three  extra-large Galpha (XLG1, XLG2, and XLG3), one Gbeta (AGB1), and three Ggamma (AGG1, AGG2,  and AGG3) subunits. To elucidate AGB1 molecular signaling, we performed  immunoprecipitation using plasma membrane-enriched proteins followed by mass  spectrometry to identify the protein interactors of AGB1. After eliminating  proteins present in the control immunoprecipitation, commonly identified  contaminants, and organellar proteins, a total of 103 candidate AGB1-associated  proteins were confidently identified. We identified all of the G protein subunits  except XLG1, receptor-like kinases, Ca(2+) signaling-related proteins, and  14-3-3-like proteins, all of which may couple with or modulate G protein  signaling. We confirmed physical interaction between AGB1 and the receptor-like  kinase FERONIA (FER) using bimolecular fluorescence complementation. The Rapid  Alkalinization Factor (RALF) family of polypeptides have been shown to be ligands  of FER. In this study, we demonstrate that RALF1 regulates stomatal apertures and  does so in a G protein-dependent manner, inhibiting stomatal opening and  promoting stomatal closure in Columbia but not in agb1 mutants. We further show  that AGGs and XLGs, but not GPA1, participate in RALF1-mediated stomatal  signaling. Our results suggest that FER acts as a G protein-coupled receptor for  plant heterotrimeric G proteins.', '2018 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01277', 'ORCID:']

GPA1: !composes! G proteins 
XLG1, XLG2, XLG3: !compose! G proteins 
AGB1: !composes! G proteins 
AGG1, AGG2, AGG3: !compose! G proteins 
AGB1: !interacts with! 103 candidate proteins 
AGB1: !interacts with! receptor-like kinases 
AGB1: !interacts with! Ca(2+) signaling-related proteins 
AGB1: !interacts with! 14-3-3-like proteins 
FER: !interacts with! AGB1 
RALF1: !regulates! stomatal apertures 
RALF1: !depends on! G proteins 
AGGs: !participate in! RALF1-mediated stomatal signaling 
XLGs: !participate in! RALF1-mediated stomatal signaling 
GPA1: !does not participate in! RALF1-mediated stomatal signaling 
FER: !acts as! G protein-coupled receptor