Eukaryotes use a temporally regulated process, known as the replication timing program, to ensure that their genomes are fully and accurately duplicated during S phase. Replication timing programs are predictive of genomic features and activity and are considered to be functional readouts of chromatin organization. Although replication timing programs have been described for yeast and animal systems, much less is known about the temporal regulation of plant DNA replication or its relationship to genome sequence and chromatin structure. We used the thymidine analog, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine, in combination with flow sorting and Repli-Seq to describe, at high-resolution, the genome-wide replication timing program for Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) Col-0 suspension cells. We identified genomic regions that replicate predominantly during early, mid, and late S phase, and correlated these regions with genomic features and with data for chromatin state, accessibility, and long-distance interaction. Arabidopsis chromosome arms tend to replicate early while pericentromeric regions replicate late. Early and mid-replicating regions are gene-rich and predominantly euchromatic, while late regions are rich in transposable elements and primarily heterochromatic. However, the distribution of chromatin states across the different times is complex, with each replication time corresponding to a mixture of states. Early and mid-replicating sequences interact with each other and not with late sequences, but early regions are more accessible than mid regions. The replication timing program in Arabidopsis reflects a bipartite genomic organization with early/mid-replicating regions and late regions forming separate, noninteracting compartments. The temporal order of DNA replication within the early/mid compartment may be modulated largely by chromatin accessibility.

Replication timing program: !predicts! Genomic features
Replication timing program: !regulated by! Chromatin organization
Early/mid-replicating regions: !interact with! Each other
Early/mid-replicating regions: !not interact with! Late regions
Early regions: !more accessible than! Mid regions
Chromatin states: !mixed in! Different replication times