['29300997', 'UDP-xylose (UDP-Xyl) is synthesized by UDP-glucuronic acid decarboxylases, also  termed UDP-Xyl synthases (UXSs). The Arabidopsis genome encodes six UXSs, which  fall into two groups based upon their subcellular location: the Golgi lumen and  the cytosol. The latter group appears to play an important role in xylan  biosynthesis. Cytosolic UDP-Xyl is transported into the Golgi lumen by three  UDP-Xyl transporters (UXT1, 2, and 3). However, while single mutants affected in  the UDP-Xyl transporter 1 (UXT1) showed a substantial reduction in cell wall  xylose content, a double mutant affected in UXT2 and UXT3 had no obvious effect  on cell wall xylose deposition. This prompted us to further investigate  redundancy among the members of the UXT family. Multiple uxt mutants were  generated, including a triple mutant, which exhibited collapsed vessels and  reduced cell wall thickness in interfascicular fiber cells. Monosaccharide  composition, molecular weight, nuclear magnetic resonance, and immunolabeling  studies demonstrated that both xylan biosynthesis (content) and fine structure  were significantly affected in the uxt triple mutant, leading to phenotypes  resembling those of the irx mutants. Pollination was also impaired in the uxt  triple mutant, likely due to reduced filament growth and anther dehiscence caused  by alterations in the composition of the cell walls. Moreover, analysis of the  nucleotide sugar composition of the uxt mutants indicated that nucleotide sugar  interconversion is influenced by the cytosolic UDP-Xyl pool within the cell.  Taken together, our results underpin the physiological roles of the UXT family in  xylan biosynthesis and provide novel insights into the nucleotide sugar  metabolism and trafficking in plants.', '2018 Feb 23', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erx448', 'Wu']

UDP-Xyl synthases: !synthesize! UDP-xylose 
UXT1, 2, 3: !transport! UDP-Xyl 
UXT family: !influences! xylan biosynthesis 
UXT family: !affects! fine structure 
UXT family: !impairs! pollination 
UXT family: !influences! nucleotide sugar interconversion