['29311272', 'The controlled distribution of sugars between assimilate-exporting source tissues  and sugar-consuming sink tissues is a key element for plant growth and  development. Monosaccharide transporters of the SUGAR TRANSPORT PROTEIN (STP)  family contribute to the uptake of sugars into sink cells. Here, we report on the  characterization of STP7, STP8, and STP12, three previously uncharacterized  members of this family in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Heterologous  expression in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) revealed that STP8 and STP12  catalyze the high-affinity proton-dependent uptake of glucose and also accept  galactose and mannose. STP12 additionally transports xylose. STP8 and STP12 are  highly expressed in reproductive organs, where their protein products might  contribute to sugar uptake into the pollen tube and the embryo sac. stp8.1 and  stp12.1 T-DNA insertion lines developed normally, which may point toward  functional redundancy with other STPs. In contrast to all other STPs, STP7 does  not transport hexoses but is specific for the pentoses l-arabinose and d-xylose.  STP7-promoter-reporter gene plants showed an expression of STP7 especially in  tissues with high cell wall turnover, indicating that STP7 might contribute to  the uptake and recycling of cell wall sugars. Uptake analyses with radioactive  l-arabinose revealed that 11 other STPs are able to transport l-arabinose with  high affinity. Hence, functional redundancy might explain the missing-mutant  phenotype of two stp7 T-DNA insertion lines. Together, these data complete the  characterization of the STP family and present the STPs as new l-arabinose  transporters for potential biotechnological applications.', '2018 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01493', 'ORCID:']

STP7: !transports! l-arabinose
STP8: !transports! glucose, galactose, mannose
STP12: !transports! glucose, galactose, mannose, xylose
STP8/12: !highly expressed in! reproductive organs
STP7: !expressed in! tissues with high cell wall turnover
STP7/8/12: !contribute to! sugar uptake into sink cells
STPs: !redundant for! l-arabinose transport