['29312414', 'Calcium ions are used as ubiquitous, key second messengers in cells across  eukaryotic taxa. In plants, calcium signal transduction is involved in a wide  range of cellular processes from abiotic and biotic stress responses to  development and growth. Calcium signals are detected by calcium sensor proteins,  of which calmodulin (CaM), is the most evolutionarily conserved and well-studied.  These sensors regulate downstream targets to propagate the information in  signaling pathways. Plants possess a large family of calcium sensors related to  CaM, termed CaM-like (CMLs), that are not found in animals and remain largely  unstudied at the structural and functional level. Here, we investigated the  biochemical properties and gene promoter activity of two closely related members  of the Arabidopsis CML family, CML15 and CML16. Biochemical characterization of  recombinant CML15 and CML16 indicated that they possess properties consistent  with their predicted roles as calcium sensors. In the absence of calcium, CML15  and CML16 display greater intrinsic hydrophobicity than CaM. Both CMLs displayed  calcium-dependent and magnesium-independent conformational changes that expose  hydrophobic residues, but the degree of hydrophobic exposure was markedly less  than that observed for CaM. Isothermal titration calorimetry indicated two and  three calcium-binding sites for CML15 and CML16, respectively, with affinities  expected to be within a physiological range. Both CML15 and CML16 bound calcium  with high affinity in the presence of excess magnesium. Promoter-reporter  analysis demonstrated that the CML16 promoter is active across a range of  Arabidopsis tissues and developmental stages, whereas the CML15 promoter activity  is very restricted and was observed only in floral tissues, specifically anthers  and pollen. Collectively, our data indicate that these CMLs behave biochemically  like calcium sensors but with properties distinct from CaM and likely have  non-overlapping roles in floral development. We discuss our findings in the  broader context of calcium sensors and signaling in Arabidopsis.', '2017', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2017.02175', 'Snedden']

Calcium ions: !used as! second messengers 
Calmodulin (CaM): !related to! CMLs 
CML15/16: !bind! calcium 
CML15/16: !expose! hydrophobic residues 
CML15/16: !have! distinct properties from CaM 
CML16: !active in! range of Arabidopsis tissues 
CML15: !active in! floral tissues