Some soil fungi in the Leotiomycetes form ericoid mycorrhizal (ERM) symbioses with Ericaceae. In the harsh habitats in which they occur, ERM plant survival relies on nutrient mobilization from soil organic matter (SOM) by their fungal partners. The characterization of the fungal genetic machinery underpinning both the symbiotic lifestyle and SOM degradation is needed to understand ERM symbiosis functioning and evolution, and its impact on soil carbon (C) turnover. We sequenced the genomes of the ERM fungi Meliniomyces bicolor, M. variabilis, Oidiodendron maius and Rhizoscyphus ericae, and compared their gene repertoires with those of fungi with different lifestyles (ecto- and orchid mycorrhiza, endophytes, saprotrophs, pathogens). We also identified fungal transcripts induced in symbiosis. The ERM fungal gene contents for polysaccharide-degrading enzymes, lipases, proteases and enzymes involved in secondary metabolism are closer to those of saprotrophs and pathogens than to those of ectomycorrhizal symbionts. The fungal genes most highly upregulated in symbiosis are those coding for fungal and plant cell wall-degrading enzymes (CWDEs), lipases, proteases, transporters and mycorrhiza-induced small secreted proteins (MiSSPs). The ERM fungal gene repertoire reveals a capacity for a dual saprotrophic and biotrophic lifestyle. This may reflect an incomplete transition from saprotrophy to the mycorrhizal habit, or a versatile life strategy similar to fungal endophytes.

Meliniomyces bicolor: !has gene repertoire! closer to saprotrophs and pathogens
M. variabilis: !has gene repertoire! closer to saprotrophs and pathogens
Oidiodendron maius: !has gene repertoire! closer to saprotrophs and pathogens
Rhizoscyphus ericae: !has gene repertoire! closer to saprotrophs and pathogens
ERM fungi: !have genes! for polysaccharide-degrading enzymes
ERM fungi: !have genes! for lipases
ERM fungi: !have genes! for proteases
ERM fungi: !have genes! for enzymes involved in secondary metabolism
ERM fungi: !have genes! for fungal and plant cell wall-degrading enzymes
ERM fungi: !have genes! for transporters
ERM fungi: !have genes! for mycorrhiza-induced small secreted proteins