['29320478', 'The cells of multicellular organisms receive extracellular signals using surface  receptors. The extracellular domains (ECDs) of cell surface receptors function as  interaction platforms, and as regulatory modules of receptor activation.  Understanding how interactions between ECDs produce signal-competent receptor  complexes is challenging because of their low biochemical tractability. In  plants, the discovery of ECD interactions is complicated by the massive expansion  of receptor families, which creates tremendous potential for changeover in  receptor interactions. The largest of these families in Arabidopsis thaliana  consists of 225 evolutionarily related leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases  (LRR-RKs), which function in the sensing of microorganisms, cell expansion,  stomata development and stem-cell maintenance. Although the principles that  govern LRR-RK signalling activation are emerging, the systems-level organization  of this family of proteins is unknown. Here, to address this, we investigated  40,000 potential ECD interactions using a sensitized high-throughput interaction  assay, and produced an LRR-based cell surface interaction network (CSI(LRR)) that  consists of 567 interactions. To demonstrate the power of CSI(LRR) for detecting  biologically relevant interactions, we predicted and validated the functions of  uncharacterized LRR-RKs in plant growth and immunity. In addition, we show that  CSI(LRR) operates as a unified regulatory network in which the LRR-RKs most  crucial for its overall structure are required to prevent the aberrant signalling  of receptors that are several network-steps away. Thus, plants have evolved  LRR-RK networks to process extracellular signals into carefully balanced  responses.', '2018 Jan 18', 'Nature', '10.1038/nature25184', 'Belkhadir']

Cell surface receptors: !receive! extracellular signals 
ECDs: !function as! interaction platforms 
LRR-RKs: !sense! microorganisms 
LRR-RKs: !control! cell expansion 
LRR-RKs: !regulate! stomata development 
LRR-RKs: !maintain! stem-cell maintenance 
CSI(LRR): !predicts! functions of uncharacterized LRR-RKs 
CSI(LRR): !prevents! aberrant signalling