Plant root cell walls are dynamic systems that serve as the first plant compartment responsive to soil conditions, such as phosphorus (P) deficiency. To date, evidence for the regulation of root cell wall proteins (CWPs) by P deficiency remains sparse. In order to gain a better understanding of the roles played by CWPs in the roots of soybean (Glycine max) in adaptation to P deficiency, we conducted an iTRAQ (isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation) proteomic analysis. A total of 53 CWPs with differential accumulation in response to P deficiency were identified. Subsequent qRT-PCR analysis correlated the accumulation of 21 of the 27 up-regulated proteins, and eight of the 26 down-regulated proteins with corresponding gene expression patterns in response to P deficiency. One up-regulated CWP, purple acid phosphatase 1-like (GmPAP1-like), was functionally characterized. Phaseolus vulgaris transgenic hairy roots overexpressing GmPAP1-like displayed an increase in root-associated acid phosphatase activity. In addition, relative growth and P content were significantly enhanced in GmPAP1-like overexpressing lines compared to control lines when deoxy-ribonucleotide triphosphate (dNTP) was applied as the sole external P source. Taken together, the results suggest that the modulation of CWPs may regulate complex changes in the root system in response to P deficiency, and that the cell wall-localized GmPAP1-like protein is involved in extracellular dNTP utilization in soybean.

P deficiency: !affects! CWPs 
CWPs: !accumulate differently in response to! P deficiency 
iTRAQ proteomic analysis: !identifies! 53 CWPs 
qRT-PCR analysis: !correlates! 21 up-regulated proteins & 8 down-regulated proteins 
GmPAP1-like: !up-regulated! in response to P deficiency 
GmPAP1-like: !localizes to! cell wall 
GmPAP1-like overexpressing lines: !enhance! root-associated acid phosphatase activity 
GmPAP1-like overexpressing lines: !increase! relative growth & P content 
GmPAP1-like: !involved in! extracellular dNTP utilization