It is predicted that climate change may increase the risk of local droughts, with severe consequences for agricultural practices. Here we report the influence of drought on alfalfa yields and nutritional composition, based on artificially induced drought conditions during two field experiments. Two types of alfalfa cultivars were compared, Gold Queen and Suntory. The severity and timing of drought periods were varied, and the crop was harvested either early during flowering, or late at full bloom. The obtained dry mass yields of Gold Queen were higher than Suntory, and the first was also more resistant to drought. Early harvest resulted in higher yields. Decreases in yields due to water shortage were observed with both cultivars, and the fraction of crude protein (CP) decreased as a result of drought stress; this fraction was higher in Gold Queen than in Suntory and higher in early harvest compared to late harvest. Severe drought late in spring had the highest effect on CP content. The fraction of fibre, split up into neutral detergent fibre (NDF) and acid detergent fibre (ADF) increased as a result of drought and was lower in early compared to late harvested plants. Suntory alfalfa produced higher fibre fractions than Gold Queen. The fraction of water-soluble carbohydrates (WSC) was least affected by drought. It was consistently higher in Gold Queen compared to Suntory alfalfa, and late harvest resulted in higher WSC content. In combination, these results suggest that the nutritive value of alfalfa will likely decrease after a period of drought. These effects can be partly overcome by choosing the Gold Queen cultivar over Suntory, by targeted irrigation, in particular in late spring, and by harvesting at an earlier time.

Gold Queen: !higher yields than! Suntory
Gold Queen: !more resistant to! drought
Early harvest: !higher yields than! late harvest
Drought: !decreases! CP content
Gold Queen: !higher CP than! Suntory
Early harvest: !lower fibre than! late harvest
Suntory: !higher fibre than! Gold Queen
WSC: !higher in! Gold Queen
Late harvest: !higher WSC than! early harvest