['29348141', 'Cellulases, hemicellulases, and pectinases play important roles in fruit  development and maturation. Although mutants with defects in these processes have  not been reported for cellulase or hemicellulase genes, the pectinases  ARABIDOPSIS DEHISCENCE ZONE POLYGALACTURONASE1 (ADPG1) and ADPG2 were previously  shown to be essential for silique dehiscence in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana). Here, we demonstrate that the cellulase gene CELLULASE6 (CEL6) and the  hemicellulase gene MANNANASE7 (MAN7) function in the development and dehiscence  of Arabidopsis siliques. We found that these genes were expressed in both  vegetative and reproductive organs and that their expression in the silique  partially depended on the INDEHISCENT and ALCATRAZ transcription factors. Cell  differentiation was delayed in the dehiscence zone of cel6 and man7 mutant  siliques at early flower development stage 17, and a comparison of the  spatio-temporal patterns of CEL6 and MAN7 expression with the locations of  delayed cell differentiation in the cel6 and man7 mutants revealed that CEL6 and  MAN7 likely indirectly affect the timing of cell differentiation in the silique  valve at this stage. CEL6 and MAN7 were also found to promote cell degeneration  in the separation layer in nearly mature siliques, as cells in this layer  remained intact in the cel6 and man7 mutants and the cel6-1 man7-3 double mutant,  whereas they degenerated in the wild-type control. Phenotypic studies of single,  double, triple, and quadruple mutants revealed that higher-order mutant  combinations of cel6-1, man7-3, and adpg1-1 and adpg2-1 produced more severe  silique indehiscent phenotypes than the corresponding lower-order mutant  combinations, except for some combinations involving cel6-1, man7-3, and adpg2-1  Our results demonstrate that the ability of the silique to dehisce can be  manipulated to different degrees by altering the activities of various cell  wall-modifying enzymes.', '2018 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01494', 'Wu']

CEL6: !affects! Cell differentiation 
MAN7: !affects! Cell differentiation 
CEL6: !promotes! Cell degeneration 
MAN7: !promotes! Cell degeneration 
ADPG1: !essential for! Silique dehiscence 
ADPG2: !essential for! Silique dehiscence 
INDEHISCENT: !regulates! CEL6 expression 
ALCATRAZ: !regulates! MAN7 expression