RING (Really Interesting New Gene) finger proteins play crucial roles in abiotic stress responses in plants. We report the RING finger E3 ligase gene, an Oryza sativa salt, ABA and drought stress-induced RING finger protein 1 gene (OsSADR1). We demonstrated that although OsSAR1 possesses E3 ligase activity, a single amino acid substitution (OsSADR1C168A) in the RING domain resulted in no E3 ligase activity, suggesting that the activity of most E3s is specified by the RING domain. Additional assays substantiated that OsSADR1 interacts with three substrates-no E3 ligase acti and OsPIRIN, and mediates their proteolysis via the 26S proteasome pathway. For OsSADR1, approximately 62% of the transient signals were in the cytosol and 38% in the nucleus. However, transiently expressed OsSADR1 was primarily expressed in the nucleus (70%) in 200 mM salt-treated rice protoplasts. The two nucleus-localized proteins (OsSNAC2 and OsGRAS44) interacted with OsSADR1 in the cytosol and nucleus. Heterogeneous overexpression of OsSADR1 in Arabidopsis resulted in sensitive phenotypes for salt- and mannitol-responsive seed germination and seedling growth. With ABA, OsSADR1 overexpression in plants produced highly tolerant phenotypes, with morphological changes in root length and stomatal closure. The ABA-tolerant transgenic plants also showed hypersensitivity phenotypes under severe water deficit conditions. Taken together, OsSADR1 may act as a regulator in abiotic stress responses by modulating target protein levels.

OsSADR1: !possesses! E3 ligase activity 
OsSADR1: !interacts with! OsPIRIN, OsSNAC2, OsGRAS44 
OsSADR1: !localizes to! cytosol, nucleus 
OsSADR1: !mediates! proteolysis via 26S proteasome pathway 
OsSADR1: !enhances! salt- and mannitol-responsive seed germination 
OsSADR1: !enhances! seedling growth 
OsSADR1: !enhances! ABA-tolerant phenotypes 
OsSADR1: !enhances! morphological changes in root length 
OsSADR1: !enhances! stomatal closure 
OsSADR1: !enhances! hypersensitivity phenotypes under water deficit