Yields of grain legumes are constrained by available water. Thus, it is crucial to understand traits influencing water uptake and the efficiency of using water to produce biomass. Global comparisons and comparisons at specific locations reveal that water use of different grain legumes is very similar, which indicates that water use efficiency varies over a wide range due to differences in biomass and yield. Moreover, yield increases more per millimetre of water used in cool season grain legumes than warm season species. Although greater contrasts have been observed across species and genotypes at the pot and lysimeter level, agronomic factors need to be taken into account when scaling those studies to field-level responses. Conservative water use strategies in grain legumes such as low stomatal conductance as approximated by low photosynthetic carbon isotope discrimination reduces yield potential, whereas temporal adjustments of stomatal conductance within the growing season and in response to environmental factors (such as vapour pressure deficit) helps to optimize the trade-off between carbon gain and water loss. Furthermore, improved photosynthetic capacity, reduced mesophyll conductance, reduced boundary layer, and re-fixation of respired CO2 were identified as traits that are beneficial without water deficit, but also under terminal and transient drought. Genotypic variability in some grain legume species has been observed for several traits that influence water use, water use efficiency, and yield, including root length and the temporal pattern of water use, but even more variation is expected from wild relatives. Albeit that N2 fixation decreases under drought, its impact on water use is still largely unknown, but the nitrogen source influences gas exchange and, thus, transpiration efficiency. This review concludes that conservative traits are needed under conditions of terminal drought to help maintain soil moisture until the pod-filling period, but profligate traits, if tightly regulated, are important under conditions of transient drought in order to profit from short intermittent periods of available soil moisture.

water: !affects! yield
traits: !influence! water uptake
species: !vary in! water use efficiency
stomatal conductance: !regulates! trade-off between carbon gain and water loss
photosynthetic capacity: !enhances! water use efficiency
root length: !varies in! genotypes
N2 fixation: !impacts! gas exchange