['29382692', 'Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) REI1-LIKE (REIL) proteins, REIL1 and REIL2,  are homologs of a yeast ribosome biogenesis factor that participates in late  cytoplasmic 60S ribosomal subunit maturation. Here, we report that the inhibited  growth of the reil1-1 reil2-1 mutant at 10 degrees C can be rescued by the expression of  amino-terminal FLUORESCENT PROTEIN (FP)-REIL fusions driven by the UBIQUITIN10  promoter, allowing the analysis of REIL function in planta. Arabidopsis REIL1  appears to be functionally conserved, based on the cytosolic localization of  FP-REIL1 and the interaction of native REIL1 with the 60S subunit in wild-type  plants. In contrast to its yeast homologs, REIL1 also was present in translating  ribosome fractions. Systems analysis revealed that wild-type Arabidopsis remodels  the cytosolic translation machinery when grown at 10 degrees C by accumulating cytosolic  ribosome subunits and inducing the expression of cytosolic ribosomal RNA,  ribosomal genes, ribosome biogenesis factors, and translation initiation or  elongation factors. In the reil1-1 reil2-1 mutant, all processes associated with  inhibited growth were delayed, although the plants maintained cellular integrity  or acquired freezing tolerance. REIL proteins also were implicated in  plant-specific processes: nonacclimated reil1-1 reil2-1 exhibited  cold-acclimation responses, including activation of the DREB/CBF regulon. In  addition, acclimated reil1-1 reil2-1 plants failed to activate FLOWERING LOCUS T  expression in mature leaves. Therefore, in the wild type, REIL function may  contribute to temperature perception by suppressing premature cold responses  during growth at nonstressful temperatures. In conclusion, we suggest that  Arabidopsis REIL proteins influence cold-induced plant ribosome remodeling and  enhance the accumulation of cytosolic ribosome subunits after cold shift either  by de novo synthesis or by recycling them from the translating ribosome fraction.', '2018 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.01448', 'ORCID:']

REIL1: !localizes to! cytosol 
REIL1: !interacts with! 60S subunit 
REIL1: !synthesizes! ribosome subunits 
REIL1: !enhances! cold-induced plant ribosome remodeling 
REIL1: !represses! premature cold responses