['29382740', 'The pantothenate (vitamin B(5)) synthesis pathway in plants is not fully defined  because the subcellular site of its ketopantoate --> pantoate reduction step is  unclear. However, the pathway is known to be split between cytosol, mitochondria,  and potentially plastids, and inferred to involve mitochondrial or plastidial  transport of ketopantoate or pantoate. No proteins that mediate these transport  steps have been identified. Comparative genomic and transcriptomic analyses  identified Arabidopsis thaliana BASS1 (At1g78560) and its maize (Zea mays)  ortholog as candidates for such a transport role. BASS1 proteins belong to the  bile acid : sodium symporter family and share similarity with the Salmonella  enterica PanS pantoate/ketopantoate transporter and with predicted bacterial  transporters whose genes cluster on the chromosome with pantothenate synthesis  genes. Furthermore, Arabidopsis BASS1 is co-expressed with genes related to  metabolism of coenzyme A, the cofactor derived from pantothenate. Expression of  Arabidopsis or maize BASS1 promoted the growth of a S. enterica panB panS mutant  strain when pantoate, but not ketopantoate, was supplied, and increased the rate  of [(3)H]pantoate uptake. Subcellular localization of green fluorescent protein  fusions in Nicotiana tabacum BY-2 cells demonstrated that Arabidopsis BASS1 is  targeted solely to the plastid inner envelope. Two independent Arabidopsis BASS1  knockout mutants accumulated pantoate  approximately 10-fold in leaves and had smaller seeds.  Taken together, these data indicate that BASS1 is a physiologically significant  plastidial pantoate transporter and that the pantoate reduction step in  pantothenate biosynthesis could be at least partly localized in plastids.', '2018 Feb 28', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BCJ20170883', 'ORCID:']

BASS1: !belongs to! bile acid : sodium symporter family 
BASS1: !shares similarity with! Salmonella enterica PanS pantoate/ketopantoate transporter 
BASS1: !co-expressed with! genes related to metabolism of coenzyme A 
BASS1: !targeted to! plastid inner envelope 
Arabidopsis BASS1: !promotes growth of! S. enterica panB panS mutant strain 
Arabidopsis BASS1: !increases rate of! [(3)H]pantoate uptake 
Arabidopsis BASS1: !accumulates! pantoate approximately 10-fold in leaves 
Arabidopsis BASS1: !results in! smaller seeds