Common wheat is a typical allohexaploid species (AABBDD) derived from the interspecific crossing between allotetraploid wheat (AABB) and Aegilops tauschii (DD). Wide variation in grain size and shape observed among Aegilops tauschii can be retained in synthetic allohexaploid wheats, but the underlying mechanism remains enigmatic. Here, the natural and resynthesized allohexaploid wheats with near-identical AB genomes and different D genomes (TAA10 and XX329) were employed for analysis. Significant differences in grain size and weight between TAA10 and XX329 were observed at the early stages of development, which could be mainly attributed to the higher growth rates of the pericarp and endosperm cells in XX329 compared to TAA10. Furthermore, comparative transcriptome analysis identified that 8891 of 69,711 unigenes (12.75%) were differentially expressed between grains at 6 days after pollination (DAP) of TAA10 and XX329, including 5314 up-regulated and 3577 down-regulated genes in XX329 compared to TAA10. The MapMan functional annotation and enrichment analysis revealed that the differentially expressed genes were significantly enriched in categories of cell wall, carbohydrate and hormone metabolism. Notably, consistent with the up-regulation of sucrose synthase genes in resynthesized relative to natural allohexaploid wheat, the resynthesized allohexaploid wheat accumulated much higher contents of glucose and fructose in 6-DAP grains than those of the natural allohexaploid wheat. These data indicated that the genetic variation of the D genome induced drastic alterations of gene expression in grains of the natural and resynthesized allohexaploid wheats, which may contribute to the observed differences in grain size and weight.

D genome: !induces! alteration of gene expression 
grain size/weight: !differs between! TAA10 and XX329 
cell wall: !enriched in! differentially expressed genes 
carbohydrate/hormone metabolism: !enriched in! differentially expressed genes 
sucrose synthase genes: !up-regulated in! resynthesized allohexaploid wheat 
glucose/fructose: !accumulated more in! resynthesized allohexaploid wheat