Phytophthora spp. cause devastating disease epidemics on important crop plants and pose a grave threat to global crop production. Critically, Phytophthora pathogens represent a distinct evolutionary lineage in which pathogenicity has been acquired independently. Therefore, there is an urgent need to understand and disrupt the processes that drive infection if we aspire to defeat oomycete pathogens in the field. One area that has received little attention thus far in this respect is the regulation of Phytophthora gene expression during infection. Here, we characterize PcNMRAL1 (Phyca11_505845), a homolog of the Aspergillus nidulans nitrogen metabolite repression regulator NMRA and demonstrate a role for this protein in progression of the Phytophthora capsici infection cycle. PcNmrAL1 is coexpressed with the biotrophic marker gene PcHmp1 (haustorial membrane protein 1) and, when overexpressed, extends the biotrophic infection stage. Microarray analyses revealed that PcNmrAL1 overexpression in P. capsici leads to large-scale transcriptional changes during infection and in vitro. Importantly, detailed analysis reveals that PcNmrAL1 overexpression induces biotrophy-associated genes while repressing those associated with necrotrophy. In addition to factors controlling transcription, translation, and nitrogen metabolism, PcNMRAL1 helps regulate the expression of a considerable effector repertoire in P. capsici. Our data suggests that PcNMRAL1 is a transcriptional regulator that mediates the biotrophy to necrotrophy transition. PcNMRAL1 represents a novel factor that may drive the Phytophthora disease cycle on crops. This study provides the first insight into mechanisms that regulate infection-related processes in Phytophthora spp. and provides a platform for further studies aimed at disabling pathogenesis and preventing crop losses.

PcNmrAL1: !extends! biotrophic infection stage
PcNmrAL1: !induces! biotrophy-associated genes
PcNmrAL1: !represses! necrotrophy-associated genes
PcNmrAL1: !regulates! transcription, translation, and nitrogen metabolism
PcNmrAL1: !regulates! effector repertoire