The aerial parts of terrestrial plants are covered with hydrophobic wax layers, which represent the primary barrier between plant cells and the environment and act to protect plants from abiotic and biotic stresses. Although total wax loads are precisely regulated in an environmental- or organ-specific manner, regulatory mechanisms underlying cuticular wax biosynthesis remain largely unknown. In this study, we characterized DEWAX2 (DECREASE WAX BIOSYNTHESIS2) which encodes an APETALA 2 (AP2)/ethylene response element-binding factor (ERF)-type transcription factor and is predominantly expressed in young seedlings, and rosette and cauline leaves. Total wax loads increased by approximately 12% and 16% in rosette and cauline leaves of dewax2, respectively, but were not significantly altered in the stems of dewax2 relative to the wild type (WT). The excess wax phenotype of dewax2 leaves was rescued upon expression of DEWAX2 driven by its own promoter. Overexpression of DEWAX2 decreased total wax loads by approximately 15% and 26% in the stems and rosette leaves compared with those of the WT, respectively. DEWAX2:eYFP (enhanced yellow fluorescent protein) was localized to the nucleus in Arabidopsis roots and hypocotyls. DEWAX2 possessed transcriptional repression activity in tobacco protoplasts. Transcriptome and quantitative real-time PCR analyses showed that the transcript levels of CER1, ACLA2, LACS1, LACS2 and KCS12 were down-regulated in DEWAX2 overexpression lines compared with the WT. Transient transcriptional assays showed that DEWAX2 represses the expression of its putative target genes. Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR revealed that DEWAX2 binds directly to the GCC motifs of the LACS1, LACS2, KCS12 and CER1 promoters. These results suggest that DEWAX2-mediated transcriptional repression may contribute to the total wax load in Arabidopsis leaves.

DEWAX2: !enhances! Total Wax Loads 
DEWAX2: !localizes to! Nucleus 
DEWAX2: !represses! CER1 
DEWAX2: !represses! ACLA2 
DEWAX2: !represses! LACS1 
DEWAX2: !represses! LACS2 
DEWAX2: !represses! KCS12 
DEWAX2: !binds directly to! GCC Motifs