['29438088', 'Salicylic acid (SA) is a major defense signal in plants. In Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana), the chloroplast-localized isochorismate pathway is the  main source of SA biosynthesis during abiotic stress or pathogen infections. In  the first step of the pathway, the enzyme ISOCHORISMATE SYNTHASE1 (ICS1) converts  chorismate to isochorismate. An unknown enzyme subsequently converts  isochorismate to SA. Here, we show that ICS1 protein levels increase during UV-C  stress. To identify proteins that may play roles in SA production by regulating  ICS1, we analyzed proteins that coimmunoprecipitated with ICS1 via mass  spectrometry. The ICS1 complexes contained a large number of peptides from the  PROHIBITIN (PHB) protein family, with PHB3 the most abundant. PHB proteins have  diverse biological functions that include acting as scaffolds for protein complex  formation and stabilization. PHB3 was reported previously to localize to  mitochondria. Using fractionation, protease protection, and live imaging, we show  that PHB3 also localizes to chloroplasts, where ICS1 resides. Notably, loss of  PHB3 function led to decreased ICS1 protein levels in response to UV-C stress.  However, ICS1 transcript levels remain unchanged, indicating that ICS1 is  regulated posttranscriptionally. The phb3 mutant displayed reduced levels of SA,  the SA-regulated protein PR1, and hypersensitive cell death in response to UV-C  and avirulent strains of Pseudomonas syringae and, correspondingly, supported  increased growth of P. syringae The expression of a PHB3 transgene in the phb3  mutant complemented all of these phenotypes. We suggest a model in which the  formation of PHB3-ICS1 complexes stabilizes ICS1 to promote SA production in  response to stress.', '2018 Mar', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.17.00941', 'ORCID:']

ICS1: !synthesizes! Isochorismate 
PHB3: !localizes to! Chloroplasts 
PHB3: !interacts with! ICS1 
PHB3: !enhances! ICS1 protein levels 
PHB3: !represses! Hypersensitive cell death 
PHB3: !affects! SA production