The sessile lifestyle of higher plants is accompanied by their remarkable ability to tolerate unfavorable environmental conditions. This is because, during evolution, plants developed a sophisticated repertoire of molecular and metabolic reactions to cope with changing biotic and abiotic challenges. In particular, the abiotic factors light intensity and ambient temperature are characterized by altering their amplitude within comparably short periods of time and are causative for onset of dynamic plant responses. These rapid responses in plants are also classified as 'acclimation reactions' which differ, due to their reversibility and duration, from non-reversible 'adaptation reactions'. In this review, we demonstrate the remarkable importance of stress-induced changes in carbohydrate homeostasis of plants exposed to high light or low temperatures. These changes represent a co-ordinated process comprising modifications of (i) the concentrations of selected sugars; (ii) starch turnover; (iii) intracellular sugar compartmentation; and (iv) corresponding gene expression patterns. The critical importance of these individual processes has been underlined in the recent past by the analyses of a large number of mutant plants. The outcome of these analyses raised our understanding of acclimation processes in plants per se but might even become instrumental to develop new concepts for directed breeding approaches with the aim to increase abiotic stress tolerance of crop species, which in most cases have high stress sensitivity. The latter direction of plant research is of special importance since abiotic stress stimuli strongly impact on crop productivity and are expected to become even more pronounced because of human activities which alter environmental conditions rapidly.

light intensity: !alters! amplitude 
low temperatures: !causes! dynamic plant responses 
carbohydrate homeostasis: !modifies! concentrations of selected sugars 
starch turnover: !modifies! intracellular sugar compartmentation 
mutant plants: !underlines! importance of individual processes 
directed breeding approaches: !aims to increase! abiotic stress tolerance 
human activities: !alter! environmental conditions