N-terminal myristoylation, a major eukaryotic protein lipid modification, is difficult to detect in vivo and challenging to predict in silico. We developed a proteomics strategy involving subfractionation of cellular membranes, combined with separation of hydrophobic peptides by mass spectrometry-coupled liquid chromatography to identify the <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> myristoylated proteome. This approach identified a starting pool of 8837 proteins in all analyzed cellular fractions, comprising 32% of the Arabidopsis proteome. Of these, 906 proteins contain an N-terminal Gly at position 2, a prerequisite for myristoylation, and 214 belong to the predicted myristoylome (comprising 51% of the predicted myristoylome of 421 proteins). We further show direct evidence of myristoylation in 72 proteins; 18 of these myristoylated proteins were not previously predicted. We found one myristoylation site downstream of a predicted initiation codon, indicating that posttranslational myristoylation occurs in plants. Over half of the identified proteins could be quantified and assigned to a subcellular compartment. Hierarchical clustering of protein accumulation combined with myristoylation and <i>S</i>-acylation data revealed that N-terminal double acylation influences redirection to the plasma membrane. In a few cases, MYR function extended beyond simple membrane association. This study identified hundreds of <i>N</i>-acylated proteins for which lipid modifications could control protein localization and expand protein function.

N-terminal myristoylation: !difficult to detect! in vivo 
N-terminal myristoylation: !challenging to predict! in silico 
proteomics strategy: !identifies! Arabidopsis thaliana myristoylated proteome 
Gly at position 2: !prerequisite for! myristoylation 
direct evidence of myristoylation: !found in! 72 proteins 
myristoylation site: !downstream of! predicted initiation codon 
N-terminal double acylation: !influences! redirection to plasma membrane 
MYR function: !extends beyond! simple membrane association