Glutathione peroxidases (GPXs) are redox sensor proteins that maintain a steady-state of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> in plant cells. They exhibit distinct sub-cellular localization and have diverse functionality in response to different stimuli. In this study, a total of 14 TaGPX genes and three splice variants were identified in the genome of Triticum aestivum and evaluated for various physicochemical properties. The TaGPX genes were scattered on the various chromosomes of the A, B, and D sub-genomes and clustered into five homeologous groups based on high sequence homology. The majority of genes were derived from the B sub-genome and localized on chromosome 2. The intron-exon organization, motif and domain architecture, and phylogenetic analyses revealed the conserved nature of TaGPXs. The occurrence of both development-related and stress-responsive cis-acting elements in the promoter region, the differential expression of these genes during various developmental stages, and the modulation of expression in the presence of biotic and abiotic stresses suggested their diverse role in T. aestivum. The majority of TaGPX genes showed higher expression in various leaf developmental stages. However, TaGPX1-A1 was upregulated in the presence of each abiotic stress treatment. A co-expression analysis revealed the interaction of TaGPXs with numerous development and stress-related genes, which indicated their vital role in numerous biological processes. Our study revealed the opportunities for further characterization of individual TaGPX proteins, which might be useful in designing future crop improvement strategies.

TaGPX genes: !scattered on! A, B, and D sub-genomes 
TaGPX genes: !clustered into! five homeologous groups 
TaGPX genes: !localized on! chromosome 2 
TaGPX genes: !occur with! development-related and stress-responsive cis-acting elements 
TaGPX genes: !differentially expressed! during various developmental stages 
TaGPX genes: !modulated in! presence of biotic and abiotic stresses 
TaGPX genes: !higher expression! in various leaf developmental stages 
TaGPX1-A1: !upregulated in! presence of each abiotic stress treatment 
TaGPXs: !interact with! numerous development and stress-related genes