['29490083', 'In Arabidopsis thaliana, cyanide is produced concomitantly with ethylene  biosynthesis and is mainly detoxified by the ss-cyanoalanine synthase CAS-C1. In  roots, CAS-C1 activity is essential to maintain a low level of cyanide for proper  root hair development. Root hair elongation relies on polarized cell expansion at  the growing tip, and we have observed that CAS-C1 locates in mitochondria and  accumulates in root hair tips during root hair elongation, as shown by observing  the fluorescence in plants transformed with the translational construct  ProC1:CASC1-GFP, containing the complete CAS-C1 gene fused to green fluorescent  protein (GFP). Mutants in the SUPERCENTIPEDE (SCN1) gene, that regulate the NADPH  oxidase gene ROOT HAIR DEFECTIVE 2 (RHD2)/AtrbohC, are affected at the very early  steps of the development of root hair that do not elongate and do not show a  preferential localization of the GFP accumulation in the tips of the root hair  primordia. Root hairs of mutants in CAS-C1 or RHD2/AtrbohC, whose protein product  catalyzes the generation of ROS and the Ca2+ gradient, start to grow out  correctly, but they do not elongate. Genetic crosses between the cas-c1 mutant  and scn1 or rhd2 mutants were performed, and the detailed phenotypic and  molecular characterization of the double mutants demonstrates that scn1 mutation  is epistatic to cas-c1 and cas-c1 is epistatic to rhd2 mutation, indicating that  CAS-C1 acts in early steps of the root hair development process. Moreover, our  results show that the role of CAS-C1 in root hair elongation is independent of  H2O2 production and of a direct NADPH oxidase inhibition by cyanide.', '2018 May 1', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcy047', 'Garcia']

CAS-C1: !localizes to! mitochondria 
CAS-C1: !essential for! root hair development 
ProC1:CASC1-GFP: !observed in! root hair tips 
SCN1: !regulates! RHD2/AtrbohC 
cas-c1: !epistatic to! scn1 
scn1: !epistatic to! cas-c1 
cas-c1: !epistatic to! rhd2 
CAS-C1: !independent of! H2O2 production 
CAS-C1: !independent of! NADPH oxidase inhibition