Transcriptome analysis was carried out for wheat seedlings and spikes from hybrid Jingmai 8 and both inbred lines to unravel mechanisms underlying heterosis. Heterosis, known as one of the most successful strategies for increasing crop yield, has been widely exploited in plant breeding systems. Despite its great importance, the molecular mechanism underlying heterosis remains elusive. In the present study, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed on the seedling and spike tissues of the wheat (Triticum aestivum) hybrid Jingmai 8 (JM8) and its homozygous parents to unravel the underlying mechanisms of wheat heterosis. In total, 1686 and 2334 genes were identified as differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the hybrid and the two inbred lines in seedling and spike tissues, respectively. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that DEGs from seedling tissues were significantly enriched in processes involved in photosynthesis and carbon fixation, and the majority of these DEGs expressed at a higher level in JM8 compared to both inbred lines. In addition, cell wall biogenesis and protein biosynthesis-related pathways were also significantly represented. These results confirmed that a combination of different pathways could contribute to heterosis. The DEGs between the hybrid and the two inbred progenitors from the spike tissues were significantly enriched in biological processes related to transcription, RNA biosynthesis and molecular function categories related to transcription factor activities. Furthermore, transcription factors such as NAC, ERF, and TIF-IIA were highly expressed in the hybrid JM8. These results may provide valuable insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying wheat heterosis.

Gene: !affects! Photosynthesis
Gene: !affects! Carbon fixation
Gene: !affects! Cell wall biogenesis
Gene: !affects! Protein biosynthesis
Gene: !affects! Transcription
Gene: !affects! RNA biosynthesis
Gene: !localizes to! JM8
Gene: !interacts with! NAC
Gene: !interacts with! ERF
Gene: !interacts with! TIF-IIA