Cellulose microfibrils are the basic units of cellulose in plants. The structure of these microfibrils is at least partly determined by the structure of the cellulose synthase complex. In higher plants, this complex is composed of 18 to 24 catalytic subunits known as CELLULOSE SYNTHASE A (CESA) proteins. Three different classes of CESA proteins are required for cellulose synthesis and for secondary cell wall cellulose biosynthesis these classes are represented by CESA4, CESA7, and CESA8. To probe the relationship between CESA proteins and microfibril structure, we created mutant cesa proteins that lack catalytic activity but retain sufficient structural integrity to allow assembly of the cellulose synthase complex. Using a series of Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) mutants and genetic backgrounds, we found consistent differences in the ability of these mutant cesa proteins to complement the cellulose-deficient phenotype of the <i>cesa</i> null mutants. The best complementation was observed with catalytically inactive cesa4, while the equivalent mutation in cesa8 exhibited significantly lower levels of complementation. Using a variety of biophysical techniques, including solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance and Fourier transform infrared microscopy, to study these mutant plants, we found evidence for changes in cellulose microfibril structure, but these changes largely correlated with cellulose content and reflected differences in the relative proportions of primary and secondary cell walls. Our results suggest that individual CESA classes have similar roles in determining cellulose microfibril structure, and it is likely that the different effects of mutating members of different CESA classes are the consequence of their different catalytic activity and their influence on the overall rate of cellulose synthesis.

Cellulose Synthase A (CESA): !comprises! Cellulose Microfibrils 
CESA: !composed of! CESA4, CESA7, and CESA8 
Mutant CESA Proteins: !complement! Cellulose-Deficient Phenotype 
CESA4: !exhibits! Best Complementation 
CESA8: !exhibits! Lower Levels of Complementation 
Mutant Plants: !show evidence for! Changes in Cellulose Microfibril Structure 
Changes in Cellulose Microfibril Structure: !correlate with! Cellulose Content 
Individual CESA Classes: !have similar roles in! Determining Cellulose Microfibril Structure