The understanding and mitigation of the appearance of herbicide-resistant weeds have come to the forefront of study in the past decade, as the number of weed species that are resistant to one or more herbicide modes of action is on the increase. Historically, weed resistance to auxin herbicides has been rare, but examples, such as <i>Kochia scoparia</i> L. Schrad (kochia), have appeared, posing a challenge to conventional agricultural practices. Reports of dicamba-resistant kochia populations began in the early 1990s in areas where auxin herbicides were heavily utilized for weed control in corn and wheat cropping systems, and some biotypes are resistant to other auxin herbicides as well. We have further characterized the auxin responses of one previously reported dicamba-resistant biotype isolated from western Nebraska and found that it is additionally cross-resistant to other auxin herbicides, including 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) and fluroxypyr. We have utilized transcriptome sequencing and comparison to identify a 2-nt base change in this biotype, which results in a glycine to asparagine amino acid change within a highly conserved region of an AUX/indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) protein, KsIAA16. Through yeast two-hybrid analysis, characterization of F2 segregation, and heterologous expression and characterization of the gene in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, we show that that the single dominant <i>KsIAA16R</i> resistance allele is the causal basis for dicamba resistance in this population. Furthermore, we report the development of a molecular marker to identify this allele in populations and facilitate inheritance studies. We also report that the resistance allele confers a fitness penalty in greenhouse studies.

KsIAA16: !causes! dicamba resistance 
KsIAA16R: !confers! fitness penalty 
2-nt base change: !results in! glycine to asparagine amino acid change 
KsIAA16: !localizes to! AUX/indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) protein 
KsIAA16R: !identifiable by! molecular marker 
KsIAA16: !interacts with! F2 segregation 
KsIAA16: !heterologously expressed in! Arabidopsis thaliana