MADS-box genes are categorized into A, B, C, D and E classes and are involved in floral organ identity and flowering. Sheepgrass (Leymus chinensis (Trin.) Tzvel) is an important perennial forage grass and adapts well to many adverse environments. However, there are few studies on the molecular mechanisms of flower development in sheepgrass, especially studies on MADS-domain proteins. In this study, we cloned 11 MADS-box genes from sheepgrass (Leymus chinensis (Trin.) Tzvel), and phylogenetic analysis of the 11 genes with their homologs revealed that they are divided into nine subclades. Tissue-specific expression profile analysis showed that most of these MADS-box genes were highly expressed in floral organs. LcMADS1 and LcMADS3 showed higher expression in the stamen than in the other tissues, and LcMADS7 showed high expression in the stamen, glume, lemma and palea, while expression of LcMADS2, LcMADS9 and LcMADS11 was higher in vegetative organs than floral organs. Furthermore, yeast two-hybrid analyses showed that LcMADS2 interacted with LcMADS7 and LcMADS9. LcMADS3 interacted with LcMADS4, LcMADS7 and LcMADS10, while LcMADS1 could interact with only LcMADS7. Interestingly, the expression of LcMADS1 and LcMADS2 were significantly induced by cold, and LcMADS9 was significantly up-regulated by NaCl. Hence, we proposed that LcMADS1, LcMADS2, LcMADS3, LcMADS7 and LcMADS9 play a pivotal role in sheepgrass sexual reproduction and may be involved in abiotic stress responses, and our findings provide useful information for further exploration of the functions of this gene family in rice, wheat and other graminaceous cereals.

MADS-box genes: !categorized into! A, B, C, D and E classes 
MADS-box genes: !involved in! floral organ identity and flowering 
LcMADS1: !highly expressed in! stamen 
LcMADS3: !highly expressed in! stamen 
LcMADS7: !highly expressed in! stamen, glume, lemma and palea 
LcMADS2, LcMADS9 and LcMADS11: !highly expressed in! vegetative organs 
LcMADS2: !interacts with! LcMADS7 and LcMADS9 
LcMADS3: !interacts with! LcMADS4, LcMADS7 and LcMADS10 
LcMADS1: !interacts with! LcMADS7 
LcMADS1 and LcMADS2: !induced by! cold 
LcMADS9: !up-regulated by! NaCl