A conserved blue light sensing and transduction pathway contributes to blue light-induced anthocyanin accumulation in the peel of red pear. Peel color is an economically important characteristic that influences the appearance quality of red pear, whose red color is due to anthocyanin accumulation. The process of coloration in the fruit peel is strongly influenced by light. However, how light quality influences color development remains unclear. In this study, we analyzed the effects of different light qualities on color development in the red pear 'Red Zaosu', a mutant of the hybrid cultivar 'Zaosu' of Pyrus pyrifolia and P. communis. The results showed that blue light increased anthocyanin accumulation after 72 h of light treatment, while red light had almost no effect. The expression of anthocyanin biosynthesis-related genes showed a similar trend to the anthocyanin accumulation. To clarify the mechanism of blue-light induced coloration, PpCRYs, PpCOP1 and PpHY5 genes were cloned. Gene expression analysis showed that their transcript abundance did not correlate with the expression of anthocyanin-related genes or anthocyanin content, but the yeast two-hybrid system revealed conserved physical interactions among these proteins. In addition, PpHY5 directly bound to the promoters of the anthocyanin biosynthesis genes PpCHS, PpDFR, PpANS and PpMYB10, and activated the transcription of PpCHS in a Nicotiana benthamiana-based dual-luciferase assay. In summary, our results preliminarily revealed that the conserved blue light signal transduction module CRY-COP1-HY5 contributed to the anthocyanin biosynthesis induced by blue light in red pear. However, our results did not provide evidence for why red light had no effect on anthocyanin accumulation, which needs further study.

PpCRYs: !interacts with! PpCOP1 
PpCOP1: !interacts with! PpHY5 
PpHY5: !binds to! promoters of anthocyanin biosynthesis genes 
promoters of anthocyanin biosynthesis genes: !activated by! PpHY5 
blue light: !induces! anthocyanin accumulation 
red light: !has no effect on! anthocyanin accumulation