The understanding of roles of bZIP factors in biological processes during plant development and under abiotic stresses requires the detailed mechanistic knowledge of behaviour of TFs. Basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors (TFs) play key roles in the regulation of grain development and plant responses to abiotic stresses. We investigated the role and molecular mechanisms of function of the TabZIP2 gene isolated from drought-stressed wheat plants. Molecular characterisation of TabZIP2 and derived protein included analyses of gene expression and its target promoter, and the influence of interacting partners on the target promoter activation. Two interacting partners of TabZIP2, the 14-3-3 protein, TaWIN1 and the bZIP transcription factor TaABI5L, were identified in a Y2H screen. We established that under elevated ABA levels the activity of TabZIP2 was negatively regulated by the TaWIN1 protein and positively regulated by the SnRK3/CIPK protein kinase WPK4, reported previously to be responsive to nutrient starvation. The physical interaction between the TaWIN1 and the WPK4 was detected. We also compared the influence of homo- and hetero-dimerisation of TabZIP2 and TaABI5L on DNA binding. TabZIP2 gene functional analyses were performed using drought-inducible overexpression of TabZIP2 in transgenic wheat. Transgenic plants grown under moderate drought during flowering, were smaller than control plants, and had fewer spikes and seeds per plant. However, a single seed weight was increased compared to single seed weights of control plants in three of four evaluated transgenic lines. The observed phenotypes of transgenic plants and the regulation of TabZIP2 activity by nutrient starvation-responsive WPK4, suggest that the TabZIP2 could be the part of a signalling pathway, which controls the rearrangement of carbohydrate and nutrient flows in plant organs in response to drought.

TabZIP2: !regulates! grain development 
TabZIP2: !interacts with! TaWIN1 
TabZIP2: !interacts with! TaABI5L 
TaWIN1: !negatively regulates! TabZIP2 
WPK4: !positively regulates! TabZIP2 
TaWIN1: !interacts with! WPK4 
TabZIP2: !influences! DNA binding 
TabZIP2: !overexpression! reduces plant size 
TabZIP2: !overexpression! increases single seed weight 
TabZIP2: !part of! signalling pathway