['29560577', 'BPH1 acts as a substrate receptor of CRL3 complex and negatively regulates  ABA-mediated cellular responses. The study on its function provides information  that helps further understand the relationship between ABA signaling and UPS.  Abscisic acid (ABA) plays a crucial role in a variety of cellular processes,  including seed dormancy, inhibition of seedling growth, and drought resistance in  plants. Cullin3-RING E3 ligase (CRL3) complex is a type of multi-subunit E3  ligase, and BTB/POZ protein, a component of CRL3 complex, functions as a receptor  to determine a specific substrate. To elucidate the CRL3 complex that  participates in ABA-mediated cellular processes, we first investigated  ABA-inducible BTB/POZ genes based on data from the AtGenExpress Visualization  Tool (AVT). We then isolated an ABA-inducible gene encoding a potential CRL3  substrate receptor in Arabidopsis, BPH1 (BTB/POZ protein hypersensitive to ABA  1). The isolate gene has a BTB/POZ domain and a NPH3 domain within its N-terminal  and C-terminal region, respectively. Yeast two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation  assays showed that BPH1 physically interacted with cullin3a, a scaffold protein  of CRL3, suggesting that it functions as an Arabidopsis CRL3 substrate receptor.  The functional mutation of BPH1 caused delayed seed germination in response to  ABA and enhanced sensitivity by NaCl and mannitol treatments as ABA-related  stresses. Moreover, bph1 mutants exhibited enhanced stomatal closure under ABA  application and reduced water loss when compared with wild-type, implying their  enhanced tolerance to drought stress. Based on the information from  microarray/AVT data and expression analysis of various ABA-inducible genes  between wild-type and bph1 plants following ABA treatments, we concluded loss of  BPH1 resulted in hyper-induction of a large portion of ABA-inducible genes in  response to ABA. Taken together, these results show that BPH1 is negatively  involved in ABA-mediated cellular events.', '2018 Apr', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-018-0717-x', 'ORCID:']

ABA: !plays a crucial role in! cellular processes 
CRL3: !is a type of! multi-subunit E3 ligase 
BTB/POZ: !functions as! receptor for CRL3 
BPH1: !interacts with! cullin3a 
BPH1: !negatively regulates! ABA-mediated cellular responses 
BPH1: !enhances! tolerance to drought stress 
BPH1: !represses! ABA-inducible genes