Contents Summary 1012 I. Introduction 1013 II. The mycorrhizal symbiosis at the dawn and rise of the land flora 1014 III. From early land plants to early trees: the origin of roots and true mycorrhizas 1016 IV. The diversification of the AM symbiosis 1019 V. The ECM symbiosis 1021 VI. The recently evolved ericoid and orchid mycorrhizas 1023 VII. Limits of paleontological vs genetic approaches and perspectives 1023 Acknowledgements 1025 References 1025 SUMMARY: The ability of fungi to form mycorrhizas with plants is one of the most remarkable and enduring adaptations to life on land. The occurrence of mycorrhizas is now well established in c. 85% of extant plants, yet the geological record of these associations is sparse. Fossils preserved under exceptional conditions provide tantalizing glimpses into the evolutionary history of mycorrhizas, showing the extent of their occurrence and aspects of their evolution in extinct plants. The fossil record has important roles to play in establishing a chronology of when key fungal associations evolved and in understanding their importance in ecosystems through time. Together with calibrated phylogenetic trees, these approaches extend our understanding of when and how groups evolved in the context of major environmental change on a global scale. Phylogenomics furthers this understanding into the evolution of different types of mycorrhizal associations, and genomic studies of both plants and fungi are shedding light on how the complex set of symbiotic traits evolved. Here we present a review of the main phases of the evolution of mycorrhizal interactions from palaeontological, phylogenetic and genomic perspectives, with the aim of highlighting the potential of fossil material and a geological perspective in a cross-disciplinary approach.

Fungi: !form! Mycorrhizas 
Fossils: !provide glimpses into! Evolutionary History 
Calibrated Phylogenetic Trees: !extend understanding of! When & How Groups Evolved 
Phylogenomics: !furthers understanding of! Different Types of Mycorrhizal Associations 
Genomic Studies: !shed light on! Complex Set of Symbiotic Traits