Streptophytes are unique among photosynthetic eukaryotes in having conquered land. As the ancestors of land plants, streptophyte algae are hypothesized to have possessed exaptations to the environmental stressors encountered during the transition to terrestrial life. Many of these stressors, including high irradiance and drought, are linked to plastid biology. We have investigated global gene expression patterns across all six major streptophyte algal lineages, analyzing a total of around 46,000 genes assembled from a little more than 1.64 billion sequence reads from six organisms under three growth conditions. Our results show that streptophyte algae respond to cold and high light stress via expression of hallmark genes used by land plants (embryophytes) during stress-response signaling and downstream responses. Among the strongest differentially regulated genes were those associated with plastid biology. We observed that among streptophyte algae, those most closely related to land plants, especially <i>Zygnema</i>, invest the largest fraction of their transcriptional budget in plastid-targeted proteins and possess an array of land plant-type plastid-nucleus communication genes. Streptophyte algae more closely related to land plants also appear most similar to land plants in their capacity to respond to plastid stressors. Support for this notion comes from the detection of a canonical abscisic acid receptor of the PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE (PYR/PYL/RCAR) family in <i>Zygnema</i>, the first found outside the land plant lineage. We conclude that a fine-tuned response toward terrestrial plastid stressors was among the exaptations that allowed streptophytes to colonize the terrestrial habitat on a global scale.

streptophytes: !respond to! cold and high light stress 
hallmark genes: !used by! land plants 
plastid biology: !invested in! by streptophyte algae 
plastid-nucleus communication genes: !possessed by! streptophyte algae 
streptophyte algae: !most similar to! land plants in response to plastid stressors 
PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE family: !detected in! Zygnema 
exaptations: !allowed streptophytes to! colonize terrestrial habitat