Inherent characteristics and changes in the physiology of rice as it attains salt tolerance affect the colonizing bacterial endophytic communities of the rice seeds. These transmissible endophytes also serve as a source of the plant's microbial community and concurrently respond to the host and environmental conditions. This study explores the influence of the rice host as well as the impact of soil salinity on the community structure and diversity of seed bacterial endophytes of rice with varying tolerance to salt stress. Endophytic bacterial diversity was studied through culture-dependent technique and Terminal-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (T-RFLP) analysis. Results revealed considerably diverse communities of bacterial endophytes in the interior of rice seeds. The overall endophytic bacterial communities of the indica rice seeds based on 16S rRNA analysis of clones and isolates are dominated by phylum Proteobacteria followed by Actinobacteria and Firmicutes. Community profiles show common ribotypes found in all cultivars of the indica subspecies representing potential core microbiota belonging to Curtobacterium, Flavobacterium, Enterobacter, Xanthomonas, Herbaspirillum, Microbacterium and Stenotrophomonas. Clustering analysis shows that the host genotype mainly influences the seed endophytic community of the different rice cultivars. Under salt stress conditions, endophytic communities of the salt-sensitive and salt-tolerant rice cultivars shift their dominance to bacterial groups belonging to Flavobacterium, Pantoea, Enterobacter, Microbacterium, Kosakonia and Curtobacterium. The endophytic communities of rice indica seeds are shaped by the hosts' genotype, their physiological adaptation to salt stress and phylogenetic relatedness. Under salt stress conditions, a few groups of bacterial communities become prominent causing a shift in bacterial diversity and dominance.

rice: !affects! endophytic bacterial communities
host genotype: !influences! seed endophytic community
physiological adaptation: !shapes! endophytic communities of rice indica seeds
salinity: !causes shift in! bacterial diversity and dominance