Stilbene synthase (STS) and its metabolic products are accumulated in senescing grapevine leaves. Ectopic expression of VpSTS29 in Arabidopsis shows the presence of VpSTS29 in oil bodies and increases trans-piceid in developing leaves. Stilbenes are the natural antimicrobial phytoalexins that are synthesised via the phenylpropanoid pathway. STS is the key enzyme catalysing the production of stilbenes. We have previously reported that the VpSTS29 gene plays an important role in powdery mildew resistance in Vitis pseudoreticulata. However, the synthesis and accumulation of these stilbene products in plant cells remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that VpSTS29 is present in cytosolic oil bodies and can be transported into the vacuole at particular plant-developmental stages. Western blot and high-performance liquid chromatography showed that STS and trans-piceid accumulated in senescent grape leaves and in pVpSTS29::VpSTS29-expressing Arabidopsis during age-dependent leaf senescence. Subcellular localisation analyses indicated VpSTS29-GFP was present in the cytoplasm and in STS-containing bodies in Arabidopsis. Nile red staining, co-localisation and immunohistochemistry analyses of leaves confirmed that the STS-containing bodies were oil bodies and that these moved randomly in the cytoplasm and vacuole. Detection of protein profiles revealed that no free GFP was detected in the pVpSTS29::VpSTS29-GFP-expressing protoplasts or in Arabidopsis during the dark-light cycle, demonstrating that GFP fluorescence distributed in the STS-containing bodies and vacuole was the VpSTS29-GFP fusion protein. Intriguingly, in comparison to the controls, over-expression of VpSTS29 in Arabidopsis resulted in relatively high levels of trans-piceid, chlorophyll content and of photochemical efficiency accompanied by delayed leaf senescence. These results provide exciting new insights into the subcellular localisation of STS in plant cells and information about stilbene synthesis and storage.

VpSTS29: !accumulates in! senescing grapevine leaves
VpSTS29: !localizes to! oil bodies
STS: !catalyses! production of stilbenes
VpSTS29-GFP: !distributes in! STS-containing bodies and vacuole
VpSTS29: !enhances! trans-piceid, chlorophyll content and photochemical efficiency
VpSTS29: !delays! leaf senescence