['29616436', 'In this work, we genetically characterized the function of Arabidopsis thaliana,  LONGIFOLIA (LNG1), LNG2, LNG3, LNG4, their contribution to regulate vegetative  architecture in plant. We used molecular and biophysical approaches to elucidate  a gene function that regulates vegetative architecture, as revealed by the leaf  phenotype and later effects on flowering patterns in Arabidopsis loss-of-function  mutants. As a result, LNG genes play an important role in polar cell elongation  by turgor pressure controlling the activation of XTH17 and XTH24. Plant  vegetative architecture is related to important traits that later influence the  floral architecture involved in seed production. Leaf morphology is the primary  key trait to compose plant vegetative architecture. However, molecular mechanism  on leaf shape determination is not fully understood even in the model plant A.  thaliana. We previously showed that LONGIFOLIA (LNG1) and LONGIFOLIA2 (LNG2)  genes regulate leaf morphology by promoting longitudinal cell elongation in  Arabidopsis. In this study, we further characterized two homologs of LNG1, LNG3,  and LNG4, using genetic, biophysical, and molecular approaches. Single  loss-of-function mutants, lng3 and lng4, do not show any phenotypic difference,  but mutants of lng quadruple (lngq), and lng1/2/3 and lng1/2/4 triples, display  reduced leaf length, compared to wild type. Using the paradermal analysis, we  conclude that the reduced leaf size of lngq is due to decreased cell elongation  in the direction of longitudinal leaf growth, and not decreased cell  proliferation. This data indicate that LNG1/2/3/4 are functionally redundant, and  are involved in polar cell elongation in Arabidopsis leaf. Using a biophysical  approach, we show that the LNGs contribute to maintain high turgor pressure, thus  regulating turgor pressure-dependent polar cell elongation. In addition, gene  expression analysis showed that LNGs positively regulate the expression of the  cell wall modifying enzyme encoded by a multi-gene family, xyloglucan  endotransglucosylase/hydrolase (XTH). Taking all of these together, we propose  that LNG related genes play an important role in polar cell elongation by  changing turgor pressure and controlling the activation of XTH17 and XTH24.', '2018 May', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-018-0722-0', 'Choi']

LNG1: !regulates! leaf morphology 
LNG1/2/3/4: !functionally redundant! polar cell elongation 
LNGs: !maintain! turgor pressure 
LNGs: !positively regulate! XTH expression 
XTH: !controls! activation of XTH17 and XTH24