The ice alga Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L is the main contributor to primary productivity in Antarctic sea ice ecosystems and is well adapted to the extremely harsh environment. However, the adaptive mechanism of Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L to sea-ice environment remains unclear. To study the adaptive strategies in Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L, we investigated the molecular evolution of chloroplast photosynthetic genes that are essential for the accumulation of carbohydrate and energy living in Antarctic sea ice. The 60 chloroplast protein-coding genes of Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L were obtained, and the branch-site test detected significant signatures of positive selection on atpB, psaB, and rbcL genes in Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L associated with the photosynthetic machinery. These positively selected genes were further identified as being under convergent evolution between Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L and the halotolerant alga Dunaliella salina. Our study provides evidence that the phototrophic component of Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L exhibits adaptive evolution under extreme environment. The positive Darwinian selection operates on the chloroplast protein-coding genes of Antarctic ice algae adapted to extreme environment following functional-specific and lineages-specific patterns. In addition, three positively selected genes with convergent substitutions in Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L were identified, and the adaptive modifications in these genes were in functionally important regions of the proteins. Our study provides a foundation for future experiments on the biochemical and physiological impacts of photosynthetic genes in green algae.

atpB: !exhibits adaptive evolution! Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L
psaB: !exhibits adaptive evolution! Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L
rbcL: !exhibits adaptive evolution! Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-L
atpB: !under convergent evolution! Dunaliella salina
psaB: !under convergent evolution! Dunaliella salina
rbcL: !under convergent evolution! Dunaliella salina
positive selection: !operates on! chloroplast protein-coding genes
adaptive modifications: !in functionally important regions of proteins! positively selected genes