TaGF14b enhances tolerance to multiple stresses through ABA signaling pathway by altering physiological and biochemical processes, including ROS-scavenging system, stomatal closure, compatible osmolytes, and stress-related gene expressions in tobaccos. The 14-3-3 proteins are involved in plant growth, development, and in responding to abiotic stresses. However, the precise functions of 14-3-3s in responding to drought and salt stresses remained unclear, especially in wheat. In this study, a 14-3-3 gene from wheat, designated TaGF14b, was cloned and characterized. TaGF14b was upregulated by polyethylene glycol 6000, sodium chloride, hydrogen peroxide, and abscisic acid (ABA) treatments. Ectopic expression of TaGF14b in tobacco conferred enhanced tolerance to drought and salt stresses. Transgenic tobaccos had longer root, better growth status, and higher relative water content, survival rate, photosynthetic rate, and water use efficiency than control plants under drought and salt stresses. The contribution of TaGF14b to drought and salt tolerance relies on the regulations of ABA biosynthesis and ABA signaling, as well as stomatal closure and stress-related gene expressions. Moreover, TaGF14b expression could significantly enhance the reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging system to ameliorate oxidative damage to cells. In addition, TaGF14b increased tolerance to osmotic stress evoked by drought and salinity through modifying water conservation and compatible osmolytes in plants. In conclusion, TaGF14b enhances tolerance to multiple abiotic stresses through the ABA signaling pathway in transgenic tobaccos by altering physiological and biochemical processes.

TaGF14b: !enhances! tolerance to multiple stresses 
TaGF14b: !regulates! ABA biosynthesis and signaling 
TaGF14b: !modifies! stomatal closure 
TaGF14b: !alters! stress-related gene expressions 
TaGF14b: !enhances! ROS scavenging system 
TaGF14b: !modifies! water conservation 
TaGF14b: !modifies! compatible osmolytes