Plants, being sessile in nature, are constantly exposed to various environmental stresses, such as solar UV radiations, soil salinity, drought and desiccation, rehydration, low and high temperatures and other vast array of air and soil borne chemicals, industrial waste products, metals and metalloids. These agents, either directly or indirectly via the induction of oxidative stress and overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), frequently perturb the chemical or physical structures of DNA and induce both cytotoxic or genotoxic stresses. Such condition, in turn, leads to genome instability and thus eventually severely affecting plant health and crop yield. With the growing industrialization process and non-judicious use of chemical fertilizers, the heavy metal mediated chemical toxicity has become one of the major environmental threats for the plants around the globe. The heavy metal ions cause damage to the structural, enzymatic and non-enzymatic components of plant cell, often resulting in loss of cell viability, thus negatively impacting plant growth and development. Plants have also evolved with an extensive and highly efficient mechanism to respond and adapt under such heavy metal toxicity mediated stress conditions. In addition to morpho-anatomical, hormonal and biochemical responses, at the molecular level, plants respond to heavy metal stress induced oxidative and genotoxic damage via the rapid change in the expression of the responsive genes at the transcriptional level. Various families of transcription factors play crucial role in triggering such responses. Apart from transcriptional response, epigenetic modifications have also been found to be essential for maintenance of plant genome stability under genotoxic stress. This review represents a comprehensive survey of recent advances in our understanding of plant responses to heavy metal mediated toxicity in general with particular emphasis on the transcriptional and epigenetic responses and highlights the importance of understanding the potential targets in the associated pathways for improved stress tolerance in crops.

Heavy metal: !induces! oxidative stress 
Oxidative stress: !causes! genome instability 
Plants: !respond to! heavy metal toxicity 
Transcription factors: !trigger! plant responses 
Epigenetic modifications: !maintain! plant genome stability