Regulation of stomatal aperture is essential for plant growth and survival in response to environmental stimuli. Opening of stomata induces uptake of CO2 for photosynthesis and transpiration, which enhances uptake of nutrients from roots. Light is the most important stimulus for stomatal opening. Under drought stress, the plant hormone ABA induces stomatal closure to prevent water loss. However, the molecular mechanisms of stomatal movements are not fully understood. In this study, we screened chemical libraries to identify compounds that affect stomatal movements in Commelina benghalensis and characterize the underlying molecular mechanisms. We identified nine stomatal closing compounds (SCL1-SCL9) that suppress light-induced stomatal opening by >50%, and two compounds (temsirolimus and CP-100356) that induce stomatal opening in the dark. Further investigations revealed that SCL1 and SCL2 had no effect on autophosphorylation of phototropin or the activity of the inward-rectifying plasma membrane (PM) K+ channel, KAT1, but suppressed blue light-induced phosphorylation of the penultimate residue, threonine, in PM H+-ATPase, which is a key enzyme for stomatal opening. SCL1 and SCL2 had no effect on ABA-dependent responses, including seed germination and expression of ABA-induced genes. These results suggest that SCL1 and SCL2 suppress light-induced stomatal opening at least in part by inhibiting blue light-induced activation of PM H+-ATPase, but not by the ABA signaling pathway. Interestingly, spraying leaves onto dicot and monocot plants with SCL1 suppressed wilting of leaves, indicating that inhibition of stomatal opening by these compounds confers tolerance to drought stress in plants.

Light: !induces! stomatal opening 
ABA: !induces! stomatal closure 
SCL1-SCL9: !suppress! light-induced stomatal opening 
temsirolimus and CP-100356: !induce! stomatal opening in the dark 
SCL1 and SCL2: !inhibit! blue light-induced activation of PM H+-ATPase 
SCL1 and SCL2: !have no effect on! ABA-dependent responses 
SCL1: !confers tolerance to! drought stress