['29659701', 'BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Anisotropic cell elongation depends on cell wall relaxation  and cellulose microfibril arrangement. The aim of this study was to characterize  the molecular function of AtDICE1 encoding a novel transmembrane protein involved  in anisotropic cell elongation in Arabidopsis. METHODS: Phenotypic  characterizations of transgenic Arabidopsis plants mis-regulating AtDICE1  expression with different pharmacological treatments were made, and biochemical,  cell biological and transcriptome analyses were performed. KEY RESULTS:  Upregulation of AtDICE1 in Arabidopsis (35S::AtDICE1) resulted in severe  dwarfism, probably caused by defects in anisotropic cell elongation. Epidermal  cell swelling was evident in all tissues, and abnormal secondary wall thickenings  were observed in pith cells of stems. These phenotypes were reproduced not only  by inducible expression of AtDICE1 but also by overexpression of its poplar  homologue in Arabidopsis. RNA interference suppression lines of AtDICE1 resulted  in no observable phenotypic changes. Interestingly, wild-type plants treated with  isoxaben, a cellulose biosynthesis inhibitor, phenocopied the 35S::AtDICE1  plants, suggesting that cellulose biosynthesis was compromised in the  35S::AtDICE1 plants. Indeed, disturbed cortical microtubule arrangements in  35S::AtDICE1/GFP-TuA6 plants were observed, and the cellulose content was  significantly reduced in 35S::AtDICE1 plants. A promoter::GUS analysis showed  that AtDICE1 is mainly expressed in vascular tissue, and transient expression of  GFP:AtDICE1 in tobacco suggests that AtDICE1 is probably localized in the  endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In addition, the external N-terminal conserved domain  of AtDICE1 was found to be necessary for AtDICE1 function. Whole transcriptome  analyses of 35S::AtDICE1 revealed that many genes involved in cell wall  modification and stress/defence responses were mis-regulated. CONCLUSIONS:  AtDICE1, a novel ER-localized transmembrane protein, may contribute to  anisotropic cell elongation in the formation of vascular tissue by affecting  cellulose biosynthesis.', '2018 Jun 28', 'Ann Bot', '10.1093/aob/mcy049', 'Ko']

AtDICE1: !affects! Cellulose biosynthesis 
AtDICE1: !localizes to! Endoplasmic reticulum 
AtDICE1: !enhances! Anisotropic cell elongation 
AtDICE1: !represses! Stress/defence responses 
AtDICE1: !interacts with! GFP-TuA6 
AtDICE1: !synthesizes! Vascular tissue