['29655284', 'Phospholipases play crucial roles in plant membrane lipid homeostasis.  Nonspecific phospholipase C (NPCs) establish a unique class of phospholipases  found only in plants and certain bacteria. Here, we show that two previously  uncharacterized NPC isoforms, NPC2 and NPC6, are required for male and female  gametophyte development in Arabidopsis. Double mutant plants of npc2-1 npc6-2  could not be retrieved because npc2-1 npc6-2 ovule and pollen development is  affected. Genetic complementation, reciprocal crossing and microscope observation  of npc2-1/- npc6-2/+ and npc2-1/+ npc6-2/- plants suggest that NPC2 and NPC6 are  redundant and are required for normal gametophyte development. Both NPC2 and NPC6  proteins are localized to the plastids. Promoter-GUS assays in transgenic  Arabidopsis revealed that NPC2 and NPC6 are preferentially expressed in floral  organs rather than in leaves. In vitro enzyme assays showed that NPC2 and NPC6  hydrolyze phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine, but not  phosphatidate, being consistent with the reported substrate selectivity of NPCs.  The amounts of phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine and  phosphatidylglycerol were increased in buds but not in flowers of npc2-1/-  npc6-2/+ and npc2-1/+ npc6-2/- plants, presumably due to reduced phospholipid  hydrolysis activity in developing flowers. Our results demonstrate that NPC2 and  NPC6 play crucial roles in gametogenesis during flower development.', '2018 Jul', 'New Phytol', '10.1111/nph.15147', 'Nakamura']

NPC2: !required for! gametophyte development 
NPC6: !required for! gametophyte development 
NPC2: !localized to! plastids 
NPC6: !localized to! plastids 
NPC2: !preferentially expressed in! floral organs 
NPC6: !preferentially expressed in! floral organs 
NPC2: !hydrolyzes! phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine 
NPC6: !hydrolyzes! phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine 
NPC2: !increases! phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylglycerol 
NPC6: !increases! phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylglycerol