The non-random spatial packing of chromosomes in the nucleus plays a critical role in orchestrating gene expression and genome function. Here, we present a Hi-C analysis of the chromatin interaction patterns in rice (Oryza sativa L.) at hierarchical architectural levels. We confirm that rice chromosomes occupy their own territories with certain preferential inter-chromosomal associations. Moderate compartment delimitation and extensive TADs (Topologically Associated Domains) were determined to be associated with heterogeneous genomic compositions and epigenetic marks in the rice genome. We found subtle features including chromatin loops, gene loops, and off-/near-diagonal intensive interaction regions. Gene chromatin loops associated with H3K27me3 could be positively involved in gene expression. In addition to insulated enhancing effects for neighbor gene expression, the identified rice gene loops could bi-directionally (+/-) affect the expression of looped genes themselves. Finally, web-interleaved off-diagonal IHIs/KEEs (Interactive Heterochromatic Islands or KNOT ENGAGED ELEMENTs) could trap transposable elements (TEs) via the enrichment of silencing epigenetic marks. In parallel, the near-diagonal FIREs (Frequently Interacting Regions) could positively affect the expression of involved genes. Our results suggest that the chromatin packing pattern in rice is generally similar to that in Arabidopsis thaliana but with clear differences at specific structural levels. We conclude that genomic composition, epigenetic modification, and transcriptional activity could act in combination to shape global and local chromatin packing in rice. Our results confirm recent observations in rice and A. thaliana but also provide additional insights into the patterns and features of chromatin organization in higher plants.

Chromatin: !orchestrates! Gene Expression
Compartment: !delimits! Genomic Composition
TADs: !associated with! Epigenetic Marks
Chromatin Loops: !involved in! Gene Expression
Gene Loops: !affects! Neighbor Gene Expression
IHIs/KEEs: !traps! Transposable Elements
FIREs: !positively affects! Involved Genes