Contents Summary 996 I. Introduction 996 II. An ancient, and diverse, symbiosis 998 III. Structural diversity in ancient plant-fungal partnerships 1000 IV. Mycorrhizal unity in host plant nutrition 1002 V. Plant-to-fungus carbon transfer 1003 VI. From individuals to networks 1003 VII. Diverse responses of mycorrhizal functioning to dynamic environments 1006 VIII. Summary of future research direction 1007 Acknowledgements 1006 References 1006 SUMMARY: Mycorrhizal symbiosis is an ancient and widespread mutualism between plants and fungi that facilitated plant terrestrialisation > 500 million years ago, with key roles in ecosystem functioning at multiple scales. Central to the symbiosis is the bidirectional exchange of plant-fixed carbon for fungal-acquired nutrients. Within this unifying role of mycorrhizas, considerable diversity in structure and function reflects the diversity of the partners involved. Early diverging plants form mutualisms not only with arbuscular mycorrhizal Glomeromycotina fungi, but also with poorly characterised Mucoromycotina, which may also colonise the roots of 'higher' plants as fine root endophytes. Functional diversity in these symbioses depends on both fungal and plant life histories and is influenced by the environment. Recent studies have highlighted the roles of lipids/fatty acids in plant-to-fungus carbon transport and potential contributions of Glomeromycotina fungi to plant nitrogen nutrition. Together with emerging appreciation of mycorrhizal networks as multi-species resource-sharing systems, these insights are broadening our views on mycorrhizas and their roles in nutrient cycling. It is crucial that the diverse array of biotic and abiotic factors that together shape the dynamics of carbon-for-nutrient exchange between plants and fungi are integrated, in addition to embracing the unfolding and potentially key role of Mucoromycotina fungi in these processes.

Mycorrhizal symbiosis: !facilitates! plant terrestrialisation 
Plants: !form mutualisms with! arbuscular mycorrhizal Glomeromycotina fungi 
Plants: !form mutualisms with! Mucoromycotina fungi 
Functional diversity: !depends on! fungal and plant life histories 
Lipids/fatty acids: !involved in! plant-to-fungus carbon transport 
Glomeromycotina fungi: !contribute to! plant nitrogen nutrition 
Mycorrhizal networks: !multi-species resource-sharing systems!