Agrobacterium tumefaciens constructs an ecological niche in its host plant by transferring the T-DNA from its Ti plasmid into the host genome and by diverting the host metabolism. We combined transcriptomics and genetics for understanding the A. tumefaciens lifestyle when it colonizes Arabidopsis thaliana tumors. Transcriptomics highlighted: a transition from a motile to sessile behavior that mobilizes some master regulators (Hfq, CtrA, DivK and PleD); a remodeling of some cell surface components (O-antigen, succinoglucan, curdlan, att genes, putative fasciclin) and functions associated with plant defense (Ef-Tu and flagellin pathogen-associated molecular pattern-response and glycerol-3-phosphate and nitric oxide signaling); and an exploitation of a wide variety of host resources, including opines, amino acids, sugars, organic acids, phosphate, phosphorylated compounds, and iron. In addition, construction of transgenic A. thaliana lines expressing a lactonase enzyme showed that Ti plasmid transfer could escape host-mediated quorum-quenching. Finally, construction of knock-out mutants in A. tumefaciens showed that expression of some At plasmid genes seemed more costly than the selective advantage they would have conferred in tumor colonization. We provide the first overview of A. tumefaciens lifestyle in a plant tumor and reveal novel signaling and trophic interplays for investigating host-pathogen interactions.

Hfq: !mobilizes! master regulators
CtrA: !mobilizes! master regulators
DivK: !mobilizes! master regulators
PleD: !mobilizes! master regulators
O-antigen: !remodels! cell surface components
succinoglucan: !remodels! cell surface components
curdlan: !remodels! cell surface components
att genes: !remodels! cell surface components
Ef-Tu: !associated with! plant defense
flagellin: !associated with! plant defense
glycerol-3-phosphate: !signals! host defense
nitric oxide: !signals! host defense
Ti plasmid: !transferred to! host genome
lactonase enzyme: !escapes! quorum-quenching
At plasmid genes: !expressed by! A. tumefaciens