The climate change scenarios besides foreseeing a severe drought imposition also emphasize the temperature rising in the Mediterranean region, with special prominence at nighttime. Despite the high olive tree tolerance to severe environmental conditions, stomatal nighttime water loss can change plant water relations, and the related consequences and opportunities, especially under water scarcity, must be clarified. A set of 3-year-old potted olive trees were subjected to three cycles of drought, imposed by withholding irrigation, while another group were continuously irrigated. At the end of the latter and more severe drought cycle, daytime gas exchange parameters, water status and membrane integrity was negatively affected by drought imposition. Moreover, the nighttime transpiration rate was far above cuticular water loss, suggesting sustained stomatal aperture during nighttime, leading to substantial water losses, which was higher under drought in the first hours of darkness. The higher nighttime stomatal conductance of droughted plants were related with higher starch concentration in their leaves, a thicker trichome layer and a lower intercellular CO<sub>2</sub> concentration, in a closely association with an inferior nighttime respiration. Still, whole-plant transpiration on droughted plants were much lower than leaf transpiration-based estimates, which is interpreted as compensation by water inputs due to dew deposition on leaves. Although unexpected, the increased of stomatal conductance in the first hours of the night, until a certain level of water deficit intensity, could be linked with potential benefits to the plants.

drought: !affects! gas exchange parameters
drought: !affects! water status
drought: !affects! membrane integrity
drought: !increases! nighttime transpiration rate
starch concentration: !correlates with! higher stomatal conductance
trichome layer: !correlates with! higher stomatal conductance
CO<sub>2</sub> concentration: !correlates with! lower stomatal conductance
dew deposition: !compensates for! whole-plant transpiration