Noscapine biosynthesis in opium poppy involves three characterized O-methyltransferases (OMTs) and a fourth responsible for the 4'-methoxyl on the phthalide isoquinoline scaffold. The first three enzymes are homodimers, whereas the latter is a heterodimer encoded by two linked genes (OMT2 and OMT3). Neither OMT2 nor OMT3 form stable homodimers, but yield a substrate-specific heterodimer when their genes are co-expressed in Escherichia coli. The only substrate, 4'-O-desmethyl-3-O-acetylpapaveroxine, is a seco-berbine pathway intermediate that undergoes ester hydrolysis subsequent to 4'-O-methylation leading to the formation of narcotine hemiacetal. In the absence of 4'-O-methylation, a parallel pathway yields narcotoline hemiacetal. Dehydrogenation produces noscapine and narcotoline from the corresponding hemiacetals. Phthalide isoquinoline intermediates with a 4'-hydroxyl (i.e. narcotoline and narcotoline hemiacetal), or the corresponding 1-hydroxyl on protoberberine intermediates, were not accepted. Norcoclaurine 6OMT, which shares 81% amino acid sequence identity with OMT3, also formed a functionally similar heterodimer with OMT2. Suppression of OMT2 transcript levels in opium poppy increased narcotoline accumulation, whereas reduced OMT3 transcript abundance caused no detectable change in the alkaloid phenotype. Opium poppy chemotype Marianne accumulates high levels of narcotoline and showed no detectable OMT2:OMT3 activity. Compared with the active subunit from the Bea's Choice chemotype, Marianne OMT2 exhibited a single S122Y mutation in the dimerization domain that precluded heterodimer formation based on homology models. Both subunits contributed to the formation of the substrate-binding domain, although site-directed mutagenesis revealed OMT2 as the active subunit. The occurrence of physiologically relevant OMT heterodimers increases the catalytic diversity of enzymes derived from a smaller number of gene products.

OMT2: !forms heterodimer with! OMT3
OMT2: !active subunit of! heterodimer
OMT2: !suppression increases! narcotoline accumulation
OMT3: !inactive subunit of! heterodimer
OMT3: !suppression causes no change in! alkaloid phenotype
Marianne OMT2: !mutation precludes! heterodimer formation