Oxylipins, including jasmonic acid (JA) and volatiles, are important for signaling in plants, and these are formed by the lipoxygenase (LOX) enzyme family. There is a large gap in understanding of the underlying molecular basis of their roles in tea plants. Here, we identified 11 CsLOX genes from the tea plant (Camellia sinensis), and characterized their phylogeny, gene structure and protein features into three subclasses. We then examined their enzymatic activities, LOX expression and alternative splicing of transcripts during development and in response to abiotic or biotic stresses in tea plants. In vitro expressed protein assays showed that the CsLOX2, 3 and 9 enzymatically function to produce 9/13-HPOT, 13-HPOT and 9-HPOT, respectively. CsLOX2 and CsLOX9 green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion proteins localized to chloroplasts and the cytoplasm, respectively. RNA sequencing, quantitative reverse transcription-PCR and Northern blot analysis suggested that CsLOX5, 6 and 9 were predominantly expressed in seeds, flowers and roots, respectively. CsLOX2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 were up-regulated after attack by the insect Ectropis oblique, while CsLOX1 was induced after infection with the pathogen Glomerella cingulata. CsLOX3, 7 and 10 were up-regulated by JA but not ABA or salicylic acid. Long-term cold stress down-regulated CsLOX expression while a short duration of cold induced the expression of CsLOX1, 6 and 7. Alternatively spliced transcripts of six CsLOX genes were dynamically regulated through time and varied in relative abundances under the investigated stresses; we propose a mechanism of competing or compensating regulation between isoforms. This study improves our understanding of evolution of LOXs and regulation of their diverse functions in plants.

CsLOX2: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
CsLOX9: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
CsLOX2: !synthesizes! 9/13-HPOT 
CsLOX3: !synthesizes! 13-HPOT 
CsLOX9: !synthesizes! 9-HPOT 
CsLOX5: !enhances! seed expression 
CsLOX6: !enhances! flower expression 
CsLOX9: !enhances! root expression 
Ectropis oblique: !induces! CsLOX2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 
Glomerella cingulata: !induces! CsLOX1 
JA: !enhances! CsLOX3, 7 and 10 
ABA: !represses! CsLOX3, 7 and 10 
Salicylic acid: !represses! CsLOX3, 7 and 10 
Cold stress: !represses! CsLOX expression