Rubber trees are the world's major source of natural rubber. Rubber-containing latex is obtained from the laticifer cells of the rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis) via regular tapping. Rubber biosynthesis is a typical isoprenoid metabolic process in the laticifer cells; however, little is known about the positive feedback regulation caused by the loss of latex that occurs through tapping. In this study, we demonstrate the crucial role of jasmonate signalling in this feedback regulation. The endogenous levels of jasmonate, the expression levels of rubber biosynthesis-related genes, and the efficiency of in vitro rubber biosynthesis were found to be significantly higher in laticifer cells of regularly tapped trees than those of virgin (i.e. untapped) trees. Application of methyl jasmonate had similar effects to latex harvesting in up-regulating the rubber biosynthesis-related genes and enhancing rubber biosynthesis. The specific jasmonate signalling module in laticifer cells was identified as COI1-JAZ3-MYC2. Its activation was associated with enhanced rubber biosynthesis via up-regulation of the expression of a farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase gene and a small rubber particle protein gene. The increase in the corresponding proteins, especially that of farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase, probably contributes to the increased efficiency of rubber biosynthesis. To our knowledge, this is the first study to reveal a jasmonate signalling pathway in the regulation of rubber biosynthesis in laticifer cells. The identification of the specific jasmonate signalling module in the laticifer cells of the rubber tree may provide a basis for genetic improvement of rubber yield potential.

jasmonate: !signals! rubber biosynthesis
COI1-JAZ3-MYC2: !activates! rubber biosynthesis
farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase gene: !up-regulates! rubber biosynthesis
small rubber particle protein gene: !up-regulates! rubber biosynthesis
methyl jasmonate: !enhances! rubber biosynthesis
latex harvesting: !up-regulates! rubber biosynthesis