Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play important roles in plant growth and stress responses. Studies of lncRNAs in non-model plants are quite limited, especially those investigating multiple dehydration stresses. In this study, we identified novel lncRNAs and analyzed their functions in dehydration stress memory in switchgrass, an excellent biofuel feedstock and soil-conserving plant in the Gramineae family. We analyzed genome-wide transcriptional profiles of leaves of 5-week-old switchgrass plantlets grown via tissue culture after primary and secondary dehydration stresses (D1 and D2) and identified 16,551 novel lncRNAs, including 4554 annotated lncRNAs (targeting 3574 genes), and 11,997 unknown lncRNAs. Gene ontology and pathway enrichment analysis of annotated genes showed that the differentially expressed lncRNAs were related to abscisic acid (ABA) and ethylene (ETH) biosynthesis and signal transduction, and to starch and sucrose metabolism. The upregulated lncRNAs and genes were related to ABA synthesis and its signal transduction, and to trehalose synthesis. Meanwhile, lncRNAs and genes related to ETH biosynthesis and signal transduction were suppressed. LncRNAs and genes involved in ABA metabolism were verified using quantitative real-time PCR, and the endogenous ABA content was determined via high performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS). These results showed that ABA accumulated significantly during dehydration stress, especially in D2. Furthermore, we identified 307 dehydration stress memory lncRNAs, and the ratios of different memory types in switchgrass were similar to those in Arabidopsis and maize. The molecular responses of switchgrass lncRNAs to multiple dehydration stresses were researched systematically, revealing novel information about their transcriptional regulatory behavior. This study provides new insights into the response mechanism to dehydration stress in plants. The lncRNAs and pathways identified in this study provide valuable information for genetic modification of switchgrass and other crops.

lncRNA: !affects! ABA biosynthesis and signal transduction
lncRNA: !affects! ETH biosynthesis and signal transduction
lncRNA: !affects! Starch and sucrose metabolism
lncRNA: !enhances! Trehalose synthesis
lncRNA: !represses! ETH biosynthesis and signal transduction
lncRNA: !regulates! Gene expression