Nonavailability of water or dehydration remains recurring climatic disorder affecting yield of major food crops, legumes in particular. Nuclear proteins (NPs) and phosphoproteins (NPPs) execute crucial cellular functions that form the regulatory hub for coordinated stress response. Phosphoproteins hold enormous influence over cellular signalling. Four-week-old seedlings of a grain legume, chickpea, were subjected to gradual dehydration, and NPs were extracted from unstressed control and from 72- and 144-hr stressed tissues. We identified 4,832 NPs and 478 phosphosites, corresponding to 299 unique NPPs involved in multivariate cellular processes including protein modification and gene expression regulation, among others. The identified proteins included several novel kinases, phosphatases, and transcription factors, besides 660 uncharacterized proteins. Spliceosome complex and splicing related proteins were dominant among differentially regulated NPPs, indicating their dehydration modulated regulation. Phospho-motif analysis revealed stress-induced enrichment of proline-directed serine phosphorylation. Association mapping of NPPs revealed predominance of differential phosphorylation of spliceosome and splicing associated proteins. Also, regulatory proteins of key processes viz., protein degradation, regulation of flowering time, and circadian clock were observed to undergo dehydration-induced dephosphorylation. The characterization of novel regulatory proteins would provide new insights into stress adaptation and enable directed genetic manipulations for developing climate-resilient crops.

NPs: !execute! crucial cellular functions
NPPs: !hold influence over! cellular signalling
seedlings: !subjected to! gradual dehydration
NPs: !identified from! unstressed control and stressed tissues
NPPs: !involved in! multivariate cellular processes
kinases: !novel! phosphatases, transcription factors
spliceosome complex: !dominant among! differentially regulated NPPs
phospho-motif analysis: !revealed! stress-induced enrichment of proline-directed serine phosphorylation
association mapping: !predominance of! differential phosphorylation of spliceosome and splicing associated proteins
regulatory proteins: !observed to undergo! dehydration-induced dephosphorylation