['29769312', 'Chloroplasts host photosynthesis and fulfill other metabolic functions that are  essential to plant life. They have to divide by binary fission to maintain their  numbers throughout cycles of cell division. Chloroplast division is achieved by a  complex ring-shaped division machinery located on both the inner (stromal) and  the outer (cytosolic) side of the chloroplast envelope. The inner division ring  (termed the Z ring) is formed by the assembly of tubulin-like FtsZ1 and FtsZ2  proteins. ARC6 is a key chloroplast division protein that interacts with the Z  ring. ARC6 spans the inner envelope membrane, is known to stabilize or maintain  the Z ring, and anchors the Z ring to the inner membrane through interaction with  FtsZ2. The underlying mechanism of Z ring stabilization is not well-understood.  Here, biochemical and structural characterization of ARC6 was conducted using  light scattering, sedimentation, and light and transmission EM. The recombinant  protein was purified as a dimer. The results indicated that a truncated form of  ARC6 (tARC6), representing the stromal portion of ARC6, affects FtsZ2 assembly  without forming higher-order structures and exerts its effect via FtsZ2 dynamics.  tARC6 prevented GDP-induced FtsZ2 disassembly and caused a significant net  increase in FtsZ2 assembly when GDP was present. Single particle analysis and 3D  reconstruction were performed to elucidate the structural basis of ARC6 activity.  Together, the data reveal that a dimeric form of tARC6 binds to FtsZ2 filaments  and does not increase FtsZ polymerization rates but rather inhibits  GDP-associated FtsZ2 disassembly.', '2018 Jul 6', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.RA117.000999', 'Holzenburg']

FtsZ1: !assembles! FtsZ2 
ARC6: !interacts with! Z ring 
ARC6: !anchors! Z ring 
tARC6: !affects! FtsZ2 assembly 
tARC6: !prevents! GDP-induced FtsZ2 disassembly 
tARC6: !increases! FtsZ2 assembly 
tARC6: !binds to! FtsZ2 filaments 
tARC6: !inhibits! GDP-associated FtsZ2 disassembly