Cytokinin plays diverse roles in plant growth and development, generally acting by modulating gene transcription in target tissues. The type-B Arabidopsis response regulators (ARR) transcription factors have emerged as primary targets of cytokinin signaling and are required for essentially all cytokinin-mediated changes in gene expression. The diversity of cytokinin function is likely imparted by the activity of various transcription factors working with the type-B ARRs to alter specific sets of target genes. One potential set of co-regulators modulating the cytokinin response are the BARLEY B-RECOMBINANT/BASIC PENTACYSTEINE (BBR/BPC) family of plant-specific transcription factors. Here, we show that disruption of multiple BPCs results in reduced sensitivity to cytokinin. Further, the BPCs are necessary for the induction of a subset of genes in response to cytokinin. We identified direct in vivo targets of BPC6 using ChIP-Seq and found an enrichment of promoters of genes differentially expressed in response to cytokinin. Further, a significant number of BPC6 regulated genes are also direct targets of the type-B ARRs. Potential cis-binding elements for a number of other transcription factors linked to cytokinin action are enriched in the BPC binding fragments, including those for the cytokinin response factors (CRFs). In addition, several BPCs interact with a subset of type-A ARRs. Consistent with these results, a significant number of genes whose expression is altered in bpc mutant roots are also mis-expressed in crf1,3,5,6 and type-A arr3,4,5,6,7,8,9,15 mutant roots. These results suggest that the BPCs are part of a complex network of transcription factors that are involved in the response to cytokinin.

Cytokinin: !modulates! gene transcription
Type-B ARRs: !required for! cytokinin-mediated changes in gene expression
BPCs: !necessary for! induction of subset of genes in response to cytokinin
BPC6: !directly targets! genes differentially expressed in response to cytokinin
BPC6: !enriches! promoters of genes differentially expressed in response to cytokinin
BPC6: !interacts with! type-A ARRs
CRFs: !enriched in! BPC binding fragments
BPCs: !part of! complex network of transcription factors involved in response to cytokinin