Transcriptomic analysis indicates that the bacterial signalling molecule lumichrome enhances plant growth through a combination of enhanced cell division and cell enlargement, and possibly enhances photosynthesis. Lumichrome (7,8 dimethylalloxazine), a novel multitrophic signal molecule produced by Sinorhizobium meliloti bacteria, has previously been shown to elicit growth promotion in different plant species (Phillips et al. in Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:12275-12280, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.22.12275 , 1999). However, the molecular mechanisms that underlie this plant growth promotion remain obscure. Global transcript profiling using RNA-seq suggests that lumichrome enhances growth by inducing genes impacting on turgor driven growth and mitotic cell cycle that ensures the integration of cell division and expansion of developing leaves. The abundance of XTH9 and XPA4 transcripts was attributed to improved mediation of cell-wall loosening to allow turgor-driven cell enlargement. Mitotic CYCD3.3, CYCA1.1, SP1L3, RSW7 and PDF1 transcripts were increased in lumichrome-treated Arabidopsis thaliana plants, suggesting enhanced growth was underpinned by increased cell differentiation and expansion with a consequential increase in biomass. Synergistic ethylene-auxin cross-talk was also observed through reciprocal over-expression of ACO1 and SAUR54, in which ethylene activates the auxin signalling pathway and regulates Arabidopsis growth by both stimulating auxin biosynthesis and modulating the auxin transport machinery to the leaves. Decreased transcription of jasmonate biosynthesis and responsive-related transcripts (LOX2; LOX3; LOX6; JAL34; JR1) might contribute towards suppression of the negative effects of methyl jasmonate (MeJa) such as chlorophyll loss and decreases in RuBisCO and photosynthesis. This work contributes towards a deeper understanding of how lumichrome enhances plant growth and development.

Lumichrome: !enhances! Plant Growth
XTH9/XPA4: !mediates! Cell-wall loosening
CYCD3.3/CYCA1.1/SP1L3/RSW7/PDF1: !increases! Cell differentiation and expansion
ACO1/SAUR54: !synergizes! Ethylene-auxin cross-talk
LOX2/LOX3/LOX6/JAL34/JR1: !decreases! Jasmonate biosynthesis