['29777000', 'Phosphatidylcholine (PC) is a major membrane phospholipid and a precursor for  major signaling molecules. Understanding its synthesis is important for improving  plant growth, nutritional value, and resistance to stress. PC synthesis is  complex, involving several interconnected pathways, one of which proceeds from  serine-derived phosphoethanolamine to form phosphocholine through three  sequential phospho-base methylations catalyzed by phosphoethanolamine  N-methyltransferases (PEAMTs). The contribution of this pathway to the production  of PC and plant growth has been a matter of some debate. Although a handful of  individual PEAMTs have been described, there has not been any in planta  investigation of a PEAMT family. Here, we provide a comparative functional  analysis of two Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) PEAMTs, NMT1 and the little  known NMT3. Analysis of loss-of-function mutants demonstrates that NMT1 and NMT3  synergistically regulate PC homeostasis, phase transition at the shoot apex,  coordinated organ development, and fertility through overlapping but also  specific functions. The nmt1 nmt3 double mutant shows extensive sterility,  drastically reduced PC concentrations, and altered lipid profiles. These findings  demonstrate that the phospho-base methylation pathway makes a major contribution  to PC synthesis in Arabidopsis and that NMT1 and NMT3 play major roles in its  catalysis and the regulation of PC homeostasis as well as in plant growth and  reproduction.', '2018 Aug', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.18.00457', 'ORCID:']

NMT1: !synergistically regulates! PC homeostasis
NMT3: !synergistically regulates! PC homeostasis
NMT1: !regulates! phase transition at shoot apex
NMT3: !regulates! phase transition at shoot apex
NMT1: !regulates! coordinated organ development
NMT3: !regulates! coordinated organ development
NMT1: !regulates! fertility
NMT3: !regulates! fertility
PC: !contributes to! plant growth
PC: !contributes to! nutritional value
PC: !contributes to! resistance to stress