Fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase participates in positive regulation of salt stress in Arabidopsis. Fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) catalyzes the hydrolysis of fumarylacetoacetate into fumarate and acetoacetate, the final step in the Tyr degradation pathway that is essential to animals. However, the Tyr degradation pathway is not well understood in plants. Previously, we found that mutation of the SHORT-DAY SENSITIVE CELL DEATH 1 (SSCD1) gene encoding FAH in Arabidopsis causes spontaneous cell death under short day, which first indicated that the Tyr degradation pathway also plays an important role in plants. In this study, we found that the SSCD1 gene was up-regulated by salt stress, and the sscd1 mutant was hypersensitive to salt stress. However, the double mutant of SSCD1 and HOMOGENTISATE DIOXYGENASE, in which intermediates of the Tyr degradation pathway could not be produced, displayed a normal response to salt stress. Furthermore, the sscd1 mutant showed more accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and less up-regulation of some ROS-scavenging genes such as ASCORBATE PEROXIDASE 2 and COPPER/ZINC SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE 1 compared with wild type under salt stress. In addition, SSCD1 expression was also up-regulated by H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and the sscd1 mutant exhibited hypersensitivity to oxidative stress compared with wild type. Taken together, we concluded that loss of FAH in sscd1 leads to the accumulation of Tyr degradation intermediates, which impairs the up-regulation of some ROS-scavenging genes under salt stress, causing more accumulation of ROS, resulting in the hypersensitivity of sscd1 to salt stress.

SSCD1: !catalyzes! FAH 
FAH: !participates in! positive regulation of salt stress 
SSCD1: !up-regulated by! salt stress 
sscd1 mutant: !hypersensitive to! salt stress 
SSCD1: !up-regulated by! H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> 
sscd1 mutant: !hypersensitive to! oxidative stress 
Tyr degradation intermediates: !accumulate in! sscd1 
Tyr degradation intermediates: !impair! up-regulation of ROS-scavenging genes 
ROS-scavenging genes: !less up-regulated in! sscd1