Contents Summary 1031 I. Introduction 1031 II. Interkingdom communication enabling symbiosis 1032 III. Nutritional and regulatory roles for key metabolites in the AM symbiosis 1035 IV. The plant-fungus genotype combination determines the outcome of the symbiosis 1039 V. Perspectives 1039 Acknowledgements 1041 References 1041 SUMMARY: The evolutionary and ecological success of the arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis relies on an efficient and multifactorial communication system for partner recognition, and on a fine-tuned and reciprocal metabolic regulation of each symbiont to reach an optimal functional integration. Besides strigolactones, N-acetylglucosamine-derivatives released by the plant were recently suggested to trigger fungal reprogramming at the pre-contact stage. Remarkably, N-acetylglucosamine-based diffusible molecules also are symbiotic signals produced by AM fungi (AMF) and clues on the mechanisms of their perception by the plant are emerging. AMF genomes and transcriptomes contain a battery of putative effector genes that may have conserved and AMF- or host plant-specific functions. Nutrient exchange is the key feature of AM symbiosis. A mechanism of phosphate transport inside fungal hyphae has been suggested, and first insights into the regulatory mechanisms of root colonization in accordance with nutrient transfer and status were obtained. The recent discovery of the dependency of AMF on fatty acid transfer from the host has offered a convincing explanation for their obligate biotrophism. Novel studies highlighted the importance of plant and fungal genotypes for the outcome of the symbiosis. These findings open new perspectives for fundamental research and application of AMF in agriculture.

plant: !releases! N-acetylglucosamine-derivatives 
AMF: !produces! N-acetylglucosamine-based diffusible molecules 
AMF: !contains! putative effector genes 
AMF: !transports! phosphate 
AMF: !depends on! fatty acid transfer from host 
plant/AMF: !determines! outcome of symbiosis