['29848548', 'Group VII ethylene response factors (ERF-VIIs) regulate transcriptional  adaptation to flooding-induced hypoxia in plants. ERF-VII stability is controlled  in an O(2)-dependent manner by the Cys/Arg branch of the N-end rule pathway  whereby oxidation of a conserved N-terminal cysteine residue initiates target  degradation. This oxidation is catalyzed by plant cysteine oxidases (PCOs), which  use O(2) as cosubstrate to generate Cys-sulfinic acid. The PCOs directly link  O(2) availability to ERF-VII stability and anaerobic adaptation, leading to the  suggestion that they act as plant O(2) sensors. However, their ability to respond  to fluctuations in O(2) concentration has not been established. Here, we  investigated the steady-state kinetics of Arabidopsis thaliana PCOs 1-5 to  ascertain whether their activities are sensitive to O(2) levels. We found that  the most catalytically competent isoform is AtPCO4, both in terms of responding  to O(2) and oxidizing AtRAP2.2/2,12 (two of the most prominent ERF-VIIs  responsible for promoting the hypoxic response), which suggests that AtPCO4 plays  a central role in ERF-VII regulation. Furthermore, we found that AtPCO activity  is susceptible to decreases in pH and that the hypoxia-inducible AtPCOs 1/2 and  the noninducible AtPCOs 4/5 have discrete AtERF-VII substrate preferences.  Pertinently, the AtPCOs had K(m(O2))(app) values in a physiologically relevant  range, which should enable them to sensitively react to changes in O(2)  availability. This work validates an O(2)-sensing role for the PCOs and suggests  that differences in expression pattern, ERF-VII selectivity, and catalytic  capability may enable the different isoforms to have distinct biological  functions. Individual PCOs could therefore be targeted to manipulate ERF-VII  levels and improve stress tolerance in plants.', '2018 Jul 27', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.RA118.003496', 'Flashman']

ERF-VII: !stability controlled by! N-end rule pathway 
N-end rule pathway: !catalyzed by! plant cysteine oxidases (PCOs) 
PCOs: !use! O(2) as cosubstrate 
PCOs: !directly link! O(2) availability to ERF-VII stability 
AtPCO4: !most catalytically competent isoform! 
AtPCO4: !oxidizes! AtRAP2.2/2,12 
AtPCO: !activity susceptible to! decreases in pH 
AtPCOs: !have discrete! AtERF-VII substrate preferences 
AtPCOs: !K(m(O2))(app)! in physiologically relevant range