Long Noncoding-RNAs (LncRNAs) are known to be involved in some biological processes, but their roles in plant-virus interactions remain largely unexplored. While circular RNAs (circRNAs) have been studied in animals, there has yet to be extensive research on them in a plant system, especially in tomato-tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) interaction. In this study, RNA transcripts from the susceptible tomato line JS-CT-9210 either infected with TYLCV or untreated, were sequenced in a pair-end strand-specific manner using ribo-zero rRNA removal library method. A total of 2056 lncRNAs including 1767 long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNAs) and 289 long non-coding natural antisense transcripts (lncNATs) were obtained. The expression patterns in lncRNAs were similar in susceptible tomato plants between control check (CK) and TYLCV infected samples. Our analysis suggested that lncRNAs likely played a role in a variety of functions, including plant hormone signaling, protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum, RNA transport, ribosome function, photosynthesis, glulathione metabolism, and plant-pathogen interactions. Using virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) analysis, we found that reduced expression of the lncRNA S-slylnc0957 resulted in enhanced resistance to TYLCV in susceptible tomato plants. Moreover, we identified 184 circRNAs candidates using the CircRNA Identifier (CIRI) software, of which 32 circRNAs were specifically expressed in untreated samples and 83 circRNAs in TYLCV samples. Approximately 62% of these circRNAs were derived from exons. We validated the circRNAs by both PCR and Sanger sequencing using divergent primers, and found that most of circRNAs were derived from the exons of protein coding genes. The silencing of these circRNAs parent genes resulted in decreased TYLCV virus accumulation. In this study, we identified novel lncRNAs and circRNAs using bioinformatic approaches and showed that these RNAs function as negative regulators of TYLCV infection. Moreover, the expression patterns of lncRNAs in susceptible tomato plants were different from that of resistant tomato plants, while exonic circRNAs expression positively associated with their respective protein coding genes. This work provides a foundation for elaborating the novel roles of lncRNAs and circRNAs in susceptible tomatoes following TYLCV infection.

lncRNA: !affects! Plant hormone signaling
lncRNA: !affects! Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum
lncRNA: !affects! RNA transport
lncRNA: !affects! Ribosome function
lncRNA: !affects! Photosynthesis
lncRNA: !affects! Glutathione metabolism
lncRNA: !affects! Plant-pathogen interactions
circRNA: !derived from! Exons
circRNA: !positively associated with! Protein coding genes