Barley (Hordeum vulgare) is an important crop cultivated across the world. Drought is a major abiotic factor compromising barley yield worldwide, therefore in modern spring barley cultivars superior seed and malting quality characteristics should be combined with reasonable level of drought tolerance. Previously we have identified a number of barley lines demonstrating the superior yield performance under drought conditions. The aim of this work was to perform a QTL analysis of malting quality traits in a doubled haploid (DH) mapping population of two elite barley lines that differ in their reaction pattern to drought stress. A population of DH lines was developed by crossing two drought-tolerant elite breeding lines, Victoriana and Sofiara, exploiting distinct mechanism of drought tolerance, sustaining assimilation vs remobilization. The mapping population was assayed under field conditions at four distinct locations that differed in precipitation rate. DH lines were genotyped with the Illumina 9 K iSelect assay, and linkage map including 1782 polymorphic markers and covering a total map length of 1140 cM was constructed. The result of quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis showed that majority of the traits were affected by several main effect QTL and/or QTL x environment (QE) interactions. In total, 57, 41, and 5 QTL were associated with yield-related traits, malting quality traits and seed quality traits, respectively. 11 and 29 of mapped QTL explained more than 10 and 5% of phenotypic variation, respectively. In several chromosomal regions co-localization between QTL for various traits were observed. The largest clusters were detected on chromosomes 3H and 4H. Our QTL mapping results revealed several novel consistent genomic regions controlling malting quality which could be exploited in marker assisted selection. In this context, the complex QTL region on chromosome 3H seems of particular interest, as it harbors several large effect QTL.

Victoriana: !crossed with! Sofiara
DH lines: !genotyped with! Illumina 9K iSelect assay
QTL: !associated with! yield-related traits
QTL: !associated with! malting quality traits
QTL: !associated with! seed quality traits
QTL: !explained by! 11 and 29 QTL
QTL: !co-localized on! chromosomes 3H and 4H
QTL: !harboring! several large effect QTL