AFP improved cryopreservation efficiency of potato (Solanum tuberosum cv. Superior) by regulating transcript levels of CBF1 and DHN1. However, the optimal AFP concentration required for strong induction of the genes was dependent on the type of vitrification solution to which the AFP was added: This finding suggests that AFP increased cryopreservation efficiency by transcriptional regulation of these genes, which might protect plant cell membranes from cold stress during cryopreservation. Despite the availability of many studies reporting the benefits of anti-freeze protein III (AFP III) as a cryoprotectant, the role of AFP III in this process has not been well demonstrated using molecular analysis. In addition, AFP III has not been exploited in the cryopreservation of potato thus far. Therefore, we studied the effects of AFP III on the cryopreservation of potato (Solanum tuberosum cv. Superior). We found that CBF1 and DHN1 genes are low temperature-inducible in potato leaves (S. tuberosum cv. Superior). Transcript levels of these genes expressed in shoot tips cryopreserved with AFP III were higher than those of the controls. However, the optimal AFP III concentration required for strong induction of the genes was dependent on the type of cryoprotection solution to which the AFP III was added: 500 ng/mL worked best for PVS2, while 1500 ng/mL was optimal for LS. Interestingly, the involvement of AFP III in the cryoprotection solutions improved cryopreservation efficiency as compared to the control, and expression levels of the detected genes were associated with cryopreservation efficiency. This finding suggests that AFP III increased cryopreservation efficiency by transcriptional regulation of these genes, which might protect plant cell membranes from cold stress during cryopreservation. Therefore, we expect that our findings will lead to the successful application of AFP III as a potent cryoprotectant in the cryopreservation of rare and commercially important plant germplasms.

AFP III: !enhances! cryopreservation efficiency
CBF1 and DHN1 genes: !are low temperature-inducible in! potato leaves
AFP III: !induces! CBF1 and DHN1 genes
AFP III: !protects! plant cell membranes from cold stress