Plants are constantly exposed to a variety of environmental stresses, including herbivory. How plants perceive herbivores on a molecular level is poorly understood. Leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs), the largest subfamily of RLKs, are essential for plants to detect external stress signals, and may therefore also be involved in herbivore perception. Here, we employed RNA interference silencing, phytohormone profiling and complementation, as well as herbivore resistance assays, to investigate the requirement of an LRR-RLK for the initiation of rice (Oryza sativa) defenses against the chewing herbivore striped stem borer (SSB) Chilo suppressalis. We discovered a plasma membrane-localized LRR-RLK, OsLRR-RLK1, whose transcription is strongly up-regulated by SSB attack and treatment with oral secretions of Spodoptera frugiperda. OsLRR-RLK1 acts upstream of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MPK) cascades, and positively regulates defense-related MPKs and WRKY transcription factors. Moreover, OsLRR-RLK1 is a positive regulator of SSB-elicited, but not wound-elicited, levels of jasmonic acid and ethylene, trypsin protease inhibitor activity and plant resistance towards SSB. OsLRR-RLK1 therefore plays an important role in herbivory-induced defenses of rice. Given the well-documented role of LRR-RLKs in the perception of stress-related molecules, we speculate that OsLRR-RLK1 may be involved in the perception of herbivory-associated molecular patterns.

OsLRR-RLK1: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
OsLRR-RLK1: !up-regulated by! SSB attack and treatment with oral secretions of Spodoptera frugiperda 
OsLRR-RLK1: !acts upstream of! mitogen-activated protein kinase (MPK) cascades 
OsLRR-RLK1: !positively regulates! defense-related MPKs and WRKY transcription factors 
OsLRR-RLK1: !positively regulates! SSB-elicited levels of jasmonic acid and ethylene, trypsin protease inhibitor activity and plant resistance towards SSB 
OsLRR-RLK1: !may be involved in! perception of herbivory-associated molecular patterns