Boron (B) is an essential micronutrient for plants. To maintain B concentration in tissues at appropriate levels, plants use boric acid channels belonging to the NIP subfamily of aquaporins and BOR borate exporters. To regulate B transport, these transporters exhibit different cell-type specific expression, polar localization, and B-dependent post-transcriptional regulation. Here, we describe the development of genetically encoded biosensors for cytosolic boric acid to visualize the spatial distribution and temporal dynamics of B in plant tissues. The biosensors were designed based on the function of the NIP5;1 5'-untranslated region (UTR), which promotes mRNA degradation in response to an elevated cytosolic boric acid concentration. The signal intensities of the biosensor coupled with Venus fluorescent protein and a nuclear localization signal (uNIP5;1-Venus) showed negative correlation with intracellular B concentrations in cultured tobacco BY-2 cells. When expressed in Arabidopsis thaliana, uNIP5;1-Venus enabled the quantification of B distribution in roots at single-cell resolution. In mature roots, cytosolic B levels in stele were maintained under low B supply, while those in epidermal, cortical, and endodermal cells were influenced by external B concentrations. Another biosensor coupled with a luciferase protein fused to a destabilization PEST sequence (uNIP5;1-Luc) was used to visualize changes in cytosolic boric acid concentrations. Thus, uNIP5;1-Venus/Luc enables visualization of B transport in various plant cells/tissues.

NIP5;1 UTR: !promotes mRNA degradation in response to! elevated cytosolic boric acid concentration
uNIP5;1-Venus: !shows negative correlation with! intracellular B concentrations 
uNIP5;1-Luc: !visualizes changes in! cytosolic boric acid concentrations 
BOR borate exporters: !exhibit! cell-type specific expression, polar localization, and B-dependent post-transcriptional regulation 
B: !maintains! concentration in tissues 
B: !influences! epidermal, cortical, and endodermal cells