Among antioxidant enzymes, the superoxide dismutase (SOD) family is a major actor in catalysing the disproportionation of superoxide. Apart from its role as antioxidant, these enzymes have a role in cell signalling, and Cu,Zn-SOD proteins are also major pollen allergens. In order to deepen our understanding of the SOD isoenzymes present in olive pollen and to analyse the molecular variability of the pollen Cu,Zn-SOD family, we carried out biochemical, transcriptomic and localization studies of pollen grains from different olive cultivars and other allergenic species. Olive pollen showed a high rate of total SOD activity in all cultivars assayed, which did not correlate with pollen viability. Mass spectrometry analysis together with activity assays and Western blotting experiments enabled us to identify new forms of Cu,Zn-SOD enzyme (including chloroplastidic and peroxisomal forms) as well as differentially expressed Mn-, Fe- and Cu,Zn-SOD isoenzymes among the pollen of different olive cultivars and allergenic species. Ultrastructural localization of Cu,Zn-SOD revealed its plastidial localization in the pollen grain. We also identified the occurrence of a shorter form of one of the cytosolic Cu,Zn-SOD enzymes, likely as the result of alternative splicing. This shorter enzyme showed lower SOD activity as compared to the full length form. The presence of multiple SOD isoenzymes in the olive pollen could be related to the need of finely tuning the ROS metabolism during the transition from its quiescent condition at maturity to a highly metabolically active state at germination.

Cu,Zn-SOD: !catalyses! disproportionation of superoxide 
Cu,Zn-SOD: !is a major pollen allergen! 
Cu,Zn-SOD: !localizes to! plastidial 
Cu,Zn-SOD: !has shorter form! with lower SOD activity 
Mn-, Fe- and Cu,Zn-SOD isoenzymes: !differentially expressed! among pollen of different olive cultivars and allergenic species 
ROS metabolism: !finely tuned! during transition from quiescent to active state