Rosa hybrida is a valuable ornamental, food and medicinal crop worldwide, but with relatively limited molecular marker resources, especially for flower-specific markers. In this study, we performed genomic and floral transcriptomic sequencing of modern rose. We obtained comprehensive nucleotide information, from which numerous potential simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers were identified but were found to have high rates of amplification failure and PCR product redundancy. We applied a filtering strategy for BLAST analysis with the assembled genomic sequence and identified 124,591 genomic and 2,292 EST markers with unique annealing sites. These markers had much greater reliability than those obtained before filtering. Additional BLAST analysis against the transcriptomic sequences uncovered 5225 genomic SSRs associated with 4100 transcripts, 2138 of which were associated with functional genes that were annotated against the non-redundant database. More than 90% of these newly developed molecular markers were polymorphic, based on PCR using a subset of SSRs to analyze tetraploid modern rose accessions, diploid Rosa species and one strawberry accession. The relationships among Rosa species determined by cluster analysis (based on these results) were in agreement with modern rose breeding history, whereas strawberry was isolated in a separate cluster, as expected. Our results provide valuable molecular-genetic tools for rose flower trait improvement, breeding and taxonomy. Importantly, we describe a reproducible organ-specific strategy for molecular marker development and selection in plants, which can be applied to other crops.

Rosa hybrida: !has! limited molecular marker resources
Rosa hybrida: !obtained! comprehensive nucleotide information
Rosa hybrida: !identified! 124,591 genomic and 2,292 EST markers
Rosa hybrida: !filtered! BLAST analysis
Rosa hybrida: !associated with! functional genes
Rosa hybrida: !analyzed! tetraploid modern rose accessions
Rosa hybrida: !clustered! in agreement with breeding history
Rosa hybrida: !provides! valuable molecular-genetic tools
Rosa hybrida: !applied to! other crops