Lysine succinylation is a newly identified protein post-translational modification and plays important roles in various biological pathways in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, but its extent and function in photosynthetic organisms remain largely unknown. Here, we performed the first systematic studies of lysine succinylation in cyanobacteria, which are the only prokaryotes capable of oxygenic photosynthesis and the established model organisms for studying photosynthetic mechanisms. By using mass spectrometry analysis in combination with the enrichment of succinylated peptides from digested cell lysates, we identified 1,704 lysine succinylation sites on 691 proteins in a model cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that a large proportion of the succinylation sites were present on proteins in photosynthesis and metabolism. Among all identified succinylated proteins involved in photosynthesis, the PSII manganese-stabilizing protein (PsbO) was found to be succinylated on Lys99 and Lys234. Functional studies of PsbO were performed by site-directed mutagenesis, and mutants mimicking either constitutively succinylated (K99E and K234E) or non-succinylated states (K99R and K234R) were constructed. The succinylation-mimicking K234E mutant exhibited a decreased oxygen evolution rate of the PSII center and the efficiency of energy transfer during the photosynthetic reaction. Molecular dynamics simulations suggested a mechanism that may allow succinylation to influence the efficiency of photosynthesis by altering the conformation of PsbO, thereby hindering the interaction between PsbO and the PSII core. Our findings suggest that reversible succinylation may be an important regulatory mechanism during photosynthesis in Synechococcus, as well as in other photosynthetic organisms.

Lysine succinylation: !affects! Photosynthesis 
PsbO: !succinylates on! Lys99 and Lys234 
K234E mutant: !decreases! Oxygen evolution rate 
Succinylation: !alters! Conformation of PsbO