Salinity is a major abiotic stress that limits upland cotton growth and reduces fibre production worldwide. To reveal genetic regulation via transcript and protein levels after salt stress, we comprehensively analysed the global changes in mRNA, miRNA, and protein profiles in response to salt stress in two contrasting salt-tolerant cotton genotypes. In the current study, proteomic and mRNA-seq data were combined to reveal that some genes are differentially expressed at both the proteomic and mRNA levels. However, we observed no significant change in mRNA corresponding to most of the strongly differentially abundant proteins. This finding may have resulted from global changes in alternative splicing events and miRNA levels under salt stress conditions. Evidence was provided indicating that several salt stress-responsive proteins can alter miRNAs and modulate alternative splicing events in upland cotton. The results of the stringent screening of the mRNA-seq and proteomic data between the salt-tolerant and salt-sensitive genotypes identified 63 and 85 candidate genes/proteins related to salt tolerance after 4 and 24 h of salt stress, respectively, between the tolerant and sensitive genotype. Finally, we predicted an interaction network comprising 158 genes/proteins and then discovered that two main clusters in the network were composed of ATP synthase (CotAD_74681) and cytochrome oxidase (CotAD_46197) in mitochondria. The results revealed that mitochondria, as important organelles involved in energy metabolism, play an essential role in the synthesis of resistance proteins during the process of salt exposure. We provided a plausible schematic for the systematic salt tolerance model; this schematic reveals multiple levels of gene regulation in response to salt stress in cotton and provides a list of salt tolerance-related genes/proteins. The information here will facilitate candidate gene discovery and molecular marker development for salt tolerance breeding in cotton.

Gene: !affects! mRNA/miRNA/protein profiles
Gene: !alters! miRNAs
Gene: !modulates! alternative splicing events
Gene: !comprises! 158 genes/proteins
Gene: !synthesizes! resistance proteins
Gene: !involves in! energy metabolism