Roots play a central role in plant response to water stress (WS). They are involved in its perception and signalling to the leaf as well as in allowing the plant to adapt to maintaining an adequate water balance. Only a few studies have investigated the molecular/biochemical responses to WS in roots of perennial plants, such as grapevine. This study compares two grapevine rootstock genotypes (i.e. 101.14 and M4) with different tolerance to WS, evaluating the responses at proteomic and metabolite levels. WS induced changes in the abundance of several proteins in both genotypes (17 and 22% of the detected proteins in 101.14 and M4, respectively). The proteomic analysis revealed changes in many metabolic pathways that fitted well with the metabolite data. M4 showed metabolic responses which were potentially able to counteract the WS effects, such as the drop in cell turgor, increased oxidative stress and loss of cell structure integrity/functionality. However, in 101.14 it was evident that the roots were suffering more severely from these effects. We found that many proteins classified as active in energy metabolism, hormone metabolism, protein, secondary metabolism and stress functional classes showed particular differences between the two rootstocks. The proteomic/metabolite comparative analysis carried out provides new information on the possible biochemical and molecular strategies adopted by grapevine roots to counteract WS. Although further work is needed to define in detail the role(s) of the proteins and metabolites that characterize WS response, this study, involving the M4 rootstock genotype, highlights that osmotic responses, modulations of C metabolism, mitochondrial functionality and some specific responses to stress occurring in the roots play a primary role in Vitis spp. tolerance to this type of abiotic stress.

WS: !induces changes in! abundance of proteins 
101.14 & M4: !show differences in! metabolic pathways 
M4: !counteracts! WS effects 
101.14: !suffers more severely from! WS effects 
energy metabolism, hormone metabolism, protein, secondary metabolism & stress functional classes: !show particular differences between! two rootstocks 
osmotic responses, C metabolism, mitochondrial functionality & specific responses to stress: !play primary role in! Vitis spp. tolerance to abiotic stress