Nitric oxide (NO) is established as a modulator of various developmental processes in plants through its interaction with multiple enzymatic and non-enzymatic biomolecules. Lateral root (LR) induction and extension in sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) has been observed to be governed by a probable crosstalk between NO and ethylene biosynthesizing enzyme-ACC oxidase. NaCl (120 mM) stress not only lowers LR induction but also reduces their extension growth. Quenching of endogenous NO by raising seedlings in presence of 40 µM hemoglobin in the growth medium does not affect LR induction but lowers their extension growth. NaCl stress and NO depletion have additive effects on the enhancement of ACC oxidase activity, leading to enhanced ethylene biosynthesis. Role of NO has been further confirmed by raising sunflower seedlings in the presence of 20-60 µM of two NO donors, sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and diethylenetriamine NONOate (DETA). LR extension growth was higher with DETA than SNP as NO donor at 40 µM. Iron-deficiency also promoted LR proliferation. It also significantly lowered ACC oxidase activity in the seedling roots in response to salt stress. Based on the present findings it is proposed that salt stress-mediated LR proliferation is regulated by NO through its binding with ACC oxidase (an iron-containing enzyme). This results in the formation of a stable ternary complex (ACC-ACC oxidase-NO) which leads to the reduction in ethylene biosynthesis. Lesser availability of ethylene consequently brings about enhanced LR formation.

Nitric oxide: !interacts with! ACC oxidase 
NaCl stress: !lowers! LR induction 
NaCl stress: !reduces! extension growth 
Hemoglobin: !quenches! NO 
NaCl stress: !enhances! ACC oxidase activity 
NO donors: !promote! LR extension growth 
Iron-deficiency: !promotes! LR proliferation 
Iron-deficiency: !lowers! ACC oxidase activity 
ACC-ACC oxidase-NO: !forms! stable ternary complex 
Stable ternary complex: !reduces! ethylene biosynthesis 
Reduced ethylene biosynthesis: !enhances! LR formation