['29945970', 'The SNF1-related protein kinase 1 (SnRK1) is a heterotrimeric eukaryotic kinase  that interacts with diverse proteins and regulates their activity in response to  starvation and stress signals. Recently, the FCS-like zinc finger (FLZ) proteins  were identified as a potential scaffold for SnRK1 in plants. However, the  evolutionary and mechanistic aspect of this complex formation is currently  unknown. Here, in silico analyses predicted that FLZ proteins possess conserved  intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) with a propensity for protein binding in  the N and C termini across the plant lineage. We observed that the Arabidopsis  FLZ proteins promiscuously interact with SnRK1 subunits, which formed different  isoenzyme complexes. The FLZ domain was essential for mediating the interaction  with SnRK1alpha subunits, whereas the IDRs in the N termini facilitated interactions  with the beta and betagamma subunits of SnRK1. Furthermore, the IDRs in the N termini were  important for mediating dimerization of different FLZ proteins. Of note, the  interaction of FLZ with SnRK1 was confined to cytoplasmic foci, which colocalized  with the endoplasmic reticulum. An evolutionary analysis revealed that in  general, the IDR-rich regions are under more relaxed selection than the FLZ  domain. In summary, the findings in our study reveal the structural details,  origin, and evolution of a land plant-specific scaffold of SnRK1 formed by the  coordinated actions of IDRs and structured regions in the FLZ proteins. We  propose that the FLZ protein complex might be involved in providing flexibility,  thus enhancing the binding repertoire of the SnRK1 hub in land plants.', '2018 Aug 24', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.RA118.002073', 'ORCID:']

SnRK1: !interacts with! FLZ proteins 
FLZ proteins: !contain! intrinsically disordered regions 
FLZ proteins: !promiscuously interact with! SnRK1 subunits 
FLZ domain: !essential for mediating interaction with! SnRK1alpha subunits 
IDRs in N termini: !facilitate interactions with! beta and betagamma subunits of SnRK1 
IDRs in N termini: !important for mediating dimerization of! different FLZ proteins 
FLZ proteins: !confined to cytoplasmic foci which colocalize with! endoplasmic reticulum 
IDR-rich regions: !under more relaxed selection than! FLZ domain