Cotton fibers are single-celled trichomes that initiate from the epidermal cells of the ovules at or before anthesis. Here, we identified that the histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity is essential for proper cotton fiber initiation. We further identified 15 HDACs homoeologs in each of the A- and D-subgenomes of Gossypium hirsutum. Few of these HDAC homoeologs expressed preferentially during the early stages of fiber development [-1, 0 and 6 days post-anthesis (DPA)]. Among them, GhHDA5 expressed significantly at the time of fiber initiation (-1 and 0 DPA). The in vitro assay for HDAC activity indicated that GhHDA5 primarily deacetylates H3K9 acetylation marks. Moreover, the reduced expression of GhHDA5 also suppresses fiber initiation and lint yield in the RNA interference (RNAi) lines. The 0 DPA ovules of GhHDA5RNAi lines also showed alterations in reactive oxygen species homeostasis and elevated autophagic cell death in the developing fibers. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) identified through RNA-seq of RNAi line (DEP12) and their pathway analysis showed that GhHDA5 modulates expression of many stress and development-related genes involved in fiber development. The reduced expression of GhHDA5 in the RNAi lines also resulted in H3K9 hyper-acetylation on the promoter region of few DEGs assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. The positively co-expressed genes with GhHDA5 showed cumulative higher expression during fiber initiation, and gene ontology annotation suggests their involvement in fiber development. Furthermore, the predicted protein interaction network in the positively co-expressed genes indicates HDA5 modulates fiber initiation-specific gene expression through a complex involving reported repressors.

GhHDA5: !deacetylates! H3K9 acetylation marks
GhHDA5: !modulates! expression of stress and development-related genes
GhHDA5: !represses! fiber initiation and lint yield
GhHDA5: !alters! reactive oxygen species homeostasis
GhHDA5: !elevates! autophagic cell death
GhHDA5: !hyper-acetylates! promoter region of DEGs
GhHDA5: !cumulatively expresses! positively co-expressed genes
GhHDA5: !involves! reported repressors in complex