Here we uncover the major evolutionary events shaping the evolution of the GID1 family of gibberellin receptors in land plants at the sequence, structure and gene expression levels. Gibberellic acid (gibberellin, GA) controls key developmental processes in the life cycle of land plants. By interacting with the GIBBERELLIN INSENSITIVE DWARF1 (GID1) receptor, GA regulates the expression of a wide range of genes through different pathways. Here we report the systematic identification and classification of GID1s in 54 plants genomes, encompassing from bryophytes and lycophytes, to several monocots and eudicots. We investigated the evolutionary relationship of GID1s using a comparative genomics framework and found strong support for a previously proposed phylogenetic classification of this family in land plants. We identified lineage-specific expansions of particular subfamilies (i.e. GID1ac and GID1b) in different eudicot lineages (e.g. GID1b in legumes). Further, we found both, shared and divergent structural features between GID1ac and GID1b subgroups in eudicots that provide mechanistic insights on their functions. Gene expression data from several species show that at least one GID1 gene is expressed in every sampled tissue, with a strong bias of GID1b expression towards underground tissues and dry legume seeds (which typically have low GA levels). Taken together, our results indicate that GID1ac retained canonical GA signaling roles, whereas GID1b specialized in conditions of low GA concentrations. We propose that this functional specialization occurred initially at the gene expression level and was later fine-tuned by mutations that conferred greater GA affinity to GID1b, including a Phe residue in the GA-binding pocket. Finally, we discuss the importance of our findings to understand the diversification of GA perception mechanisms in land plants.

Gibberellic acid: !interacts with! GIBBERELLIN INSENSITIVE DWARF1 (GID1)
GID1: !regulates expression of! wide range of genes
GID1: !expands in! eudicot lineages
GID1ac: !retains canonical GA signaling roles!
GID1b: !specializes in conditions of low GA concentrations!
Phe residue: !conferred greater GA affinity to! GID1b