In the current study, we showed that exogenous GABA supplementation increases the endogenous GABA level, several amino acids, and phytohormones in citrus plants, suggesting that GABA works in harmony with phytohormones. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) plays a key role in cytosolic regulation of pH, controlling of carbon and nitrogen metabolism, and protection against biotic and abiotic stresses. Although it is well-known that GABA is implicated in plant defense and it could act as a signaling molecule, its effect on phytohormones is not completely understood. In this study, we investigated the effect of exogenous GABA on citrus phytohormones using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. A significant increase in endogenous GABA was observed in GABA-treated plants. The highest increase in GABA was recorded in plants treated with 10 mM 7 days post-treatment. In addition, we observed a moderate increase in several amino acids including glycine, L-alanine, L-proline, L-asparagine, and L-glutamine. The levels of benzoic acid, cinnamic acid, salicylic acid, trans-jasmonic acid, indole acetic acid, indole propionic acid, and abscisic acid were significantly increased in GABA-treated plants compared to the control. The gene expression showed that GABA transaminase (GABA-T) and succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) were induced in GABA-treated plants, indicating a conversion of GABA to succinate. In addition, the gene expression of the regulatory enzymes of the TCA cycle (malate dehydrogenase and succinic dehydrogenase) was upregulated in GABA-treated plants, indicating an induction of respiration. In agreement with the chemical analysis, the gene expression results showed that most of the genes implicated in the biosynthesis of phytohormones were also upregulated in GABA-treated plants. Our results indicated that GABA works in harmony with phytohormones and suggested that regulation of phytohormones by exogenous GABA could play a key role in reducing plant stress.

GABA: !increases! endogenous GABA level
GABA: !increases! amino acids
GABA: !increases! phytohormones
GABA-T: !induces! conversion of GABA to succinate
TCA cycle enzymes: !upregulates! respiration
phytohormone biosynthesis genes: !upregulates! in GABA-treated plants