Metabolite profiling, biochemical assays, and transcript analysis revealed differential modulation of specific induced defense responses in local, older, and younger systemic leaves in Solanum lycopersicum upon Spodoptera litura herbivory. Plants reconfigure their metabolome upon herbivory to induce production of defense metabolites involved in both direct and indirect defenses against insect herbivores. Herbivory mediated leaf-to-leaf systemic induction pattern of primary and non-volatile secondary metabolites is not well studied in tomato. Here, we show that, in cultivated tomato Solanum lycopersicum herbivory by generalist insect, Spodoptera litura results in differential alteration of primary metabolites, majorly sugars and amino acids and specific secondary metabolites in local, younger, and older systemic leaves. Cluster analysis of 55 metabolites identified by GC-MS showed correlation between local and younger systemic leaves. Re-allocation of primary metabolites like glucose and amino acids from the local to systemic leaf was observed. Secondary metabolites chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid, and catechin were significantly induced during herbivory in systemic leaves. Among specific secondary metabolites, chlorogenic acid and catechin significantly inhibits S. litura larval growth in all stages. Local leaf exhibited increased lignin accumulation upon herbivory. Differential alteration of induced defense responses like reactive oxygen species, polyphenol oxidase activity, proteinase inhibitor, cell wall metabolites, and lignin accumulation was observed in systemic leaves. The metabolite alteration also resulted in increased defense in systemic leaves. Thus, comparative analysis of metabolites in local and systemic leaves of tomato revealed a constant re-allocation of primary metabolites to systemic leaves and differential induction of secondary metabolites and induced defenses upon herbivory.

Metabolite: !re-allocated to! systemic leaves
Herbivory: !induces! primary metabolites
Herbivory: !induces! secondary metabolites
Secondary metabolites: !inhibit! S. litura larval growth
Herbivory: !induces! reactive oxygen species
Herbivory: !induces! polyphenol oxidase activity
Herbivory: !induces! proteinase inhibitor
Herbivory: !induces! cell wall metabolites
Herbivory: !induces! lignin accumulation