Plant microRNAs (miRNAs) and their target genes have important functional roles in nutrition deficiency and stress response. However, the underlying mechanisms relating relative expression of miRNAs and target mRNAs to morphological adjustments are not well defined. By combining miRNA expression profiles, corresponding target genes and transcription factors that bind to computationally identified over-represented cis-regulatory elements (CREs) common in miRNAs and target gene promoters, we implement a strategy that identifies a set of differentially expressed regulatory interactions which, in turn, relate underlying cellular mechanisms to some of the phenotypic changes observed. Integration of experimentally reported individual interactions with identified regulatory interactions explains how (i) during mineral deficiency osa-miR167 inhibits shoot growth but activates adventitious root growth by influencing free auxin content; (ii) during sulfur deficiency osa-miR394 is involved in adventitious root growth inhibition, sulfur and iron homeostasis, and auxin-mediated regulation of sulfur homeostasis; (iii) osa-miR399 contributes to cross-talk between cytokinin and phosphorus deficiency signaling; and (iv) a feed-forward loop involving the osa-miR166, trihelix and HD-ZIP III transcription factors may regulate leaf senescence during drought. This strategy not only identifies various regulatory interactions connecting phenotypic changes with cellular or molecular events triggered by stress, but also provides a framework to deepen our understanding of stress cellular physiology.

miRNA: !inhibits! shoot growth
miRNA: !activates! adventitious root growth
miRNA: !regulates! sulfur and iron homeostasis
miRNA: !contributes to! cross-talk between cytokinin and phosphorus deficiency signaling
miRNA: !involves! feed-forward loop with transcription factors
transcription factor: !binds to! computationally identified CREs
transcription factor: !regulates! leaf senescence during drought