Repeated artificial selection of a complex trait facilitates the identification of genes underlying the trait, especially if multiple selected descendant lines are available. Here we developed a pedigree-based approach to identify genes underlying the Green Revolution (GR) phenotype. From a pedigree analysis, we selected 30 cultivars including the "miracle rice" IR8, a GR landmark, its ancestors and descendants, and also other related cultivars for identifying high-yield genes. Through sequencing of these genomes, we identified 28 ancestral chromosomal blocks that were maintained in all the high-yield cultivars under study. In these blocks, we identified six genes of known function, including the GR gene <i>sd1</i>, and 123 loci with genes of unknown function. We randomly selected 57 genes from the 123 loci for knockout or knockdown studies and found that a high proportion of these genes are essential or have phenotypic effects related to rice production. Notably, knockout lines have significant changes in plant height (<i>P</i> < 0.003), a key GR trait, compared with wild-type lines. Some gene knockouts or knockdowns were especially interesting. For example, knockout of Os10g0555100, a putative glucosyltransferase gene, showed both reduced growth and altered panicle architecture. In addition, we found that in some retained chromosome blocks several GR-related genes were clustered, although they have unrelated sequences, suggesting clustering of genes with similar functions. In conclusion, we have identified many high-yield genes in rice. Our method provides a powerful means to identify genes associated with a specific trait.

Pedigree analysis: !facilitates identification of! genes underlying Green Revolution phenotype
Sequencing: !identifies! 28 ancestral chromosomal blocks
Chromosomal blocks: !contain! 6 genes of known function, 123 loci with genes of unknown function
Knockout/knockdown studies: !reveal! essential genes and phenotypic effects related to rice production
Gene knockouts/knockdowns: !show! changes in plant height
Clustering of GR-related genes: !suggests! clustering of genes with similar functions