['30030857', 'Cytidine triphosphate (CTP) is essential for DNA, RNA and phospholipid  biosynthesis. De novo synthesis is catalyzed by CTP synthases (CTPS). Arabidopsis  encodes five CTPS isoforms that unanimously share conserved motifs found across  kingdoms, suggesting all five are functional enzymes. Whereas CTPS1-4 are  expressed throughout Arabidopsis tissues, CTPS5 reveals exclusive expression in  developing embryos. CTPS activity and substrates affinities were determined for a  representative plant enzyme on purified recombinant CTPS3 protein. As  demonstrated in model organisms such as yeast, fruit fly and mammals, CTPS show  the capacity to assemble into large filaments called cytoophidia. Transient  expression of N- and C-terminal YFP-CTPS fusion proteins in Nicotiana benthamiana  allowed to monitor such filament formation. Interestingly, CTPS1 and 2 always  appeared as soluble proteins, whereas filaments were observed for CTPS3, 4 and 5  independent of the YFP-tag location. However, when similar constructs were  expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, no filaments were observed, pointing to a  requirement for organism-specific factors in vivo. Indications for filament  assembly were also obtained in vitro when recombinant CTPS3 protein was incubated  in the presence of CTP. T-DNA-insertion mutants in four CTPS loci revealed no  apparent phenotypical alteration. In contrast, CTPS2 T-DNA-insertion mutants did  not produce homozygous progenies. An initial characterization of the CTPS protein  family members from Arabidopsis is presented. We provide evidence for their  involvement in nucleotide de novo synthesis and show that only three of the five  CTPS isoforms were able to form filamentous structures in the transient tobacco  expression system. This represents a striking difference from previous  observations in prokaryotes, yeast, Drosophila and mammalian cells. This finding  will be highly valuable to further understand the role of filament formation to  regulate CTPS activity.', '2018 Oct', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.14032', 'Mohlmann']

CTP synthases: !synthesize! CTP 
CTPS1-4: !expressed in! Arabidopsis tissues 
CTPS5: !expressed in! developing embryos 
YFP-CTPS fusion proteins: !observed as! soluble proteins 
CTPS3, 4 and 5: !form filaments! in Nicotiana benthamiana 
CTPS3 protein: !forms filaments! in vitro 
CTPS2 T-DNA-insertion mutants: !do not produce! homozygous progenies