Salt stress is a major abiotic stress threatening plant growth and development throughout the world. In this study, we investigated the salt stress adaptation mechanism of Carex rigescens (Franch.) V. Krecz, a stress-tolerant turfgrass species with a wide distribution in northern China. Specifically, we analyzed the growth, physiology, and transcript expression patterns of two C. rigescens genotypes (Huanghua and Lvping No.1) exposed to salt stress. Results show that Huanghua demonstrated better growth performance, and higher turf quality (TQ), photochemical efficiency (Fv/Fm), relative water content (RWC), proline content, and lower relative electrolyte leakage (REL) during seven days of salt treatment compared to Lvping No.1, suggesting that Huanghua is more salt tolerant. Significant differences in reactive oxygen species (ROS), Malondialdehyde (MDA), melatonin, non-enzymatic antioxidants, lignin, and flavonoid content, as well as in antioxidant activity between Huanghua and Lvping No.1 after salt stress indicate the diverse regulation involved in salt stress adaptation in C. rigescens. These results, combined with those of the transcript expression pattern of involved genes, suggest that Huanghua is more active and efficient in ROS scavenging, Ca<sup>2+</sup> binding, and its phytohormone response than Lvping No.1. Meanwhile, Lvping No.1 showed relatively higher phenylpropanoid synthesis, using flavonoid and lignin as supplements for the inadequate ROS-scavenging capacity and the development of vascular tissues, respectively. These performances illustrate the differences between the two genotypes in multifaceted and sophisticated actions contributing to the tolerance mechanism of salt stress in C. rigescens. In addition, the significantly higher content of melatonin and the rapid induction of Caffeic acid O-methyltransferase (COMT) highlight the role of melatonin in the salt stress response in Huanghua. The results of our study expand existing knowledge of the complexity of the salt stress response involving the antioxidant system, Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling, phytohormone response signaling, and phenylpropanoid pathways. It also provides a basis for further study of the underlying mechanism of salt tolerance in C. rigescens and other plant species.

Huanghua: !demonstrates better growth! Lvping No.1
Huanghua: !more active in ROS scavenging! Lvping No.1
Huanghua: !more efficient in Ca2+ binding! Lvping No.1
Huanghua: !better phytohormone response! Lvping No.1
Lvping No.1: !relatively higher phenylpropanoid synthesis! Huanghua
Huanghua: !higher melatonin content! Lvping No.1
Huanghua: !rapid induction of COMT! Lvping No.1