High-quality and dense genetic maps were constructed, and leaf shape variation was dissected by QTL mapping in poplar. Species in the genus Populus, also known as poplars, are important woody species and considered model plants for perennial trees. High-density genetic maps are valuable genomic resources for population genetics. Here, we generated a high-quality and dense genetic map for an F1 poplar population using high-throughput NGS-based genotyping. A total of 92,097 high-quality SNP markers were developed by stringent filtering and identification. In total, 889 and 1650 SNPs formed the female and male genetic maps, respectively. To test the application of the genetic maps, QTL mapping of leaf shape was conducted for this F1 population. A total of nine parameters were scored for leaf shape variation in three different environments. Combining genetic maps and measurements of the nine leaf shape parameters, we mapped a total of 42 significant QTLs. The highest LOD score of all QTLs was 9.2, and that QTL explained the most (15.13%) trait variation. A total of nine QTLs could be detected in at least two environments, and they were located in two genomic regions. Within these two QTL regions, some candidate genes for regulating leaf shape were predicted through functional annotation. The successful mapping of leaf shape QTLs demonstrated the utility of our genetic maps. According to the performance of this study, we were able to provide high-quality and dense genetic maps and dissect the leaf shape variation in poplar.

High-quality and dense genetic maps: !constructed! Species in the genus Populus 
SNP markers: !developed! High-throughput NGS-based genotyping 
QTL mapping: !conducted! F1 poplar population 
Nine parameters: !scored! Leaf shape variation 
42 significant QTLs: !mapped! Genetic maps and measurements 
Highest LOD score: !reached! 9.2 
Nine QTLs: !detected! At least two environments 
Candidate genes: !predicted! Functional annotation 
Leaf shape QTLs: !mapped! Utility of genetic maps