Flax is an important field crop that can be used for either oilseed or fiber production. Plant height and technical length are important characters for flax. For linseed flax, plants usually have a short technical length and plant height than those for fiber flax. As an important agronomical character for fiber and linseed flax, plant height is usually a selection target for breeding. However, because of limited technologies and methods available, there has been little research focused on discovering the molecular mechanism controlling plant height. In this study, two related recombinant inbred line (RIL) populations developed from crosses of linseed and fiber parents were developed and phenotyped for plant height and technical length in four environments. A consensus linkage map based on two RIL populations was constructed using SNP markers generated by genotyping by sequencing (GBS) technology. A total of 4497 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers were included on 15 linkage groups with an average marker density of one marker every 2.71 cM. Quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping analysis was performed for plant height and technical length using the two populations. A total of 19 QTLs were identified for plant height and technical length. For the MH population, eight plant height QTLs and seven technical length QTLs were identified, five of which were common QTLs for both traits. For the PH population, six plant height and three technical length QTLs were identified. By comparing the QTLs and candidate gene information in the two population, two common QTLs and three candidate genes were discovered. This study provides a foundation for map-based cloning of QTLs and marker-assisted selection for plant height-related traits in linseed and fiber flax.

Flax: !has! Plant Height 
Flax: !has! Technical Length 
RIL Populations: !developed from! Linseed and Fiber Parents 
SNP Markers: !generated by! GBS Technology 
QTL Mapping Analysis: !performed for! Plant Height and Technical Length 
QTLs: !identified for! Plant Height and Technical Length 
QTLs: !compared with! Candidate Gene Information 
QTLs: !discovered for! Plant Height-Related Traits