Nitrogen is an essential macronutrient for plants and the common limiting factor for crop productivity worldwide. An effective approach to combat N deficiency and overuse is to understand the mechanism of low-nitrogen tolerance in plants and develop low-nitrogen-tolerant crop cultivars. Wild soybean has a high tolerance to poor environmental conditions, but, until now, no study has illustrated the mechanism of low-nitrogen tolerance at a metabolomic level. In this study, the photosynthetic characteristics and metabolomics of wild and cultivated soybean seedlings were analyzed, and the mechanism of wild soybean's low-nitrogen tolerance was explained using a sand culture experiment. Wild soybean was less affected by low-nitrogen stress than cultivated soybean as assessed by plant growth parameters and photosynthesis. The root length of wild soybean increased, and a high root-shoot ratio was maintained under low-nitrogen stress. Carotenoids accumulated, which contributed to its higher low-nitrogen tolerance. A total of 48 and 60 differentially accumulated metabolites were identified in leaves and roots, respectively, between the low-nitrogen stress and control groups. The ability of wild soybean to tolerate low nitrogen also resulted from its capability to enhance the TCA cycle, synthesize key amino acids, accumulate metabolites, such as soluble sugars and organic acids, and synthesize favorable secondary metabolites under low-nitrogen stress. The current results reveal the mechanism underlying wild soybean's high low-nitrogen tolerance and provide the methodology and theoretical basis for utilizing wild soybean, improving cultivated soybean, and studying the low-nitrogen tolerance of other plants.

Wild soybean: !enhances! TCA cycle
Wild soybean: !synthesizes! key amino acids
Wild soybean: !accumulates! metabolites
Wild soybean: !synthesizes! favorable secondary metabolites
Carotenoids: !accumulate! in wild soybean
Low-nitrogen stress: !affects! cultivated soybean more than wild soybean