Ripening of fleshy fruits has been classically defined as climacteric or non-climacteric. Both types of ripening are controlled by plant hormones, notably by ethylene in climacteric ripening and by abscisic acid (ABA) in non-climacteric ripening. In pepper (Capsicum), fruit ripening has been widely classified as non-climacteric, but the ripening of the hot pepper fruit appears to be climacteric. To date, how to regulate the hot pepper fruit ripening through ethylene and ABA remains unclear. Here, we examined ripening of the hot pepper (Capsicum frutescens) fruit during large green (LG), initial colouring (IC), brown (Br), and full red (FR) stages. We found a peak of ethylene emission at the IC stage, followed by a peak respiratory quotient at the Br stage. By contrast, ABA levels increased slowly before the Br stage, then increased sharply and reached a maximum level at the FR stage. Exogenous ethylene promoted colouration, but exogenous ABA did not. Unexpectedly, fluridone, an inhibitor of ABA biosynthesis, promoted colouration. RNA-sequencing data obtained from the four stages around ripening showed that ACO3 and NCED1/3 gene expression determined ethylene and ABA levels, respectively. Downregulation of ACO3 and NCED1/3 expression by virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) inhibited and promoted colouration, respectively, as evidenced by changes in carotenoid, ABA, and ethylene levels, as well as carotenoid biosynthesis-related gene expression. Importantly, the retarded colouration in ACO3-VIGS fruits was rescued by exogenous ethylene. Ethylene positively regulates the hot pepper fruit colouration, while inhibition of ABA biosynthesis promotes colouration, suggesting a role of ABA in de-greening. Our findings provide new insights into processes of fleshy fruit ripening regulated by ABA and ethylene, focusing on ethylene in carotenoid biosynthesis and ABA in chlorophyll degradation.

ethylene: !positively regulates! hot pepper fruit colouration
ABA: !inhibits! colouration
ACO3: !determines! ethylene levels
NCED1/3: !determines! ABA levels
fluridone: !inhibits! ABA biosynthesis
exogenous ethylene: !rescues! retarded colouration in ACO3-VIGS fruits