The current review provides an updated, new insights into the regulation of transcription mediated underlying mechanisms of wheat plants to osmotic stress perturbations. Osmotic stress tolerance mechanisms being complex are governed by multiple factors at physiological, biochemical and at the molecular level, hence approaches like "OMICS" that can underpin mechanisms behind osmotic tolerance in wheat is of paramount importance. The transcription factors (TFs) are a class of molecular proteins, which are involved in regulation, modulation and orchestrating the responses of plants to a variety of environmental stresses. Recent reports have provided novel insights on the role of TFs in osmotic stress tolerance via direct molecular links. However, our knowledge on the regulatory role TFs during osmotic stress tolerance in wheat remains limited. The present review in its first part sheds light on the importance of studying the role of osmotic stress tolerance in wheat plants and second aims to decipher molecular mechanisms of TFs belonging to several classes, including DREB, NAC, MYB, WRKY and bHLH, which have been reported to engage in osmotic stress mediated gene expression in wheat and third part covers the systems biology approaches to understand the transcriptional regulation of osmotic stress and the role of long non-coding RNAs in response to osmotic stress with special emphasis on wheat. The current concept may lead to an understanding in molecular regulation and signalling interaction of TFs under osmotic stress to clarify challenges and problems for devising potential strategies to improve complex regulatory events involved in plant tolerance to osmotic stress adaptive pathways in wheat.

DREB: !regulates! osmotic stress tolerance
NAC: !regulates! osmotic stress tolerance
MYB: !regulates! osmotic stress tolerance
WRKY: !regulates! osmotic stress tolerance
bHLH: !regulates! osmotic stress tolerance
TFs: !involved in! regulation of plant responses to environmental stresses
OMICS: !underpins! mechanisms behind osmotic tolerance in wheat
long non-coding RNAs: !involved in! response to osmotic stress