Contents Summary 706 I. Introduction 707 II. Leaf zones in monocot and eudicot leaves 707 III. Monocot and eudicot leaf initiation: differences in degree and timing, but not kind 710 IV. Reticulate and parallel venation: extending the model? 711 V. Flat laminar growth: patterning and coordination of adaxial-abaxial and mediolateral axes 713 VI. Stipules and ligules: ontogeny of primordial elaborations 715 VII. Leaf architecture 716 VIII. Stomatal development: shared and diverged mechanisms for making epidermal pores 717 IX. Conclusion 719 Acknowledgements 720 References 720 SUMMARY: Comparisons of concepts in monocot and eudicot leaf development are presented, with attention to the morphologies and mechanisms separating these angiosperm lineages. Monocot and eudicot leaves are distinguished by the differential elaborations of upper and lower leaf zones, the formation of sheathing/nonsheathing leaf bases and vasculature patterning. We propose that monocot and eudicot leaves undergo expansion of mediolateral domains at different times in ontogeny, directly impacting features such as venation and leaf bases. Furthermore, lineage-specific mechanisms in compound leaf development are discussed. Although models for the homologies of enigmatic tissues, such as ligules and stipules, are proposed, tests of these hypotheses are rare. Likewise, comparisons of stomatal development are limited to Arabidopsis and a few grasses. Future studies may investigate correlations in the ontogenies of parallel venation and linear stomatal files in monocots, and the reticulate patterning of veins and dispersed stoma in eudicots. Although many fundamental mechanisms of leaf development are shared in eudicots and monocots, variations in the timing, degree and duration of these ontogenetic events may contribute to key differences in morphology. We anticipate that the incorporation of an ever-expanding number of sequenced genomes will enrich our understanding of the developmental mechanisms generating eudicot and monocot leaves.

monocot: !differs from! eudicot
upper/lower leaf zones: !elaborate differently in! monocot/eudicot
sheathing/nonsheathing leaf bases: !distinguish! monocot/eudicot
mediolateral domains: !expand at different times in! monocot/eudicot
venation/leaf bases: !impact! by mediolateral expansion
compound leaf development: !involve lineage-specific mechanisms in! monocot/eudicot
ligules/stipules: !hypothesized to be homologous in! monocot/eudicot
stomatal development: !compared in! Arabidopsis/grasses
parallel venation/linear stomatal files: !correlate in! monocots
reticulate patterning/dispersed stoma: !correlate in! eudicots
timing/degree/duration of ontogenetic events: !contribute to differences in! monocot/eudicot morphology