Curds are the main edible organs, which exhibit remarkable yield heterosis in F<sub>1</sub> hybrid broccoli. However, the molecular basis underlying heterosis in broccoli remains elusive. In the present study, transcriptome profiles revealed that the hybridization made most genes show additive expression patterns in hybrid broccoli. The differentially expressed genes including the non-additively expressed genes detected in the hybrid broccoli and its parents were mainly involved in light, hormone and hydrogen peroxide-mediated signaling pathways, responses to stresses, and regulation of floral development, which suggested that these biological processes should play crucial roles in the yield heterosis of broccoli. Among them, light and hydrogen peroxide-mediated signaling pathways represent two novel classes of regulatory processes that could function in yield or biomass heterosis of plants. Totally, 53 candidate genes closely involved in curd yield heterosis were identified. Methylome data indicated that the DNA methylation ratio of the hybrids was higher than that of their parents. However, the DNA methylation levels of most sites also displayed additive expression patterns. These sites with differential methylation levels were predominant in the intergenic regions. In most cases, the changes of DNA methylation levels in gene regions did not significantly affect their expression levels. The differentially expressed genes, the regulatory processes and the possible roles of DNA methylation modification in the formation of curd yield heterotic trait were discovered. These findings provided comprehensive insights into the curd yield heterosis in broccoli, and were significant for breeding high-yield broccoli varieties.

light: !affects! signaling pathways 
hormone: !affects! signaling pathways 
hydrogen peroxide: !affects! signaling pathways 
stresses: !affects! responses 
floral development: !regulates! regulation 
candidate genes: !involved in! curd yield heterosis 
DNA methylation: !higher in! hybrids 
DNA methylation: !affects! expression levels