Wheat streak mosaic virus (WSMV) and Triticum mosaic virus (TriMV), distinct members in the family Potyviridae, are economically important wheat-infecting viruses in the Great Plains region. Previously, we reported that coinfection of wheat by WSMV and TriMV caused disease synergism with increased concentration of both viruses. The mechanisms of synergistic interaction between WSMV and TriMV and the effects of prior infection of wheat by either of these "synergistically interacting partner" (SIP) viruses on the establishment of local and systemic infection by the other SIP virus are not known. In this study, using fluorescent protein-tagged viruses, we found that prior infection of wheat by WSMV or TriMV negatively affected the onset and size of local foci elicited by subsequent SIP virus infection compared with those in buffer-inoculated wheat. These data revealed that prior infection of wheat by an SIP virus has no measurable advantage for another SIP virus on the initiation of infection and cell-to-cell movement. In TriMV-infected wheat, WSMV exhibited accelerated long-distance movement and increased accumulation of genomic RNAs compared with those in buffer-inoculated wheat, indicating that TriMV-encoded proteins complemented WSMV for efficient systemic infection. In contrast, TriMV displayed delayed systemic infection in WSMV-infected wheat, with fewer genomic RNA copies in early stages of infection compared with those in buffer-inoculated wheat. However, during late stages of infection, TriMV accumulation in WSMV-infected wheat increased rapidly with accelerated long-distance movement compared with those in buffer-inoculated wheat. Taken together, these data suggest that interactions between synergistically interacting WSMV and TriMV are asymmetrical; thus, successful establishment of synergistic interaction between unrelated viruses will depend on the order of infection of plants by SIP viruses.

WSMV: !accelerates long-distance movement in! TriMV-infected wheat
TriMV: !complements WSMV for efficient systemic infection in! WSMV-infected wheat
WSMV: !increases accumulation of genomic RNAs in! TriMV-infected wheat
TriMV: !delays systemic infection in! WSMV-infected wheat