Key message The OsPLS3 locus was isolated by map-based cloning that encodes a DUF266-containing protein. OsPLS3 regulates the onset of leaf senescence in rice. Glycosyltransferases (GTs) are one of the most important enzyme groups required for the modification of plant secondary metabolites and play a crucial role in plant growth and development, however the biological functions of most GTs remain elusive. We reported here the identification and characterization of a novel Oryza sativa premature leaf senescence mutant (ospls3). Through map-based cloning strategy, we determined that 22-bp deletion in the OsPLS3 gene encoding a domain of unknown function 266 (DUF266)-containing protein, a member of GT14-like, underlies the premature leaf senescence phenotype in the ospls3 mutant. The OsPLS3 mRNA levels progressively declined with the age-dependent leaf senescence in wild-type rice, implying a negative role of OsPLS3 in regulating leaf senescence. Physiological analysis, and histochemical staining and transmission electron microscopy assays indicated that the ospls3 mutant accumulated higher levels of ethylene and reactive oxygen species than its wild type. Furthermore, the ospls3 mutant showed hypersensitivity to exogenous 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and high level of cytokinins. Our results indicated that the DUF266-containing gene OsPLS3 plays an important role in the onset of leaf senescence, in part through cytokinin and ethylene signaling in rice.

OsPLS3: !encodes! DUF266-containing protein
OsPLS3: !regulates! leaf senescence in rice
GTs: !modify! plant secondary metabolites
22-bp deletion: !underlies! premature leaf senescence phenotype
OsPLS3: !declines with! age-dependent leaf senescence
ospls3 mutant: !accumulates! higher levels of ethylene and reactive oxygen species
ospls3 mutant: !shows hypersensitivity to! exogenous 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and high level of cytokinins
DUF266-containing gene OsPLS3: !plays important role in! onset of leaf senescence, in part through cytokinin and ethylene signaling