Abiotic stresses greatly influenced wheat productivity executed by environmental factors such as drought, salt, water submergence and heavy metals. The effective management at the molecular level is mandatory for a thorough understanding of plant response to abiotic stress. Understanding the molecular mechanism of stress tolerance is complex and requires information at the omic level. In the areas of genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics enormous progress has been made in the omics field. The rising field of ionomics is also being utilized for examining abiotic stress resilience in wheat. Omic approaches produce a huge amount of data and sufficient developments in computational tools have been accomplished for efficient analysis. However, the integration of omic-scale information to address complex genetics and physiological questions is still a challenge. Though, the incorporation of omic-scale data to address complex genetic qualities and physiological inquiries is as yet a challenge. In this review, we have reported advances in omic tools in the perspective of conventional and present day approaches being utilized to dismember abiotic stress tolerance in wheat. Attention was given to methodologies, for example, quantitative trait loci (QTL), genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and genomic selection (GS). Comparative genomics and candidate genes methodologies are additionally talked about considering the identification of potential genomic loci, genes and biochemical pathways engaged with stress resilience in wheat. This review additionally gives an extensive list of accessible online omic assets for wheat and its effective use. We have additionally addressed the significance of genomics in the integrated approach and perceived high-throughput multi-dimensional phenotyping as a significant restricting component for the enhancement of abiotic stress resistance in wheat.

QTL: !identifies! Genomic loci 
GWAS: !identifies! Genes 
GS: !identifies! Genes 
Comparative genomics: !identifies! Genes 
Candidate genes: !identifies! Genes 
Omic tools: !utilizes! Abiotic stress resilience 
Multi-dimensional phenotyping: !enhances! Abiotic stress resistance