Light signaling and phytohormones play important roles in plant growth, development, and biotic and abiotic stress responses. However, the roles of phytochromes and cross-talk between these two signaling pathways in response to salt stress in tobacco plants remain underexplored. Here, we explored the defense response in phytochrome-defective mutants under salt stress. We monitored the physiological and molecular changes of these mutants under salt stress conditions. The results showed that phytochrome A (phyA), phytochrome B (phyB) and phyAphyB (phyAB) mutants exhibited improved salt stress tolerance compared with wild-type (WT) plants. The mutant plants had a lower electrolyte leakage (EL) and malondialdehyde (MDA) concentration than WT plants, and the effect was clearly synergistic in the phyAB double mutant plants. Furthermore, the data showed that the transcript levels of defense-associated genes and the activities of some antioxidant enzymes in the mutant plants were much higher than those in WT plants. Additionally, the results indicated that phytochrome signaling strongly modulates the expression of endogenous abscisic acid (ABA) and jasmonic acid (JA) of Nicotiana tobacum in response to salt stress. To illustrate further the relationship between phytochrome and phytohormone, we measured the expression of defense genes and phytochrome. The results displayed that salt stress and application of methyl jasmonate (MeJA) or ABA up-regulated the transcript levels of salt response-associated genes and inhibited the expression of NtphyA and NtphyB. Foliar application of inhibitors of ABA and JA further confirmed that JA co-operated with ABA in phytochrome-mediated salt stress tolerance.

phyA: !enhances! Salt Stress Tolerance
phyB: !enhances! Salt Stress Tolerance
phyAB: !enhances! Salt Stress Tolerance
phytochrome: !modulates! ABA Expression
phytochrome: !modulates! JA Expression
ABA: !interacts with! JA
MeJA: !upregulates! Defense Genes
ABA: !upregulates! Defense Genes
Salt Stress: !upregulates! Defense Genes