Barley crop model was analyzed for early and late events during the dark-induced leaf senescence (DILS) as well as for deciphering critical time limit for reversal of the senescence process. Chlorophyll fluorescence vitality index Rfd was determined as the earliest parameter that correlated well with the cessation of photosynthesis prior to microautophagy symptoms, initiation of DNA degradation, and severalfold increase in the endonuclease <i>BNUC1.</i> DILS was found characterized by up-regulation of processes that enable recycling of degraded macromolecules and metabolites, including increased NH<sub>4</sub> <sup>+</sup> remobilization, gluconeogenesis, glycolysis, and partial up-regulation of glyoxylate and tricarboxylate acid cycles. The most evident differences in gene medleys between DILS and developmental senescence included hormone-activated signaling pathways, lipid catabolic processes, carbohydrate metabolic processes, low-affinity ammonia remobilization, and RNA methylation. The mega-autophagy symptoms were apparent much later, specifically on day 10 of DILS, when disruption of organelles-nucleus and mitochondria -became evident. Also, during this latter-stage programmed cell death processes, namely, shrinking of the protoplast, tonoplast interruption, and vacuole breakdown, chromatin condensation, more DNA fragmentation, and disintegration of the cell membrane were prominent. Reversal of DILS by re-exposure of the plants from dark to light was possible until but not later than day 7 of dark exposure and was accompanied by regained photosynthesis, increase in chlorophyll, and reversal of Rfd, despite activation of macro-autophagy-related genes.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Gene: !up-regulates! Recycling of macromolecules and metabolites 
Gene: !mediates! Hormone-activated signaling pathways 
Gene: !activates! Lipid catabolic processes 
Gene: !enhances! Gluconeogenesis 
Gene: !promotes! Glycolysis 
Gene: !induces! Low-affinity ammonia remobilization 
Gene: !initiates! DNA degradation 
Gene: !causes! Chromatin condensation 
Gene: !triggers! Macro-autophagy-related genes 
Gene: !reverses! DILS