['30135084', "Base excision repair (BER) is essential for active DNA demethylation and DNA  damage repair in mammals and plants. Here, we provide genetic and biochemical  evidence that APURINIC/APYRIMIDINIC ENDONUCLEASE2 (APE2) plays overlapping roles  with ZINC FINGER DNA 3'-PHOSPHOESTERASE (ZDP) in active DNA demethylation and DNA  damage repair in Arabidopsis thaliana Simultaneous mutation of APE2 and ZDP  causes DNA hypermethylation at more than 2000 loci, most of which are not  hypermethylated in ape2 or zdp single mutants. The zdp and ape2 single mutants  exhibit normal development, but the zdp ape2 double mutants display pleiotropic  developmental defects and are supersensitive to the DNA alkylating reagent methyl  methanesulfonate. The gradual accumulation of DNA lesions in the zdp ape2  seedlings is accompanied by constitutive activation of the DNA damage response  and alteration of the cell cycle. Interestingly, knockout of the key DNA  demethylase REPRESSOR OF SILENCING1 reduces the magnitude of DNA lesion  accumulation and the DNA damage response in the zdp ape2 mutants, suggesting that  a proportion of the DNA damage in the zdp ape2 mutants arises from incomplete  active DNA demethylation. Lastly, we find that APE2 has 3'-phosphatase activity  and strong 3'-5' exonuclease activity in vitro. Together, our results suggest  that APE2 and ZDP, two BER proteins, play overlapping roles in the maintenance of  epigenome and genome stability in plants.", '2018 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.18.00287', 'ORCID:']

APE2: !plays overlapping roles with! ZDP 
ZDP: !plays overlapping roles with! APE2 
APE2: !has 3'-phosphatase activity and strong 3'-5' exonuclease activity in vitro! 
ZDP: !causes DNA hypermethylation at more than 2000 loci! 
zdp ape2 double mutants: !exhibit pleiotropic developmental defects and are supersensitive to the DNA alkylating reagent methyl methanesulfonate! 
REPRESSOR OF SILENCING1: !reduces the magnitude of DNA lesion accumulation and the DNA damage response in the zdp ape2 mutants!