The exposure of Vitis vinifera L. berries to forest fire smoke changes the concentration of phenylpropanoid metabolites in berries and the resulting wine. The exposure of Vitis vinifera L. berries (i.e., wine grapes) to forest fire smoke can lead to a wine defect known as smoke taint that is characterized by unpleasant "smoky" and "ashy" aromas and flavors. The intensity of smoke taint is associated with the concentration of organoleptic volatile phenols that are produced during the combustion-mediated oxidation of lignocellulosic biomass and subsequently concentrated in berries prior to fermentation. However, these same smoke-derived volatile phenols are also produced via metabolic pathways endogenous to berries. It follows then that an influx of exogenous volatile phenols (i.e., from forest fire smoke) could alter endogenous metabolism associated with volatile phenol synthesis, which occurs via the shikimic acid/phenylpropanoid pathways. The presence of ozone and karrikins in forest fire smoke, as well as changes to stomatal conductance that can occur from exposure to forest fire smoke also have the potential to influence phenylpropanoid metabolism. This study demonstrated changes in phenylpropanoid metabolites in Pinot noir berries and wine from three vineyards following the exposure of Vitis vinifera L. vines to simulated forest fire smoke. This included changes to metabolites associated with mouth feel and color in wine, both of which are important sensorial qualities to wine producers and consumers. The results reported are critical to understanding the chemical changes associated with smoke taint beyond volatile phenols, which in turn, may aid the development of preventative and remedial strategies.

Vitis vinifera L. berries: !exposed to! forest fire smoke 
forest fire smoke: !alters! endogenous metabolism 
ozone: !influences! phenylpropanoid metabolism 
karrikins: !influences! phenylpropanoid metabolism 
stomatal conductance: !altered by! forest fire smoke 
Pinot noir berries: !show changes in! phenylpropanoid metabolites 
wine: !show changes in! mouth feel and color