The plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris produces diffusible signal factor (DSF) quorum sensing (QS) signals to regulate its biological functions and virulence. Our previous study showed that X. campestris pv. campestris utilizes host plant metabolites to enhance the biosynthesis of DSF family signals. However, it is unclear how X. campestris pv. campestris benefits from the metabolic products of the host plant. In this study, we observed that the host plant metabolites not only boosted the production of the DSF family signals but also modulated the expression levels of DSF-regulated genes in X. campestris pv. campestris. Infection with X. campestris pv. campestris induced changes in the expression of many sugar transporter genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. Exogenous addition of sucrose or glucose, which are the major products of photosynthesis in plants, enhanced DSF signal production and X. campestris pv. campestris pathogenicity in the Arabidopsis model. In addition, several sucrose hydrolase-encoding genes in X. campestris pv. campestris and sucrose invertase-encoding genes in the host plant were notably upregulated during the infection process. These enzymes hydrolyzed sucrose to glucose and fructose, and in trans expression of one of these enzymes, CINV1 of A. thaliana or XC_0805 of X. campestris pv. campestris, enhanced DSF signal biosynthesis in X. campestris pv. campestris in the presence of sucrose. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that X. campestris pv. campestris applies multiple strategies to utilize host plant sugars to enhance QS and pathogenicity.

X. campestris pv. campestris: !utilizes! host plant metabolites 
host plant metabolites: !enhance! DSF signal production 
host plant metabolites: !modulate! expression of DSF-regulated genes 
X. campestris pv. campestris: !induces changes in! expression of sugar transporter genes 
sucrose/glucose: !enhance! DSF signal production & X. campestris pv. campestris pathogenicity 
sucrose hydrolase-encoding genes: !upregulated! during infection 
sucrose hydrolase-encoding genes: !hydrolyze! sucrose to glucose & fructose 
CINV1/XC_0805: !enhance! DSF signal biosynthesis in presence of sucrose