Plants produce a large variety of specialized (secondary) metabolites having a wide range of hydrophobicity. Shikonin, a red naphthoquinone pigment, is a highly hydrophobic metabolite produced in the roots of Lithospermum erythrorhizon, a medicinal plant in the family Boraginaceae. The shikonin molecule is formed by the coupling of p-hydroxybenzoic acid and geranyl diphosphate, catalyzed by a membrane-bound geranyltransferase LePGT at the endoplasmic reticulum, followed by cyclization of the geranyl chain and oxidations; the latter half of this biosynthetic pathway, however, has not yet been clarified. To shed light on these steps, a proteome analysis was conducted. Shikonin production in vitro was specifically regulated by illumination and by the difference in media used to culture cells and hairy roots. In intact plants, however, shikonin is produced exclusively in the root bark of L. erythrorhizon. These features were utilized for comparative transcriptome and proteome analyses. As the genome sequence is not known for this medicinal plant, sequences from de novo RNA-seq data with 95,861 contigs were used as reference for proteome analysis. Because shikonin biosynthesis requires copper ions and is sensitive to blue light, this methodology identified strong candidates for enzymes involved in shikonin biosynthesis, such as polyphenol oxidase, cannabidiolic acid synthase-like and neomenthol dehydrogenase-like proteins. Because acetylshikonin is the main end product of shikonin derivatives, an O-acetyltransferase was also identified. This enzyme may be responsible for end product formation in these plant species. Taken together, these findings suggest a putative pathway for shikonin biosynthesis.

Light: !regulates! Shikonin production 
Media: !affects! Shikonin production 
Root bark: !produces! Shikonin 
RNA-seq data: !used as reference for! Proteome analysis 
Polyphenol oxidase: !involved in! Shikonin biosynthesis 
Cannabidiolic acid synthase-like protein: !involved in! Shikonin biosynthesis 
Neomenthol dehydrogenase-like protein: !involved in! Shikonin biosynthesis 
O-acetyltransferase: !responsible for! End product formation