Contents Summary 982 I. Introduction 982 II. The portraits of our ancestors: a gallery of ideas from more than 100 years of mycorrhizal research 983 III. Mycorrhizal fungi in the 'omics' era: first puzzle, how to name mycorrhizal fungi 985 IV. Signalling: a central question of our time? 987 V. The colonization process: how cellular studies predicted future 'omics' data 989 VI. The genetics underlying colonization events 991 VII. Concluding thoughts: chance and needs in mycorrhizal symbioses 992 Acknowledgements 992 References 992 SUMMARY: Our knowledge of mycorrhizas dates back to at least 150 years ago, when the plant pathologists A. B. Frank and G. Gibelli described the surprisingly morphology of forest tree roots surrounded by a fungal mantle. Compared with this history, our molecular study of mycorrhizas remains a young science. To trace the history of mycorrhizal research, from its roots in the distant past, to the present and the future, this review outlines a few topics that were already central in the 19<sup>th</sup> century and were seminal in revealing the biological meaning of mycorrhizal associations. These include investigations of nutrient exchange between partners, plant responses to mycorrhizal fungi, and the identity and evolution of mycorrhizal symbionts as just a few examples of how the most recent molecular studies of mycorrhizal biology sprouted from the roots of past research. In addition to clarifying the ecological role of mycorrhizas, some of the recent results have changed the perception of the relevance of mycorrhizas in the scientific community, and in the whole of society. Looking to past knowledge while foreseeing strategies for the next steps can help us catch a glimpse of the future of mycorrhizal research.

A.B. Frank: !described! morphology of forest tree roots
G. Gibelli: !described! morphology of forest tree roots
Nutrient exchange: !investigated! between partners
Plant responses: !investigated! to mycorrhizal fungi
Identity/evolution: !investigated! of mycorrhizal symbionts
Recent molecular studies: !sprouted from! roots of past research
Ecological role: !clarified! of mycorrhizas
Relevance: !changed perception of! in scientific community