MADS-box genes encode a large family of transcription factors that play significant roles in plant growth and development. Bamboo is an important non-timber forest product worldwide, but previous studies on the moso bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis) MADS-box gene family were not accurate nor sufficiently detailed. Here, a complete genome-wide identification and characterization of the MADS-box genes in moso bamboo was conducted. There was an unusual lack of type-I MADS-box genes in the bamboo genome database ( http://202.127.18.221/bamboo/index.php ), and some of the PeMADS sequences are fragmented and/or inaccurate. We performed several bioinformatics techniques to obtain more precise sequences using transcriptome assembly. In total, 42 MADS-box genes, including six new type-I MADS-box genes, were identified in bamboo, and their structures, phylogenetic relationships, predicted conserved motifs and promoter cis-elements were systematically investigated. An expression analysis of the bamboo MADS-box genes in floral organs and leaves revealed that several key members are involved in bamboo inflorescence development, like their orthologous genes in Oryza. The ectopic overexpression of one MADS-box gene, PeMADS5, in Arabidopsis triggered an earlier flowering time and the development of an aberrant flower phenotype, suggesting that PeMADS5 acts as a floral activator and is involved in bamboo flowering. We produced the most comprehensive information on MADS-box genes in moso bamboo. Additionally, a critical PeMADS gene (PeMADS5) responsible for the transition from vegetative to reproductive growth was identified and shown to be related to bamboo floral development.

MADS-box genes: !encode! transcription factors 
transcription factors: !play roles in! plant growth and development 
Moso bamboo: !has! MADS-box gene family 
bioinformatics techniques: !used to obtain! more precise sequences 
42 MADS-box genes: !identified in! bamboo 
expression analysis: !revealed involvement of! key members in bamboo inflorescence development 
PeMADS5: !triggered earlier flowering time and aberrant flower phenotype in! Arabidopsis