The phenylpropanoid pathway leads to the production of many important plant secondary metabolites including lignin, chlorogenic acids, flavonoids, and phenolic glycosides. Early studies have demonstrated that flavonoid biosynthesis is transcriptionally regulated, often by a MYB, bHLH, and WDR transcription factor complex. In poplar, several R2R3 MYB transcription factors are known to be involved in flavonoid biosynthesis. Previous work determined that poplar MYB134 and MYB115 are major activators of the proanthocyanidin pathway, and also induce the expression of repressor-like MYB transcription factors. Here we characterize two new repressor MYBs, poplar MYB165 and MYB194, paralogs which comprise a subgroup of R2R3-MYBs distinct from previously reported poplar repressors. Both MYB165 and MYB194 repressed the activation of flavonoid promoters by MYB134 in transient activation assays, and both interacted with a co-expressed bHLH transcription factor, bHLH131, in yeast two-hybrid assays. Overexpression of MYB165 and MYB194 in hybrid poplar resulted in greatly reduced accumulation of several phenylpropanoids including anthocyanins, proanthocyanidins, phenolic glycosides, and hydroxycinnamic acid esters. Transcriptome analysis of MYB165- and MYB194-overexpressing poplars confirmed repression of many phenylpropanoid enzyme genes. In addition, other MYB genes as well as several shikimate pathway enzyme genes were downregulated by MYB165-overexpression. By contrast, leaf aromatic amino acid concentrations were greater in MYB165-overexpressing poplars. Our findings indicate that MYB165 is a major repressor of the flavonoid and phenylpropanoid pathway in poplar, and may also affect the shikimate pathway. The coordinated action of repressor and activator MYBs could be important for the fine tuning of proanthocyanidin biosynthesis during development or following stress.

MYB134: !activates! flavonoid promoters
MYB115: !activates! proanthocyanidin pathway
MYB165: !represses! flavonoid & phenylpropanoid pathways
MYB194: !represses! flavonoid promoters
bHLH131: !interacts with! MYB165 & MYB194
MYB165: !downregulates! phenylpropanoid enzyme genes
MYB165: !upregulates! leaf aromatic amino acid concentrations