Pollen development is a strictly controlled post-meiotic process during which microspores differentiate into microgametophytes and profound structural and functional changes occur in organelles. Annexin 5 is a calcium- and lipid-binding protein that is highly expressed in pollen grains and regulates pollen development and physiology. To gain further insights into the role of ANN5 in Arabidopsis development, we performed detailed phenotypic characterization of Arabidopsis plants with modified ANN5 levels. In addition, interaction partners and subcellular localization of ANN5 were analyzed to investigate potential functions of ANN5 at cellular level. Here, we report that RNAi-mediated suppression of ANN5 results in formation of smaller pollen grains, enhanced pollen lethality, and delayed pollen tube growth. ANN5 RNAi knockdown plants also displayed aberrant development during the transition from the vegetative to generative phase and during embryogenesis, reflected by delayed bolting time and reduced embryo size, respectively. At the subcellular level, ANN5 was delivered to the nucleus, nucleolus, and cytoplasm, and was frequently localized in plastid nucleoids, suggesting a likely role in interorganellar communication. Furthermore, ANN5-YFP co-immunoprecipitated with RABE1b, a putative GTPase, and interaction in planta was confirmed in plastidial nucleoids using FLIM-FRET analysis. Our findings let us to propose that ANN5 influences basal cell homeostasis via modulation of plastid activity during pollen maturation. We hypothesize that the role of ANN5 is to orchestrate the plastidial and nuclear genome activities via protein-protein interactions however not only in maturing pollen but also during the transition from the vegetative to the generative growth and seed development.

ANN5: !regulates! Pollen development 
ANN5: !localizes to! Nucleus, nucleolus, cytoplasm 
ANN5: !interacts with! RABE1b 
ANN5: !enhances! Plastid activity 
ANN5: !represses! Pollen lethality 
ANN5: !synthesizes! Interorganellar communication