Fatty acids are synthesized in the stroma of plant and algal chloroplasts by the fatty acid synthase complex. Newly synthesized fatty acids are then used to generate plastidial lipids that are essential for chloroplast structure and function. Here, we show that inhibition of fatty acid synthesis in the model alga <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> activates autophagy, a highly conserved catabolic process by which cells degrade intracellular material under adverse conditions to maintain cell homeostasis. Treatment of <i>Chlamydomonas</i> cells with cerulenin, a specific fatty acid synthase inhibitor, stimulated lipidation of the autophagosome protein ATG8 and enhanced autophagic flux. We found that inhibition of fatty acid synthesis decreased monogalactosyldiacylglycerol abundance, increased lutein content, down-regulated photosynthesis, and increased the production of reactive oxygen species. Electron microscopy revealed a high degree of thylakoid membrane stacking in cerulenin-treated cells. Moreover, global transcriptomic analysis of these cells showed an up-regulation of genes encoding chloroplast proteins involved in protein folding and oxidative stress and the induction of major catabolic processes, including autophagy and proteasome pathways. Thus, our results uncovered a link between lipid metabolism, chloroplast integrity, and autophagy through a mechanism that involves the activation of a chloroplast quality control system.

Fatty acid synthase: !synthesizes! Fatty acids 
Fatty acids: !used to generate! Plastidial lipids 
Cerulenin: !inhibits! Fatty acid synthesis 
Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis: !activates! Autophagy 
ATG8: !lipidated by! Cerulenin 
Monogalactosyldiacylglycerol: !decreased by! Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis 
Lutein: !increased by! Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis 
Photosynthesis: !down-regulated by! Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis 
Reactive oxygen species: !increased production of! Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis 
Thylakoid membrane stacking: !high degree of! Cerulenin-treated cells 
Chloroplast proteins: !up-regulated genes encoding! Global transcriptomic analysis 
Protein folding and oxidative stress: !involved in! Chloroplast proteins 
Autophagy and proteasome pathways: !induced! Major catabolic processes