Root growth is controlled by mechanisms underlying cell division and cell elongation, which respond to various internal and external factors. In Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), cells produced in the proximal meristem (PM) elongate and differentiate in the transition zone (TZ) and the elongation/differentiation zone (EDZ). Previous studies have demonstrated that endoreplication is involved in root cell elongation; however, the manner by which cells increase in length by more than 2-fold remains unknown. Here, we show that epidermal and cortical cells in Arabidopsis roots undergo two modes of rapid cell elongation: the first rapid cell elongation occurs at the border of the proximal meristem and the TZ, and the second mode occurs during the transition from the TZ to the EDZ. Our previous study showed that cytokinin signaling promotes endoreplication, which triggers the first rapid cell elongation. Our cytological and genetic data revealed that the second rapid cell elongation involves dynamic actin reorganization independent of endoreplication. Cytokinins promote actin bundling and the resultant second rapid cell elongation through activating the signaling pathway involving the cytokinin receptors ARABIDOPSIS HISTIDINE KINASE3 (AHK3) and AHK4 and the B-type transcription factor ARABIDOPSIS RESPONSE REGULATOR2. Our results suggest that cytokinins promote the two modes of rapid cell elongation by controlling distinct cellular events: endoreplication and actin reorganization.

Root growth: !controlled by! cell division/elongation 
cell division/elongation: !responds to! internal/external factors 
endoreplication: !involved in! root cell elongation 
first rapid cell elongation: !occurs at! border of PM/TZ 
second rapid cell elongation: !occurs during! transition from TZ/EDZ 
cytokinin signaling: !promotes! endoreplication/actin reorganization 
cytokinin receptors AHK3/AHK4: !activates! B-type transcription factor ARR2 
cytokinins: !controls! distinct cellular events (endoreplication/actin reorganization)