The plant hormone salicylic acid (SA) plays a critical role in defense against biotrophic pathogens such as Plasmodiophora brassicae, which is an obligate pathogen of crucifer species and the causal agent of clubroot disease of canola (Brassica napus). P. brassicae encodes a protein, predicted to be secreted, with very limited homology to benzoic acid (BA)/SA-methyltransferase, designated PbBSMT. PbBSMT has a SA- and an indole-3-acetic acid-binding domain, which are also present in Arabidopsis thaliana BSMT1 (AtBSMT1) and, like AtBSMT1, has been shown to methylate BA and SA. In support of the hypothesis that P. brassicae uses PbBSMT to overcome SA-mediated defenses by converting SA into inactive methyl salicylate (MeSA), here, we show that PbBSMT suppresses local defense and provide evidence that PbBSMT is much more effective than AtBSMT1 at suppressing the levels of SA and its associated effects. Basal SA levels in Arabidopsis plants that constitutively overexpress PbBSMT compared with those in Arabidopsis wild-type Col-0 (WT) were reduced approximately 80% versus only a 50% reduction in plants overexpressing AtBSMT1. PbBSMT-overexpressing plants were more susceptible to P. brassicae than WT plants; they also were partially compromised in nonhost resistance to Albugo candida. In contrast, AtBSMT1-overexpressing plants were not more susceptible than WT to either P. brassicae or A. candida. Furthermore, transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco plants overexpressing PbBSMT exhibited increased susceptibility to virulent Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (DC3000) and virulent Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci, respectively. Gene-mediated resistance to DC3000/AvrRpt2 and tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) was also compromised in Arabidopsis and Nicotiana tabacum 'Xanthi-nc' plants overexpressing PbBSMT, respectively. Transient expression of PbBSMT or AtBSMT1 in lower leaves of N. tabacum Xanthi-nc resulted in systemic acquired resistance (SAR)-like enhanced resistance to TMV in the distal systemic leaves. Chimeric grafting experiments revealed that, similar to SAR, the development of a PbBSMT-mediated SAR-like phenotype was also dependent on the MeSA esterase activity of NtSABP2 in the systemic leaves. Collectively, these results strongly suggest that PbBSMT is a novel effector, which is secreted by P. brassicae into its host plant to deplete pathogen-induced SA accumulation.

PbBSMT: !suppresses! local defense
PbBSMT: !reduces! SA levels
PbBSMT: !increases susceptibility to! P. brassicae, A. candida, DC3000, TMV
AtBSMT1: !reduces! SA levels
AtBSMT1: !does not increase susceptibility to! P. brassicae, A. candida
NtSABP2: !mediates! SAR-like enhanced resistance to TMV
PbBSMT: !secreted by! P. brassicae