Predominant gene isoforms and expression bias in lipid metabolism pathways are highly conserved between oil-producing Arecaceae crop species coconut and oil palm, but diverge in non-oil-producing species date palm. Coconut (Cocos nucifera), African oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) and date palm (Phoenix dactylifera) are three major crop species in the Arecaceae family for which genome sequences have recently become available. Coconut and African oil palm both store oil in their endosperms, while date palm fruits contain very little oil. We analyzed fatty acid composition in three coconut tissues (leaf, endosperm and embryo) and in two African oil palm tissues (leaf and mesocarp), and identified 806, 840 and 848 lipid-related genes in 22 lipid metabolism pathways from the coconut, African oil palm and date palm genomes, respectively. The majority of lipid-related genes were highly homologous and retained in homologous segments between the three species. Genes involved in the conversion of pyruvate to fatty acid had a five-to-sixfold higher expression in the coconut endosperm and oil palm mesocarp than in the leaf or embryo tissues based on Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript per Million mapped reads values. A close evolutionary relationship between predominant gene isoforms and high conservation of gene expression bias in the lipid and carbohydrate gene metabolism pathways was observed for the two oil-producing species coconut and oil palm, differing from that of date palm, a non-oil-producing species. Our results elucidate the similarities and differences in lipid metabolism between the three major Arecaceae crop species, providing important information for physiology studies as well as breeding for fatty acid composition and oil content in these crops.

Coconut: !stores oil in! endosperm
African oil palm: !stores oil in! mesocarp
Coconut: !expresses higher levels of! genes involved in pyruvate to fatty acid conversion
Oil-producing species: !have close evolutionary relationship between! predominant gene isoforms and gene expression bias
Non-oil-producing species: !differ from! oil-producing species