A normal tea plant with one albino branch was discovered. RNA sequencing, albinism phenotype and ultrastructural observations provided a valuable understanding of the albino mechanism in tea plants. Tea plants with a specific color (white or yellow) have been studied extensively. A normal tea plant (Camellia sinensis cv. quntizhong) with one albino branch was discovered in a local tea plantation in Huangshan, Anhui, China. The pure albino leaves on this special branch had accumulated a fairly high content of amino acids, especially theanine (45.31 mg/g DW), and had a low concentration of polyphenols and an extremely low chlorophyll (Chl) content compared with control leaves. Ultrastructural observation of an albino leaf revealed no chloroplasts, whereas it was viable in the control leaf. RNA sequencing and differentially expressed gene (DEG) analysis were performed on the albino leaves and on control leaves from a normal green branch. The related genes involved in theanine and polyphenol biosynthesis were also investigated in this study. DEG expression patterns in Chl biosynthesis or degradation, carotenoid biosynthesis or degradation, chloroplast development, and biosynthesis were influenced in the albino leaves. Chloroplast deletion in albino leaves had probably destroyed the balance of carbon and nitrogen metabolism, leading to a high accumulation of free amino acids and a low concentration of polyphenols in the albino leaves. The obtained results can provide insight into the mechanism underlying this special albino branch phenotype, and are a valuable contribution toward understanding the albino mechanism in tea plants.

Chloroplast deletion: !causes! imbalance of carbon and nitrogen metabolism
RNA sequencing: !reveals! DEG expression patterns
DEG expression: !influences! Chl biosynthesis/degradation
Chl biosynthesis/degradation: !affects! theanine/polyphenol biosynthesis
theanine/polyphenol biosynthesis: !results in! high accumulation of free amino acids/low concentration of polyphenols