Two intercistronic regions were identified as functional intercistronic expression elements (IEE) for the simultaneous expression of aphA-6 and gfp in a synthetic operon in the chloroplast of C. reinhardtii. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a biflagellate photosynthetic microalga, has been widely used in basic and applied science. Already three decades ago, Chlamydomonas had its chloroplast genome transformed and to this day constitutes the only alga routinely used in transplastomic technology. Despite the fact that over a 100 foreign genes have been expressed from the chloroplast genome, little has been done to address the challenge of expressing multiple genes in the form of operons, a development that is needed and crucial to push forward metabolic engineering and synthetic biology in this organism. Here, we studied five intercistronic regions and investigated if they can be used as intercistronic expression elements (IEE) in synthetic operons to drive the expression of foreign genes in the chloroplast of C. reinhardtii. The intercistronic regions were those from the psbB-psbT, psbN-psbH, psaC-petL, petL-trnN and tscA-chlN chloroplast operons, and the foreign genes were the aminoglycoside 3'-phosphotransferase (aphA-6), which confers resistance to kanamycin, and the green fluorescent protein gene (gfp). While all the intercistronic regions yielded lines that were resistant to kanamycin, only two (obtained with intercistronic regions from psbN-psbH and tscA-chlN) were identified as functional IEEs, yielding lines in which the second cistron (gfp) was translated and generated GFP. The IEEs we have identified could be useful for the stacking of genes for metabolic engineering or synthetic biology circuits in the chloroplast of C. reinhardtii.

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: !has been widely used in! basic and applied science 
intercistronic regions: !were identified as! functional intercistronic expression elements 
psbB-psbT, psbN-psbH, psaC-petL, petL-trnN, tscA-chlN: !were studied as! intercistronic expression elements 
aminoglycoside 3'-phosphotransferase (aphA-6): !confers resistance to! kanamycin 
green fluorescent protein gene (gfp): !was translated and generated! GFP 
IEEs: !could be useful for! stacking of genes