In plants, brassinosteroid biosynthesis and metabolism genes affect endogenous brassinosteroid metabolic processes as well as stem and root growth. However, there is little information available regarding these genes in apple. In this study, 22 brassinosteroid biosynthesis and metabolism genes were identified in apple (Malus domestica). These genes were named according to their chromosomal locations and the Arabidopsis thaliana homologs. Their conserved characteristic domains, evolutionary relationships, syntenic relationships, chemical characteristics, gene/protein structures, interactions among the encoded proteins, promoter sequences, and functions were investigated. These 22 genes were clustered with their A. thaliana homologs based on bioinformatics analyses, which suggested they are functionally similar in apple and A. thaliana. Tissue-specific expression levels revealed that most of these genes are important for stem growth and development, while several of these genes affect lateral root formation. The transcription patterns of these genes in shoot tips were investigated following diverse treatments [brassinosteroid (shoot tips and roots), brassinazole, auxin, and temperature]. Gene expression levels were also examined in different grafting combinations ('Nagafu No. 2'/Malling 9 and 'Nagafu No. 2'/'Nagafu No. 2') and shoot varieties ('Yanfu No. 6' and 'Nagafu No. 2'). The results indicated that these genes may be involved in apple stem and root growth. The comprehensive genome-wide analysis of brassinosteroid biosynthesis and metabolism genes presented herein may be useful for breeding new apple cultivars with increased vigor. The data also represent a rich genetic resource for future apple gene functional investigations that may have implications for the genetic improvement of apple tree species.

brassinosteroid biosynthesis and metabolism genes: !affect! stem and root growth 
brassinosteroid biosynthesis and metabolism genes: !cluster with! A. thaliana homologs 
brassinosteroid biosynthesis and metabolism genes: !express in! shoot tips 
brassinosteroid biosynthesis and metabolism genes: !respond to! brassinosteroid, brassinazole, auxin, temperature 
brassinosteroid biosynthesis and metabolism genes: !examined in! grafting combinations, shoot varieties