Cucumber fruit trichomes could be classified into eight types; all of them are multicellular with complex and different developmental processes as compared with unicellular trichomes in other plants. The fruit trichomes or fruit spines of cucumber, Cucumis sativus L., are highly specialized structures originating from epidermal cells with diverse morphology, which grow perpendicular to the fruit surface. To understand the underlying molecular mechanisms of fruit trichome development, in this study, we conducted morphological characterization and classification of cucumber fruit trichomes and their developmental processes. We examined the fruit trichomes among 200 cucumber varieties, which could be classified into eight morphologically distinct types (I-VIII). Investigation of the organogenesis of the eight types of trichomes revealed two main developmental patterns. The development of glandular trichomes had multiple stages including initiation and expansion of the trichome precursor cell protuberating out of the epidermal surface, followed by periclinal bipartition to two cells (top and bottom) which later formed the head region and the stalk, respectively, through subsequent cell divisions. The non-glandular trichome development started with the expansion of the precursor cell perpendicularly to the epidermal plane followed by cell periclinal division to form a stalk comprising of some rectangle cells and a pointed apex cell. The base cell then started anticlinal bipartition to two cells, which then underwent many cell divisions to form a multicellular spherical structure. In addition, phytohormones as environmental cues were closely related to trichome development. We found that GA and BAP were capable of increasing trichome number per fruit with distinct effects under different concentrations.

Cucumber fruit trichomes: !classified into! 8 types
Fruit trichomes: !originate from! epidermal cells
Organogenesis: !involves! multiple stages
GA and BAP: !increase! trichome number