['30233632', 'Tyrosine serves as a precursor to several types of plant natural products of  medicinal or nutritional interests. Hydroxyphenylpyruvate reductase (HPPR), which  catalyzes the reduction of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid (pHPP) to  4-hydroxyphenyllactic acid (pHPL), has been shown to be the key enzyme in the  biosynthesis of rosmarinic acid (RA) from tyrosine and, so far, HPPR activity has  been reported only from the RA-accumulating plants. Here, we show that HPPR  homologs are widely distributed in land plants. In Arabidopsis thaliana, which  does not accumulate RA at detectable level, two homologs (HPPR2 and HPPR3) are  functional in reducing pHPP. Phylogenetic analysis placed HPPR2 and HPPR3 in two  separate groups within the HPPR clade, and HPPR2 and HPPR3 are distinct from  HPR1, a peroxisomal hydroxypyruvate reductase (HPR). In vitro characterization of  the recombinant proteins revealed that HPPR2 has both HPR and HPPR activities,  whereas HPPR3 has a strong preference for pHPP, and both enzymes are localized in  the cytosol. Arabidopsis mutants defective in either HPPR2 or HPPR3 contained  lower amounts of pHPL and were impaired in conversion of tyrosine to pHPL.  Furthermore, a loss-of-function mutation in tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) also  reduced the pHPL accumulation in plants. Our data demonstrate that in Arabidopsis  HPPR2 and HPPR3, together with TAT1, constitute to a probably conserved  biosynthetic pathway from tyrosine to pHPL, from which some specialized  metabolites, such as RA, can be generated in specific groups of plants. Our  finding may have broad implications for the origins of tyrosine-derived  specialized metabolites in general.', '2018', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2018.01305', 'Yang']

Tyrosine: !serves as precursor to! plant natural products 
HPPR: !catalyzes reduction of! 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid 
HPPR: !widely distributed in! land plants 
HPPR2: !functional in reducing! pHPP 
HPPR3: !preference for! pHPP 
HPPR2: !localized in! cytosol 
HPPR3: !localized in! cytosol 
HPPR2: !has both HPR and HPPR activities! 
HPPR3: !has strong preference for! pHPP 
HPPR2: !impaired in conversion of! tyrosine to pHPL 
HPPR3: !impaired in conversion of! tyrosine to pHPL 
TAT1: !constitutes biosynthetic pathway from! tyrosine to pHPL