The emerging roles of rhizobacteria in improving plant nutrition and stress protection have great potential for sustainable use in saline soils. We evaluated the function of the salt-tolerant strain Azotobacter chroococcum 76A as stress protectant in an important horticultural crop, tomato. Specifically we hypothesized that treatment of tomato plants with A. chroococcum 76A could improve plant performance under salinity stress and sub-optimal nutrient regimen. Inoculation of Micro Tom tomato plants with A. chroococcum 76A increased numerous growth parameters and also conferred protective effects under both moderate (50 mM NaCl) and severe (100 mM NaCl) salt stresses. These benefits were mostly observed under reduced nutrient regimen and were less appreciable in optimal nitrogen conditions. Therefore, the efficiency of A. chroococcum 76A was found to be dependent on the nutrient status of the rhizosphere. The expression profiles of LEA genes indicated that A. chroococcum 76A treated plants were more responsive to stress stimuli when compared to untreated controls. However, transcript levels of key nitrogen assimilation genes revealed that the optimal nitrogen regimen, in combination with the strain A. chroococcum 76A, may have saturated plant's ability to assimilate nitrogen. Roots inoculation with A. chroococcum 76A tomato promoted tomato plant growth, stress tolerance and nutrient assimilation efficiency under moderate and severe salinity. Inoculation with beneficial bacteria such as A. chroococcum 76A may be an ideal solution for low-input systems, where environmental constraints and limited chemical fertilization may affect the potential yield.

A. chroococcum 76A: !improves! Plant Performance 
A. chroococcum 76A: !confers protective effects! Salinity Stress 
A. chroococcum 76A: !efficiency dependent on! Nutrient Status 
LEA genes: !indicate! A. chroococcum 76A treated plants more responsive to stress 
Nitrogen assimilation genes: !reveal! Optimal nitrogen regimen may saturate plant's ability to assimilate nitrogen 
A. chroococcum 76A: !promotes! Tomato Plant Growth 
A. chroococcum 76A: !promotes! Stress Tolerance 
A. chroococcum 76A: !promotes! Nutrient Assimilation Efficiency