We have isolated a novel powdery mildew resistance gene in wheat that was originally introgressed from rye. Further analysis revealed evolutionary divergent history of wheat and rye orthologous resistance genes. Wheat production is under constant threat from a number of fungal pathogens, among them is wheat powdery mildew (Blumeria graminis f. sp. tritici). Deployment of resistance genes is the most economical and sustainable method for mildew control. However, domestication and selective breeding have narrowed genetic diversity of modern wheat germplasm, and breeders have relied on wheat relatives for enriching its gene pool through introgression. Translocations where the 1RS chromosome arm was introgressed from rye to wheat have improved yield and resistance against various pathogens. Here, we isolated the Pm17 mildew resistance gene located on the 1RS introgression in wheat cultivar 'Amigo' and found that it is an allele or a close paralog of the Pm8 gene isolated earlier from 'Petkus' rye. Functional validation using transient and stable transformation confirmed the identity of Pm17. Analysis of Pm17 and Pm8 coding regions revealed an overall identity of 82.9% at the protein level, with the LRR domains being most divergent. Our analysis also showed that the two rye genes are much more diverse compared to the variants encoded by the Pm3 gene in wheat, which is orthologous to Pm17/Pm8 as concluded from highly conserved upstream sequences in all these genes. Thus, the evolutionary history of these orthologous loci differs in the cereal species rye and wheat and demonstrates that orthologous resistance genes can take different routes towards functionally active genes. These findings suggest that the isolation of Pm3/Pm8/Pm17 orthologs from other grass species, additional alleles from the rye germplasm as well as possibly synthetic variants will result in novel resistance genes useful in wheat breeding.

1RS chromosome arm: !introgressed from! rye 
Pm17 gene: !isolated from! wheat cultivar 'Amigo' 
Pm17 gene: !allele or close paralog of! Pm8 gene 
Pm17 and Pm8 coding regions: !overall identity of! 82.9% at protein level 
Pm3 gene: !orthologous to! Pm17/Pm8 
Pm3/Pm8/Pm17 orthologs: !isolate from! other grass species 
additional alleles: !from! rye germplasm 
synthetic variants: !result in! novel resistance genes