In the present study, we investigated the induced systemic resistance (ISR) activated by the beneficial fungus Trichoderma atroviride in maize plants, and the early immunological responses triggered after challenge with the ear rot pathogen Fusarium verticillioides. By transcriptional analysis, we were able to identify the gene core set specifically modulated in silks of maize plants expressing ISR. Our results showed that the main transcriptional reprogramming falls into genes involved in five main functional categories: cell structure or cell wall, amino acid and protein metabolism, stress responses, signaling, and transport. Among these ISR-related genes, it is important to highlight novel findings regarding hormone metabolism and signaling. The expression of hormone-dependent genes was in good agreement with the abscisic acid, jasmonic acid, and salicylic acid (SA) levels detected in the plants under study. The experimental design allowed the identification of novel regulatory elements related to a heightened state of defense in silks and suggests that steroids and SA are central components of a master regulatory network controlling the immunity of silks during ISR. The results presented also provide evidence about the molecular mechanisms used by maize silks against F. verticillioides to counteract pathogenic development and host invasion, including pathogenesis-related genes, plant cell-wall reinforcement, fungal cell-wall-degrading enzymes and secondary metabolism.

Trichoderma atroviride: !activates! Induced systemic resistance
Fusarium verticillioides: !triggers! Early immunological responses
Cell structure/cell wall: !modulated by! ISR-related genes
Amino acid/protein metabolism: !modulated by! ISR-related genes
Stress responses: !modulated by! ISR-related genes
Signaling: !modulated by! ISR-related genes
Transport: !modulated by! ISR-related genes
Hormone metabolism/signaling: !regulated by! Abscisic acid, jasmonic acid, salicylic acid
Pathogenesis-related genes: !enhanced by! Maize silks
Plant cell-wall reinforcement: !enhanced by! Maize silks
Fungal cell-wall-degrading enzymes: !enhanced by! Maize silks
Secondary metabolism: !enhanced by! Maize silks