DOTAP triggers Arabidopsis thaliana immunity and by priming the defense response is able to reduce bacterial pathogen attack. DOTAP is a cationic lipid widely used as a liposomal transfection reagent and it has recently been identified as a strong activator of the innate immune system in animal cells. Plants are sessile organisms and unlike mammals, that have innate and acquired immunity, plants possess only innate immunity. A key feature of plant immunity is the ability to sense potentially dangerous signals, as it is the case for microbe-associated, pathogen-associated or damage-associated molecular patterns and by doing so, trigger an active defense response to cope with the perturbing stimulus. Here, we evaluated the effect of DOTAP in plant basal innate immunity. An initial plant defense response was induced by the cationic lipid DOTAP in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, assessed by callose deposition, reactive oxygen species production, and plant cell death. In addition, a proteomic analysis revealed that these responses are mirrored by changes in the plant proteome, such as up-regulation of proteins related to defense responses, including proteins involved in photorespiration, cysteine and oxylipin synthesis, and oxidative stress response; and down-regulation of enzymes related to photosynthesis. Furthermore, DOTAP was able to prime the defense response for later pathogenic challenges as in the case of the virulent bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato. Disease outcome was diminished in DOTAP-pre-treated leaves and bacterial growth was reduced 100 times compared to mock leaves. Therefore, DOTAP may be considered a good candidate as an elicitor for the study of plant immunity.

DOTAP: !triggers! Arabidopsis thaliana immunity 
DOTAP: !induces! plant defense response 
plant defense response: !mirrored by! changes in plant proteome 
DOTAP: !primes! defense response 
defense response: !diminishes! disease outcome 
defense response: !reduces! bacterial growth