['30266040', 'Leaf senescence affects plant fitness. Plants that evolve in different  environments are expected to acquire distinct regulations of leaf senescence.  However, the adaptive and evolutionary roles of leaf senescence are largely  unknown. We investigated leaf senescence in 259 natural accessions of Arabidopsis  by quantitatively assaying dark-induced senescence responses using a  high-throughput chlorophyll fluorescence imaging system. A meta-analysis of our  data with phenotypic and climatic information demonstrated biological and  environmental links with leaf senescence. We further performed genome-wide  association mapping to identify the genetic loci underlying the diversity of leaf  senescence responses. We uncovered a new locus, Genetic Variants in leaf  Senescence (GVS1), with high similarity to reductase, where a single  nonsynonymous nucleotide substitution at GVS1 mediates the diversity of the  senescence trait. Loss-of-function mutations of GVS1 in Columbia-0 delayed leaf  senescence and increased sensitivity to oxidative stress, suggesting that this  GVS1 variant promotes optimal responses to developmental and environmental  signals. Intriguingly, gvs1 loss-of-function mutants display allele- and  accession-dependent phenotypes, revealing the functional diversity of GVS1  alleles not only in leaf senescence, but also oxidative stress. Our discovery of  GVS1 as the genetic basis of natural variation in senescence programs reinforces  its adaptive potential in modulating life histories across diverse environments.', '2019 Mar', 'New Phytol', '10.1111/nph.15501', 'ORCID:']

Leaf senescence: !affects! Plant fitness 
Plants: !evolve in! Different environments 
Dark-induced senescence responses: !quantitatively assayed using! High-throughput chlorophyll fluorescence imaging system 
Meta-analysis: !demonstrated! Biological and environmental links with leaf senescence 
Genome-wide association mapping: !identified! Genetic loci underlying diversity of leaf senescence responses 
GVS1: !mediates! Diversity of senescence trait 
Loss-of-function mutations of GVS1: !delayed! Leaf senescence 
GVS1: !promotes! Optimal responses to developmental and environmental signals 
GVS1: !reveals! Functional diversity not only in leaf senescence, but also oxidative stress