Although a requirement for boron is a well-established feature of vascular plants, its designation, for almost a century, as essential is challenged and, instead, the proposal is made that it has never been so as conventionally defined. This is because an alternative interpretation of published evidence negates its compliance with one of the criteria for essentiality, that its effects are direct. The alternative, here postulated, is that boron is, and always has been, potentially toxic, a feature which, for normal growth, development and reproduction, needed to be nullified. This was enabled by exploitation of boron's ability to be chemically bound to compounds with cis-hydroxyl groups. Although particular cell wall carbohydrate polymers, glycoproteins and membrane glycolipids are among candidates for this role, it is here proposed that soluble phenolic metabolites of, or related to, the components of the pathway of lignin biosynthesis, themselves potentially toxic, are primarily used by vascular plants. When metabolic circumstances allow these phenolics to accumulate endogenously in the cytoplasm, their own inherent toxicity is also alleviated, partially at least, by formation of complexes with boron. This chemical reciprocity, enhanced by physical sequestration of the complexes in vacuoles and/or apoplast, thus achieves, in a flexible but indirect manner, a minimization of the inherent toxicities of both boron and relevant phenolics. In these ways, the multifarious outcomes of impairments, natural or experimental, to this interplay are responsible for the lack of consensus to explain the diverse effects observed in the many searches for boron's primary metabolic role, here considered to be nonexistent. In particular, since a toxic element cannot have 'deficiency symptoms', those previously so-called are postulated to be largely due to the expressed toxicity of phenylpropanoids. A principal requirement for the otherwise toxic boron is to nullify, by means of its indirect chemical and physical sequestration, such expression. In these ways, it is therefore neither an essential nor a beneficial element as currently strictly defined.

Boron: !nullifies! Phenylpropanoids 
Phenylpropanoids: !sequestered by! Boron 
Boron: !chemically bound to! Compounds with cis-hydroxyl groups 
Cell wall carbohydrates: !potential role in! Binding Boron