Contents Summary 1215 I. Introduction 1215 II. Molecular organization of the plant circadian clock 1216 III. Temperature compensation 1219 IV. Temperature regulation of circadian behaviors 1220 V. Thermal adaptation of the clock: evolutionary considerations 1223 VI. Light and temperature information for the clock function - synergic or individual? 1224 VII. Concluding remarks and future prospects 1225 Acknowledgements 1225 References 1225 SUMMARY: Plant growth and development is widely affected by diverse temperature conditions. Although studies have been focused mainly on the effects of stressful temperature extremes in recent decades, nonstressful ambient temperatures also influence an array of plant growth and morphogenic aspects, a process termed thermomorphogenesis. Notably, accumulating evidence indicates that both stressful and nonstressful temperatures modulate the functional process of the circadian clock, a molecular timer of biological rhythms in higher eukaryotes and photosynthetic prokaryotes. The circadian clock can sustain robust and precise timing over a range of physiological temperatures. Genes and molecular mechanisms governing the temperature compensation process have been explored in different plant species. In addition, a ZEITLUPE/HSP90-mediated protein quality control mechanism helps plants maintain the thermal stability of the clock under heat stress. The thermal adaptation capability and plasticity of the clock are of particular interest in view of the growing concern about global climate changes. Considering these circumstances in the field, we believe that it is timely to provide a provoking discussion on the current knowledge of temperature regulation of the clock function. The review also will discuss stimulating ideas on this topic along with ecosystem management and future agricultural innovation.

Gene: !affects! Process
Process: !modulates! Clock
Clock: !sustains! Timing
Temperature: !influences! Plant growth
ZEITLUPE/HSP90: !mediates! Protein quality control
Heat Stress: !stabilizes! Clock