The res (restored cell structure by salinity) mutant, recently identified as the first tomato mutant accumulating jasmonate in roots under non-stressful conditions, exhibits a remarkable growth inhibition and morphological alterations in roots and leaves, which are suppressed when the mutant plants are exposed to salinity. In order to understand the molecular basis of the phenotype recovery induced by salt stress in the res mutant, we carried out a comparative transcriptomic analysis in roots and leaves of wild-type and res plants in absence of stress (control) and when the phenotypic recovery of res mutant began to be observed upon salt stress (5 days of 200 mM NaCl). The number of differentially expressed genes was three times greater in roots than in leaves of res vs WT plants grown in control, and included the down-regulation of growth-promoting genes and the up-regulation of genes involved in Ca<sup>2+</sup> signalling, transcription factors and others related to stress responses. However, these expression differences were attenuated under salt stress, coinciding with the phenotypic normalisation of the mutant. Contrarily to the attenuated response observed in roots, an enhanced response was found in leaves under salt stress. This included drastic expression changes in several circadian clock genes, such as GIGANTEA1, which was down-regulated in res vs WT plants. Moreover, the higher photosynthetic efficiency of res leaves under salt stress was accompanied by specific salt-upregulation of the genes RUBISCO ACTIVASE1 and ALTERNATIVE OXIDASE1A. Very few genes were found to be differentially expressed in both tissues (root and leaf) and conditions (control and salt), but this group included SlWRKY39 and SlMYB14 transcription factors, as well as genes related to protein homeostasis, especially protease inhibitors such as METALLOCARBOXYPEPTIDASE INHIBITOR, which also seem to play a role in the phenotype recovery and salt tolerance of res mutant. In summary, in this study we have identified genes which seem to have a prominent role in salt tolerance. Moreover, we think this work could contribute to future breeding of tomato crops with increased stress tolerance.

Growth-promoting genes: !down-regulated in! res mutant
Ca<sup>2+</sup> signalling genes: !up-regulated in! res mutant
Transcription factors: !up-regulated in! res mutant
Stress response genes: !up-regulated in! res mutant
Circadian clock genes: !down-regulated in! res mutant
RUBISCO ACTIVASE1: !up-regulated in! res mutant
ALTERNATIVE OXIDASE1A: !up-regulated in! res mutant
SlWRKY39: !differentially expressed in! root and leaf
SlMYB14: !differentially expressed in! root and leaf
Protein homeostasis genes: !differentially expressed in! root and leaf
METALLOCARBOXYPEPTIDASE INHIBITOR: !differentially expressed in! root and leaf