The barley disease resistance (R) gene locus mildew locus A (Mla) provides isolate-specific resistance against the powdery mildew fungus Blumeria graminis hordei and has been introgressed into modern cultivars from diverse germplasms, including the wild relative Hordeum spontaneum. Known Mla disease resistance specificities to B. graminis hordei appear to encode allelic variants of the R gene homolog 1 (RGH1) family of nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat (NLR) proteins. Here, we sequenced and assembled the transcriptomes of 50 H. spontaneum accessions representing nine populations distributed throughout the Fertile Crescent. The assembled Mla transcripts exhibited rich sequence diversity, linked neither to geographic origin nor population structure, and could be grouped into two similar-sized subfamilies based on two major N-terminal coiled-coil (CC) signaling domains that are both capable of eliciting cell death. The presence of positively selected sites located mainly in the C-terminal leucine-rich repeats of both MLA subfamilies, together with the fact that both CC signaling domains mediate cell death, implies that the two subfamilies are actively maintained in the population. Unexpectedly, known MLA receptor variants that confer B. graminis hordei resistance belong exclusively to one subfamily. Thus, signaling domain divergence, potentially as adaptation to distinct pathogen populations, is an evolutionary signature of functional diversification of an immune receptor. Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Mla: !provides isolate-specific resistance against! B. graminis hordei
Mla: !encodes allelic variants of! RGH1 family
Mla: !exhibited rich sequence diversity linked to neither geographic origin nor population structure!
Mla: !could be grouped into two subfamilies based on two major N-terminal coiled-coil signaling domains!
positively selected sites: !located mainly in the C-terminal leucine-rich repeats of both MLA subfamilies!
known MLA receptor variants: !belong exclusively to one subfamily!
signaling domain divergence: !potentially as adaptation to distinct pathogen populations!