['30293201', 'Maf1 repressor activity is critical for plant survival during environmental  stresses, and is regulated by its phosphorylation/dephosphorylation through the  activity of TOR and PP4/PP2A phosphatases. Maf1 is a global repressor of RNA  polymerase III (Pol III), and is conserved in eukaryotes. Pol III synthesizes  small RNAs, 5S rRNA, and tRNAs that are essential for protein translation and  cell growth. Maf1 is a phosphoprotein and dephosphorylation of Maf1 promotes its  repressor activity in yeast and mammals. Plant Maf1 was identified in citrus  plants as a canker elicitor-binding protein, and citrus Maf1 represses cell  growth associated with canker development. However, functions of plant Maf1 under  diverse stress conditions and its regulation by the target of rapamycin (TOR)  signaling components are poorly understood. In this study, the Arabidopsis maf1  mutants were more susceptible to diverse stresses and treatment with the TOR  inhibitor Torin-1 than wild-type plants. The maf1 mutants expressed higher levels  of Maf1 target RNAs, including 5S rRNA and pre-tRNAs in leaf cells, supporting  Pol III repressor activity of Arabidopsis Maf1. Cellular stresses and Torin-1  treatment induced dephosphorylation of Maf1, suggesting Maf1 activation under  diverse stress conditions. TOR silencing also stimulated Maf1 dephosphorylation,  while silencing of catalytic subunit genes of PP4 and PP2A repressed it. Thus,  TOR kinase and PP4/PP2A phosphatases appeared to oppositely modulate the Maf1  phosphorylation status. TOR silencing decreased the abundance of the target RNAs,  while silencing of the PP4 and PP2A subunit genes increased it, supporting the  positive correlation between Maf1 dephosphorylation and its repressor activity.  Taken together, these results suggest that repressor activity of Maf1, regulated  by the TOR signaling pathway, is critical for plant cell survival during  environmental stresses.', '2019 Feb', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-018-3024-5', 'Pai']

Maf1: !represses! Pol III 
TOR: !regulates! Maf1 phosphorylation/dephosphorylation 
PP4/PP2A: !regulates! Maf1 phosphorylation/dephosphorylation 
TOR: !induces! Maf1 dephosphorylation 
PP4/PP2A: !inhibits! Maf1 dephosphorylation 
Maf1: !enhances! cell survival during environmental stresses