['30291188', 'Environmental mechanical forces, such as wind and touch, trigger gene-expression  regulation and developmental changes, called "thigmomorphogenesis," in plants,  demonstrating the ability of plants to perceive such stimuli. In Arabidopsis, a  major thigmomorphogenetic response is delayed bolting, i.e., emergence of the  flowering stem. The signaling components responsible for mechanotransduction of  the touch response are largely unknown. Here, we performed a high-throughput  SILIA (stable isotope labeling in Arabidopsis)-based quantitative  phosphoproteomics analysis to profile changes in protein phosphorylation  resulting from 40 seconds of force stimulation in Arabidopsis thaliana Of the 24  touch-responsive phosphopeptides identified, many were derived from kinases,  phosphatases, cytoskeleton proteins, membrane proteins, and ion transporters. In  addition, the previously uncharacterized protein TOUCH-REGULATED PHOSPHOPROTEIN1  (TREPH1) became rapidly phosphorylated in touch-stimulated plants, as confirmed  by immunoblots. TREPH1 fractionates as a soluble protein and is shown to be  required for the touch-induced delay of bolting and gene-expression changes.  Furthermore, a nonphosphorylatable site-specific isoform of TREPH1 (S625A) failed  to restore touch-induced flowering delay of treph1-1, indicating the necessity of  S625 for TREPH1 function and providing evidence consistent with the possible  functional relevance of the touch-regulated TREPH1 phosphorylation. Taken  together, these findings identify a phosphoprotein player in Arabidopsis  thigmomorphogenesis regulation and provide evidence that TREPH1 and its  touch-induced phosphorylation may play a role in touch-induced bolting delay, a  major component of thigmomorphogenesis.', '2018 Oct 23', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1814006115', 'Li']

Environmental mechanical forces: !trigger! thigmomorphogenesis 
Kinases, phosphatases, cytoskeleton proteins, membrane proteins, and ion transporters: !respond to! touch response 
TOUCH-REGULATED PHOSPHOPROTEIN1 (TREPH1): !becomes rapidly phosphorylated in! touch-stimulated plants 
TREPH1: !fractionates as! soluble protein 
TREPH1: !is required for! touch-induced delay of bolting 
Nonphosphorylatable site-specific isoform of TREPH1 (S625A): !fails to restore! touch-induced flowering delay