Hydrogen gas (H<sub>2</sub>) is the most abundant element in the universe, and has been reported to act as a novel beneficial gaseous molecule in plant adaptive responses. Radish sprouts are popular because they contain substantial amounts of antioxidants and health-promoting compounds, such as anthocyanin and glucosinolates. Although radish sprouts accumulated more anthocyanin under UV-A after treatment with hydrogen-rich water (HRW), the molecular mechanism responsible is still elusive. To explore these mechanisms, RNA-seq analysis was used. Four cDNA libraries from radish sprout hypocotyls were constructed, and a total of 14,564 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified through pairwise comparisons. By Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis, these unigenes were found to be implicated in light signal perception and transduction, starch and sucrose metabolism, photosynthesis, nitrogen metabolism and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. The MYB-bHLH-WD40 complex accounted for the majority of the transcription factors found to be involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis, and levels of transcripts for this complex were in accordance with the anthocyanin concentrations observed. In addition, other transcription factors (such as NAC, bZIP and TCP) might participate in HRW-promoted anthocyanin biosynthesis. Furthermore, the signaling processes of plant hormones, MAPKs and Ca<sup>2+</sup> might be involved in HRW-promoted anthocyanin biosynthesis under UV-A. The expression patterns of 16 selected genes were confirmed using qRT-PCR analysis. Taken together, the results of this study may expand our understanding of HRW-promoted anthocyanin accumulation under UV-A in radish sprouts.

H2: !promotes! Anthocyanin
Gene Ontology: !implicates in! Light signal perception and transduction
KEGG: !implicates in! Starch and sucrose metabolism
MYB-bHLH-WD40 complex: !accounts for! Transcription factors
NAC, bZIP, TCP: !participate in! HRW-promoted anthocyanin biosynthesis
Plant hormones: !signal! MAPKs and Ca2+
qRT-PCR: !confirms! Expression patterns of 16 selected genes