Histone deacetylases (HDACs) function as key epigenetic factors in repressing the expression of genes in multiple aspects of plant growth, development and plant response to abiotic or biotic stresses. To date, the molecular function of HDACs is well described in Arabidopsis thaliana, but no systematic analysis of this gene family in soybean (Glycine max) has been reported. In this study, 28 HDAC genes from soybean genome were identified, which were asymmetrically distributed on 12 chromosomes. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that GmHDACs fall into three major groups previously named RPD3/HDA1, SIR2, and HD2. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that YFP-tagged GmSRT4, GmHDT2 and GmHDT4 were predominantly localized in the nucleus, whereas GmHDA6, GmHDA13, GmHDA14 and GmHDA16 were found in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. Real-time quantitative PCR showed that GmHDA6, GmHDA13, GmHDA14, GmHDA16 and GmHDT4 were broadly expressed across plant tissues, while GmHDA8, GmSRT2, GmSRT4 and GmHDT2 showed differential expression across various tissues. Interestingly, we measured differential changes in GmHDACs transcripts accumulation in response to several abiotic cues, indicating that these epigenetic modifiers could potentially be part of a dynamic transcriptional response to stress in soybean. Finally, we show that the levels of histone marks previously reported to be associated with plant HDACs are modulated by cold and heat in this legume. We have identified and classified 28 HDAC genes in soybean. Our data provides insights into the evolution of the HDAC gene family and further support the hypothesis that these genes are important for the plant responses to environmental stress.

HDACs: !repress! gene expression
GmHDACs: !fall into! 3 major groups
YFP-tagged GmHDACs: !localize to! nucleus/cytoplasm
GmHDA6, GmHDA13, GmHDA14, GmHDA16 and GmHDT4: !broadly expressed across! plant tissues
GmHDA8, GmSRT2, GmSRT4 and GmHDT2: !differentially expressed across! various tissues
GmHDACs: !modulated by! cold/heat
HDACs: !important for! plant responses to environmental stress