Meiosis is a specialized cell division critical for gamete production in the sexual reproduction of eukaryotes. It ensures genome integrity and generates genetic variability as well. The Rec8-like cohesin is a cohesion protein essential for orderly chromosome segregation in meiotic cell division. The Rec8-like genes and cohesins have been cloned and characterized in diploid models, but not in polyploids. The present study aimed to clone the homoeologous genes (homoeoalleles) for Rec8-like cohesin in polyploid wheat, an important food crop for humans, and to characterize their structure and function under a polyploid condition. We cloned two Rec8-like homoeoalleles from tetraploid wheat (TtRec8-A1 and TtRec8-B1) and one from hexaploid wheat (TaRec8-D1), and performed expression and functional analyses of the homoeoalleles. Also, we identified other two Rec8 homoeoalleles in hexaploid wheat (TaRec8-A1 and TaRec8-B1) and the one in Aegilops tauschii (AetRec8-D1) by referencing the DNA sequences of the Rec8 homoeoalleles cloned in this study. The coding DNA sequences (CDS) of these six Rec8 homoeoalleles are all 1,827 bp in length, encoding 608 amino acids. They differed from each other primarily in introns although single nucleotide polymorphisms were detected in CDS. Substantial difference was observed between the homoeoalleles from the subgenome B (TtRec8-B1 and TaRec8-B1) and those from the subgenomes A and D (TtRec8-A1, TaRec8-A1, and TaRec8-D1). TtRec8-A1 expressed dominantly over TtRec8-B1, but comparably to TaRec8-D1, in polyploid wheat. In addition, we developed the antibody against wheat Rec8 and used the antibody to detect Rec8 cohesin in the Western blotting and subcellular localization analyses. The Rec8 homoeoalleles from the subgenomes A and D are transcriptionally more active than the one from the subgenome B in polyploid wheat. The structural variation and differential expression of the Rec8 homoeoalleles indicate a unique cross-genome coordination of the homoeologous genes in polyploid wheat, and imply the distinction of the wheat subgenome B from the subgenomes A and D in the origin and evolution.

Rec8-like genes: !cloned from! polyploid wheat 
Rec8-like genes: !differ in! introns 
Rec8-like genes: !express dominantly! subgenome A and D 
Rec8-like genes: !indicate! unique cross-genome coordination 
Rec8-like genes: !imply! distinction of subgenome B