Lipoxygenases mediate important biological processes. Through comparative genomics, domain-scan analysis, sequence analysis, phylogenetic analysis, homology modelling and transcriptional analysis the lipoxygenase gene family of pepper (Capsicum annuum) has been identified. Lipoxygenases (LOXs) are non-heme, iron-containing dioxygenases playing a pivotal role in diverse biological processes in plants, including defence and development. Here, we exploited the recent sequencing of the pepper genome to investigate the LOX gene family in pepper. Two LOX classes are recognized, the 9- and 13-LOXs that oxygenate lipids at the 9th and 13th carbon atom, respectively. Using two main in-silico approaches, we identified a total of eight LOXs in pepper. Phylogenetic analysis classified four LOXs (CaLOX1, CaLOX3, CaLOX4 and CaLOX5) as 9-LOXs and four (CaLOX2, CaLOX6, CaLOX7 and CaLOX8) as 13-LOXs. Furthermore, sequence similarity/identity and subcellular localization analysis strengthen the classification predicted by phylogenetic analysis. Pivotal amino acids together with all domains and motifs are highly conserved in all pepper LOXs. Expression of 13-LOXs appeared to be more dynamic compared to 9-LOXs both in response to exogenous JA application and to thrips feeding. Bioinformatic and expression analyses predict the putative functions of two 13-LOXs, CaLOX6 and CaLOX7, in the biosynthesis of Green Leaf Volatiles, involved in indirect defence. The data are discussed in the context of LOX families in solanaceous plants and plants of other families.

Lipoxygenases: !mediate! Important biological processes
Comparative genomics: !identify! Lipoxygenase gene family of pepper
Lipoxygenases: !oxygenate! Lipids
Two LOX classes: !recognized! 9- and 13-LOXs
In-silico approaches: !identify! 8 LOXs in pepper
Phylogenetic analysis: !classify! 4 LOXs as 9-LOXs, 4 as 13-LOXs
Sequence similarity/identity: !strengthen! Classification predicted by phylogenetic analysis
Pivotal amino acids: !highly conserved! In all pepper LOXs
13-LOXs: !appear more dynamic! Than 9-LOXs
CaLOX6 and CaLOX7: !predict putative functions! In biosynthesis of Green Leaf Volatiles