The plastome of B. orellana reveals specific evolutionary features, unique RNA editing sites, molecular markers and the position of Bixaceae within Malvales. Annatto (Bixa orellana L.) is a native species of tropical Americas with center of origin in Brazilian Amazonia. Its seeds accumulate the apocarotenoids, bixin and norbixin, which are only found in high content in this species. The seeds of B. orellana are commercially valued by the food industry because its dyes replace synthetic ones from the market due to potential carcinogenic risks. The increasing consumption of B. orellana seeds for dye extraction makes necessary the increase of productivity, which is possible accessing the genetic basis and searching for elite genotypes. The identification and characterization of molecular markers are essential to analyse the genetic diversity of natural populations and to establish suitable strategies for conservation, domestication, germplasm characterization and genetic breeding. Therefore, we sequenced and characterized in detail the plastome of B. orellana. The plastome of B. orellana is a circular DNA molecule of 159,708 bp with a typical quadripartite structure and 112 unique genes. Additionally, a total of 312 SSR loci were identified in the plastome of B. orellana. Moreover, we predicted in 23 genes a total of 57 RNA-editing sites of which 11 are unique for B. orellana. Furthermore, our plastid phylogenomic analyses, using the plastome sequences available in the plastid database belonging to species of order Malvales, indicate a closed relationship between Bixaceae and Malvaceae, which formed a sister group to Thymelaeaceae. Finally, our study provided useful data to be employed in several genetic and biotechnological approaches in B. orellana and related species of the family Bixaceae.

B. orellana: !accumulates! apocarotenoids 
B. orellana: !valued by! food industry 
B. orellana: !sequenced and characterized! plastome 
plastome: !contains! 112 unique genes 
plastome: !contains! 312 SSR loci 
plastome: !predicted! 57 RNA-editing sites 
plastid phylogenomic analyses: !indicate! closed relationship between Bixaceae and Malvaceae