We generated transgenic tobacco plants (Nicotiana tabacum L.) with overexpression of the Arabidopsis thaliana CLAVATA3 (CLV3) gene which is known to be a negative regulator of cell division. Surprisingly, most of the 35S::CLV3 transgenic plants showed no phenotypic differences with the wild type plants. However, there were considerable changes in the morphological parameters between 35S::CLV3 overexpressors and wild type plants. As expected, the number of meristematic cells in the shoot apical meristem was reduced in 35S::CLV3 plants as compared to the wild type plants. Moreover, overexpression of CLV3 exerted morphological changes not only to shoot apical meristem but also to leaves and flowers. Thus, transgenic plants were characterized by reduced number of epidermal and mesophyll cells as well as stomatal pores in mature leaves. However, there was a compensatory increase in leaf cell size of 35S::CLV3 plants that contributed to maintenance of organ size within the normal range. We observed that expression of cell expansion-promoted genes, expansin NtEXPA4 and endo-xyloglucan transferase NtEXGT, were elevated in mature leaves. In contrast, there was a decrease in the transcript level of the cell division-related AINTEGUMENTA-like (NtANTL) gene in 35S::CLV3 transgenic plants. In addition, we detected an increase in cytokinin level without any changes in the contents of IAA and ABA in 35S::CLV3 overexpressors. Interestingly, cytokinin treatment was shown to stimulate the expression of NtEXPA4 and NtEXGT genes in 35S::CLV3 transgenic plants. We propose that observed compensatory cell expansion in leaves of 35S::CLV3 transgenic plants may be due, at least in part, to a possible link between cytokinin signalling and cell expansion-related genes.

CLV3: !overexpresses in! transgenic tobacco plants
CLV3: !reduces! meristematic cells
CLV3: !decreases! NtANTL transcript level
CLV3: !increases! expansin NtEXPA4 and endo-xyloglucan transferase NtEXGT transcripts
CLV3: !elevates! cytokinin level
cytokinin: !stimulates! NtEXPA4 and NtEXGT gene expression