['30317699', 'Nucleotide biosynthesis proceeds through a de novo pathway and a salvage route.  In the salvage route, free bases and/or nucleosides are recycled to generate the  corresponding nucleotides. Thymidine kinase (TK) is the first enzyme in the  salvage pathway to recycle thymidine nucleosides as it phosphorylates thymidine  to yield thymidine monophosphate. The Arabidopsis genome contains two TK genes  -TK1a and TK1b- that show similar expression patterns during development. In this  work, we studied the respective roles of the two genes during early development  and in response to genotoxic agents targeting the organellar or the nuclear  genome. We found that the pyrimidine salvage pathway is crucial for chloroplast  development and genome replication, as well as for the maintenance of its  integrity, and is thus likely to play a crucial role during the transition from  heterotrophy to autotrophy after germination. Interestingly, defects in TK  activity could be partially compensated by supplementation of the medium with  sugar, and this effect resulted from both the availability of a carbon source and  the activation of the nucleotide de novo synthesis pathway, providing evidence  for a compensation mechanism between two routes of nucleotide biosynthesis that  depend on nutrient availability. Finally, we found differential roles of the TK1a  and TK1b genes during the plant response to genotoxic stress, suggesting that  different pools of nucleotides exist within the cells and are required to respond  to different types of DNA damage. Altogether, our results highlight the  importance of the pyrimidine salvage pathway, both during plant development and  in response to genotoxic stress.', '2019 Feb', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.14128', 'Plasencia']

Thymidine kinase (TK): !synthesizes! Thymidine monophosphate 
TK1a/TK1b: !localizes to! Arabidopsis genome 
TK1a/TK1b: !enhances! Chloroplast development 
TK1a/TK1b: !represses! Genotoxic stress 
Nucleotide biosynthesis: !compensates for! TK activity 
Nutrient availability: !activates! Nucleotide de novo synthesis pathway