Cell-size enlargement plays a pivotal role in increasing the leaf size of triploid poplar, and polyploidization could change leaf shape. ABP1 was highly expressed in triploid plants and positively related to cell size. In the plant kingdom, the leaf is the most important energy production organ, and polyploidy often exhibits a "Gigas" effect on leaf size, which benefits agriculture and forestry. However, little is known regarding the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the leaf size superiority of polyploid woody plants. In the present study, the leaf area and abaxial epidermal cells of diploid and triploid full-sib groups and their parents were measured at three different positions. We measured the expression of several genes related to cell division and cell expansion. The results showed that the leaf area of triploids was significantly larger than that of diploids, and the triploid group showed transgressive variation compared to their full-sib diploid group. Cell size but not cell number was the main reason for leaf size variation. Cell expansion was in accordance with leaf enlargement. In addition, the leaf shape changes in triploids primarily resulted from a significant decrease in the leaf ratio of length to -width. Auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1) was highly expressed in triploids and positively related to leaf size. These results enhanced the current understanding that giant leaf is affected by polyploidy vigor. However, significant heterosis is not exhibited in diploid offspring. Overall, polyploid breeding is an effective strategy to enhance leaf size, and Populus, as an ideal material, plays an important role in studying the leaf morphological variations of polyploid woody plants.

Cell size: !enlarges! Leaf size
Polyploidy: !changes! Leaf shape
ABP1: !highly expressed in! Triploids
ABP1: !positively related to! Cell size
Cell size: !main reason for! Leaf size variation
Cell expansion: !in accordance with! Leaf enlargement
Leaf ratio: !decreases in! Triploids
ABP1: !positively related to! Leaf size
Polyploidy: !enhances! Leaf size
Populus: !ideal material for! Studying leaf morphological variations