Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) in flowering plants is usually caused by incompatibility between mitochondrial and nuclear genomes, and can be restored by nuclear genes known as restorer-of-fertility (Rf). Although the CMS/Rf system is useful and convenient for economic production of commercial hybrid seed, the molecular mechanisms of CMS occurrence and fertility restoration in cotton are unclear. Here, a combined small RNA and transcriptome sequencing analysis was performed on floral buds at the meiosis stage in three-line hybrid cotton system, and differentially expressed microRNAs (DEMs) and their target genes were identified and further analyzed for a possible involvement in CMS and fertility restoration. Totally 10 and 30 differentially expressed miRNA-target gene pairs were identified in A-B and A-R comparison group, respectively. A putative regulatory network of CMS occurrence and fertility restoration-related miRNA-target pairs during anther development were then constructed. The RLM-RACE analysis showed that gra-miR7505b regulates a PPR gene (Gh_D05G3392) by cleaving precisely at the 643 nt and 748 nt sites. The further analysis indicated that the sequence variation in the binding regions of Gh_D05G3392 and Gh_D05G3356 may cause a lower cleavage efficiency of the PPR genes by miR7505b and miR7505 in R line, respectively, leading to the up-regulation of the PPR genes and fertility restoration. These results have established their genetic involvement in fertility restoration in the CMS-D2 system. Our combined miRNA and transcriptome analysis in three-line hybrid cotton system provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms of CMS occurrence and fertility restoration, which will contribute to further hybrid breeding in cotton.

miRNA: !regulates! PPR gene 
PPR gene: !cleaved by! miRNA 
sequence variation: !affects! cleavage efficiency 
cleavage efficiency: !influences! up-regulation of PPR genes 
up-regulation of PPR genes: !leads to! fertility restoration