Comparative genomic analysis of cytochromes P450 revealed high diversification and dynamic changes in stramenopiles, associated with transcriptional responsiveness to various environmental stimuli. Comparative genomic and molecular evolution approaches were used to characterize cytochromes P450 (P450) diversity in stramenopiles. Phylogenetic analysis pointed to a high diversity of P450 in stramenopiles and identified three major clans. The CYP51 and CYP97 clans were present in brown algae, diatoms and Nannochloropsis gaditana, whereas the CYP5014 clan mainly includes oomycetes. Gene gain and loss patterns revealed that six CYP families-CYP51, CYP97, CYP5160, CYP5021, CYP5022, and CYP5165-predated the split of brown algae and diatoms. After they diverged, diatoms gained more CYP families, especially in the cold-adapted species Fragilariopsis cylindrus, in which eight new CYP families were found. Selection analysis revealed that the expanded CYP51 family in the brown alga Cladosiphon okamuranus exhibited a more relaxed selection constraint compared with those of other brown algae and diatoms. Our RNA-seq data further evidenced that most of P450s in Saccharina japonica are highly expressed in large sporophytes, which could potentially promote the large kelp formation in this developmental stage. A survey of Ectocarpus siliculosus and diatom transcriptomes showed that many P450s are responsive to stress, nutrient limitation or light quality, suggesting pivotal roles in detoxification or metabolic processes under adverse environmental conditions. The information provided in this study will be helpful in designing functional experiments and interpreting P450 roles in this particular lineage.

CYP51: !predates! split of brown algae and diatoms
CYP97: !predates! split of brown algae and diatoms
CYP5160: !predates! split of brown algae and diatoms
CYP5021: !predates! split of brown algae and diatoms
CYP5022: !predates! split of brown algae and diatoms
CYP5165: !predates! split of brown algae and diatoms
Fragilariopsis cylindrus: !gains! CYP families
Cladosiphon okamuranus: !exhibits! relaxed selection constraint
Saccharina japonica: !highly expressed! in large sporophytes
P450s: !responsive to! stress, nutrient limitation or light quality