Plant transformation via Agrobacterium tumefaciens is characterized by integration of commonly low number of T-DNAs at random positions in the genome. When integrated into an active gene region, promoterless reporter genes placed near the T-DNA border sequence are frequently transcribed and even translated to reporter proteins, which is the principle of promoter- and gene-trap lines. Here we show that even internal promotorless regions of T-DNAs are often transcribed. Such spontaneous transcription was observed in the majority of independently transformed tobacco BY-2 lines (over 65%) and it could effectively induce silencing if an inverted repeat was present within the T-DNA. We documented that the transcription often occurred in both directions. It was not directly connected with any regulatory elements present within the T-DNAs and at least some of the transcripts were initiated outside of the T-DNA. The likeliness of this read-through transcription seemed to increase in lines with higher T-DNA copy number. Splicing and presence of a polyA tail in the transcripts indicated involvement of Pol II, but surprisingly, the transcription was able to run across two transcription terminators present within the T-DNA. Such pervasive transcription was observed with three different T-DNAs in BY-2 cells and with lower frequency was also detected in Arabidopsis thaliana. Our results demonstrate unexpected pervasive read-through transcription of T-DNAs. We hypothesize that it was connected with a specific chromatin state of newly integrated DNA, possibly affected by the adjacent genomic region. Although this phenomenon can be easily overlooked, it can have significant consequences when working with highly sensitive systems like RNAi induction using an inverted repeat construct, so it should be generally considered when interpreting results obtained with the transgenic technology.

T-DNA: !transcribed! BY-2 cells 
T-DNA: !transcribed! A. thaliana 
T-DNA: !initiated outside of! T-DNA 
T-DNA: !involves Pol II! Splicing 
T-DNA: !runs across! Transcription terminators 
T-DNA: !affected by! Adjacent genomic region