The eukaryotic transcription factor NF-Y (which consists of NF-YA, NF-YB and NF-YC subunits) is involved in many important plant development processes. There are many reports about the NF-Y family in Arabidopsis and other plant species. However, there are no reports about the NF-Y family in walnut (Juglans regia L.). Thirty-three walnut NF-Y genes (JrNF-Ys) were identified and mapped on the walnut genome. The JrNF-Y gene family consisted of 17 NF-YA genes, 9 NF-YB genes, and 7 NF-YC genes. The structural features of the JrNF-Y genes were investigated by comparing their evolutionary relationship and motif distributions. The comparisons indicated the NF-Y gene structure was both conserved and altered during evolution. Functional prediction and protein interaction analysis were performed by comparing the JrNF-Y protein structure with that in Arabidopsis. Two differentially expressed JrNF-Y genes were identified. Their expression was compared with that of three JrCOs and two JrFTs using quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). The results revealed that the expression of JrCO2 was positively correlated with the expression of JrNF-YA11 and JrNF-YA12. In contrast, JrNF-CO1 and JrNF-YA12 were negatively correlated. Thirty-three JrNF-Ys were identified and their evolutionary, structure, biological function and expression pattern were analyzed. Two of the JrNF-Ys were screened out, their expression was differentially expressed in different development periods of female flower buds, and in different tissues (female flower buds and leaf buds). Based on prediction and experimental data, JrNF-Ys may be involved in flowering regulation by co-regulate the expression of flowering genes with other transcription factors (TFs). The results of this study may make contribution to the further investigation of JrNF-Y family.

NF-Y: !consists of! NF-YA, NF-YB and NF-YC subunits
JrNF-Ys: !identified in! walnut (Juglans regia L.)
JrNF-Ys: !consisted of! 17 NF-YA genes, 9 NF-YB genes, and 7 NF-YC genes
JrNF-Ys: !compared to! Arabidopsis
JrNF-Ys: !predicted to! interact with other transcription factors
JrNF-YA11 & JrNF-YA12: !positively correlated with! JrCO2
JrNF-CO1 & JrNF-YA12: !negatively correlated with! JrCO2
JrNF-Ys: !involved in! flowering regulation