Bioactive compounds, vitamins, phenolic acids, flavonoids of A. tricolor are the sources of natural antioxidant that had a great importance for the food industry as these detoxify ROS in the human body. These natural antioxidants protect human from many diseases such as cancer, arthritis, emphysema, retinopathy, neuro-degenerative cardiovascular diseases, atherosclerosis and cataracts. Moreover, previous literature has shown that drought stress elevated bioactive compounds, vitamins, phenolics, flavonoids and antioxidant activity in many leafy vegetables. Hence, we study the nutritional and bioactive compounds, phenolic acids, flavonoids and antioxidant capacity of amaranth under drought stress for evaluation of the significant contribution of these compounds in the human diet. The genotype VA3 was assessed at four drought stress levels that significantly affected nutritional and bioactive compounds, phenolic acids, flavonoids and antioxidant capacity. Protein, ash, energy, dietary fiber, Ca, K, Cu, S, Mg, Mn, Mo, Na, B content, total carotenoids, TFC, vitamin C, TPC, TAC (DPPH), betacarotene, TAC (ABTS<sup>+</sup>), sixteen phenolic acids and flavonoids were remarkably increased with the severity of drought stress. At moderate and severe drought stress conditions, the increments of all these components were more preponderant. Trans-cinnamic acid was newly identified phenolic acid in A. tricolor. Salicylic acid, vanilic acid, gallic acid, chlorogenic acid, Trans-cinnamic acid, rutin, isoquercetin, m-coumaric acid and p-hydroxybenzoic acid were the most abundant phenolic compounds in this genotype. In A. tricolor, drought stress enhanced the quantitative and qualitative improvement of nutritional and bioactive compounds, phenolic acids, flavonoids and antioxidants. Hence, farmers of semi-arid and dry areas of the world could be able to grow amaranth as a substitute crop.

drought stress: !enhances! nutritional and bioactive compounds
drought stress: !enhances! phenolic acids
drought stress: !enhances! flavonoids
drought stress: !enhances! antioxidant capacity
Trans-cinnamic acid: !identified in! A. tricolor
Salicylic acid: !abundant in! A. tricolor
vanilic acid: !abundant in! A. tricolor
gallic acid: !abundant in! A. tricolor
chlorogenic acid: !abundant in! A. tricolor
Trans-cinnamic acid: !abundant in! A. tricolor
rutin: !abundant in! A. tricolor
isoquercetin: !abundant in! A. tricolor
m-coumaric acid: !abundant in! A. tricolor
p-hydroxybenzoic acid: !abundant in! A. tricolor