Citrus tristeza virus encodes a unique protein, p23, with multiple functional roles that include co-option of the cytoplasmic glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase to facilitate the viral infectious cycle. The genome of citrus tristeza virus (CTV), genus Closterovirus family Closteroviridae, is a single-stranded (+) RNA potentially encoding at least 17 proteins. One (p23), an RNA-binding protein of 209 amino acids with a putative Zn-finger and some basic motifs, displays singular features: (i) it has no homologues in other closteroviruses, (ii) it accumulates mainly in the nucleolus and Cajal bodies, and in plasmodesmata, and (iii) it mediates asymmetric accumulation of CTV RNA strands, intracellular suppression of RNA silencing, induction of some CTV syndromes and enhancement of systemic infection when expressed as a transgene ectopically or in phloem-associated cells in several Citrus spp. Here, a yeast two-hybrid screening of an expression library of Nicotiana benthamiana (a symptomatic experimental host for CTV), identified a transducin/WD40 domain protein and the cytosolic glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as potential host interactors with p23. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation corroborated the p23-GAPDH interaction in planta and showed that p23 interacts with itself in the nucleolus, Cajal bodies and plasmodesmata, and with GAPDH in the cytoplasm (forming aggregates) and in plasmodesmata. The latter interaction was preserved in a p23 deletion mutant affecting the C-terminal domain, but not in two others affecting the Zn-finger and one internal basic motif. Virus-induced gene silencing of GAPDH mRNA resulted in a decrease of CTV titer as revealed by real-time RT-quantitative PCR and RNA gel-blot hybridization. Thus, like other viruses, CTV seems to co-opt GAPDH, via interaction with p23, to facilitate its infectious cycle.

p23: !interacts with! GAPDH 
p23: !interacts with! itself 
CTV: !co-opts! GAPDH 
GAPDH: !facilitates! CTV infectious cycle