The molecular mechanisms regulating calcium-mediated thermotolerance in Camellia sinensis were revealed by RNA-Sequencing. Heat stress is one of the most remarkable abiotic factors limiting the growth and productivity of Camellia sinensis plants. Calcium helps regulate plant responses to various adverse environmental conditions, including heat stress. In this study, the effects of exogenous calcium on the physiological characteristics of heat-stressed C. sinensis were investigated. A calcium pretreatment increased the proline, soluble sugar, Ca<sup>2+</sup>, and chlorophyll contents, but decreased the malondialdehyde content and relative electrical conductivity in C. sinensis leaves under heat stress. Further analysis of the ultra-structure of chloroplasts indicated that heat stress induced accumulation of starch granules and destruction of the stroma lamella in C. sinensis. However, calcium pretreatment counteracted the adverse effects of heat stress on the structure of the photosynthetic apparatus. These results imply that the calcium pretreatment increased C. sinensis thermotolerance. Moreover, RNA-sequencing was applied to characterize the calcium-mediated transcript-level responses to heat stress. A total of 923 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) including 299 up-regulated and 624 down-regulated genes were identified. Functional annotations indicated that these DEGs were primarily related to signal transduction, transcriptional regulation, and post-translational modification. In addition, a C. sinensis gene [CsCML45 (GenBank: KY652927)] encoding a calmodulin-like protein was isolated. The heterologous expression of CsCML45 enhanced the thermotolerance of transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana plants. These results may be useful for characterizing the calcium-mediated molecular mechanism responsible for C. sinensis thermotolerance.

Heat stress: !affects! C. sinensis
Calcium: !increases! thermotolerance of C. sinensis
RNA-Sequencing: !reveals! molecular mechanisms
DEGs: !related to! signal transduction, transcriptional regulation, post-translational modification
CsCML45: !encodes! calmodulin-like protein
CsCML45: !enhances! thermotolerance of A. thaliana