While the role of ethylene in fruit ripening has been widely studied, the contributions of additional plant hormones are less clear. Here we examined the interactions between the transcription factor MaMADS2-box which plays a major role in banana fruit ripening and hormonal regulation. Specifically, we used MaMADS2 repressed lines in transcriptome and hormonal analyses throughout ripening and assessed hormone and gene expression perturbations as compared to wild-type (WT) control fruit. Our analyses revealed major differences in hormones levels and in expression of hormone synthesis and signaling genes mediated by MaMADS2 especially in preclimacteric pulp. Genes encoding ethylene biosynthesis enzymes had lower expression in the pulp of the repressed lines, consistent with reduced ethylene production. Generally, the expression of other hormone (auxin, gibberellins, abscisic acid, jasmonic acid and salicylic acid) response pathway genes were down regulated in the WT pulp prior to ripening, but remained high in MaMADS2 repressed lines. Hormone levels of abscisic acid were also higher, however, active gibberellin levels were lower and auxin levels were similar with MaMADS2 repression as compared to WT. Although abscisic level was higher in MaMADS2 repression, exogenous abscisic acid shortened the time to ethylene production and increased MaMADS2 mRNA accumulation in WT. Exogenous ethylene did not influence abscisic acid level. CRE - a cytokinin receptor, increased its expression during maturation in WT and was lower especially at prebreaker in the repressed line and zeatin level was lower at mature green of the repressed line in comparison to WT. In addition to previously reported effects of MaMADS2 on ethylene, this transcription factor also influences other plant hormones, particularly at the pre-climacteric stage. The cytokinin pathway may play a previously unanticipated role via MaMADS2 in banana ripening. Finally, abscisic acid enhances MaMADS2 expression to promote ripening, but the transcription factor in turn auto inhibits ABA synthesis and signaling. Together, these results demonstrate a complex interaction of plant hormones and banana fruit ripening mediated by MaMADS2.

MaMADS2: !represses! ethylene biosynthesis enzymes
MaMADS2: !downregulates! hormone synthesis and signaling genes
MaMADS2: !inhibits! ABA synthesis and signaling
MaMADS2: !influences! other plant hormones
MaMADS2: !enhances! MaMADS2 expression
CRE: !increases! expression during maturation
ABA: !enhances! MaMADS2 expression