Cucumbers (Cucumis sativus) are known for their plasticity in sex expression. DNA methylation status determines gene activity but is susceptible to environmental condition changes. Thus, DNA methylation-based epigenetic regulation may at least partially account for the instability of cucumber sex expression. Do temperature and photoperiod that are the two most important environmental factors have equal effect on cucumber sex expression by similar epigenetic regulation mechanism? To answer this question, we did a two-factor experiment of temperature and photoperiod and generated methylome and transcriptome data from cucumber shoot apices. The seasonal change in the femaleness of a cucumber core germplasm collection was investigated over five consecutive years. As a result, 71.3% of the 359 cucumber accessions significantly decreased their femaleness in early autumn when compared with spring. High temperature and long-day photoperiod treatments, which mimic early autumn conditions, are both unfavorable for female flower formation, and temperature is the predominant factor. High temperatures and long-day treatments both predominantly resulted in hypermethylation compared to demethylation, and temperature effect was decisive. The targeted cytosines shared in high-temperature and long-day photoperiod treatment showed the same change in DNA methylation level. Moreover, differentially expressed TEs (DETs) and the predicted epiregulation sites were clustered across chromosomes, and importantly, these sites were reproducible among different treatments. Essentially, the photoperiod treatment preferentially and significantly influenced flower development processes, while temperature treatment produced stronger responses from phytohormone-pathway-related genes. Cucumber AGAMOUS was likely epicontrolled exclusively by photoperiod while CAULIFLOWER A and CsACO<sub>3</sub> were likely epicontrolled by both photoperiod and temperature. Seasonal change of sex expression is a germplasm-wide phenomenon in cucumbers. High temperature and long-day photoperiod might have the same effect on the methylome via the same mechanism of gene-TE interaction but resulted in different epicontrol sites that account for different mechanisms between temperature- and photoperiod-dependent sex expression changes.

DNA methylation: !determines! gene activity 
Temperature/Photoperiod: !influences! DNA methylation 
Temperature/Photoperiod: !unfavorable for! female flower formation 
Temperature/Photoperiod: !results in! hypermethylation 
Temperature/Photoperiod: !shares! targeted cytosines 
Temperature/Photoperiod: !clusters! DETs/epiregulation sites 
Temperature/Photoperiod: !influences! flower development processes 
Temperature/Photoperiod: !produces! stronger responses from phytohormone-pathway-related genes 
AGAMOUS/CAULIFLOWER A/CsACO<sub>3</sub>: !likely epicontrolled by! photoperiod/temperature