Leucine-rich repeat (LRR)-containing genes are involved in responses to various diseases. Recently, RNA-seq data from A. duranensis after nematode (Meloidogyne arenaria) infection were released. However, the number of LRR-containing genes present in A. duranensis and the response of LRR-containing genes to nematode infection are poorly understood. In this study, we found 509 amino acid sequences containing nine types of LRR domains in A. duranensis. The inferred phylogenetic relationships revealed that the nine types of LRR domains had two originations. The inferred selective pressure was mainly consistent with LRR domains undergoing purifying selection. Twenty-one LRR-containing genes were associated with possible resistance to nematode infection after 3, 6, and 9 days. Among them, Aradu.T5WNW, Aradu.JM17V, and Aradu.MKP1A were up-regulate at these three time points, while Aradu.QD5DS and Aradu.M0ENQ were up-regulated 6 and 9 days after nematode infection. The expression of the above mentioned five genes was significantly and negatively correlated with the number of LRR8 domain, indicating that fewer LRR8 domains are associated with the promotion of LRR-containing genes that resist nematode infection. Patterns of co-expression and cis-acting elements indicated that WRKY possibly regulate the responses of LRR-containing genes to nematode infection and that expansin genes may work together with LRR-containing genes in response to nematode infection. We identified the number and type of LRR-containing genes in A. duranensis. The LRR-containing genes that were found appear to be involved in responses to nematode infection. The number of LRR8 domains was negatively correlated with expression after nematode infection. The WRKY transcription factor may regulate resistance to nematode infection based on LRR-containing genes. Our results could improve the understanding of resistance to nematodes and molecular breeding in peanuts.

LRR-containing genes: !involved in! responses to various diseases
LRR-containing genes: !associated with! resistance to nematode infection
LRR8 domains: !negatively correlated with! expression after nematode infection
WRKY transcription factor: !may regulate! resistance to nematode infection based on LRR-containing genes