As a consequence of global climate change, cold acclimation and deacclimation cycles are becoming increasingly frequent during winter in temperate regions. However, little is known about plant deacclimation and in particular reacclimation mechanisms, although deacclimation resistance and the ability to reacclimate may have wide-ranging consequences regarding plant productivity in a changing climate. Here, we report time-dependent responses of freezing tolerance, respiration rates, metabolite contents (high-resolution magic angle spinning NMR) and fatty acid levels (gas chromatography) in flower buds of two ecodormant Ribes nigrum cultivars exposed to three different deacclimation temperatures followed by a reacclimation treatment at 4°C. The data reveal that despite differences in the progression of deacclimation, the capacity of blackcurrant flower buds to reharden in late winter is virtually non-existing, implying that increasingly irregular temperature patterns is critical for blackcurrant fruit yield. The early phase of deacclimation is associated with a transient increase in respiration and decreasing contents of amino acids, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates and sugars, indicating an increased need for carbon sources and respiratory energy production for the activation of growth. Decreasing sugar levels may additionally cause loss of freezing tolerance. Deacclimation also involves desaturation of membrane lipids, which likely also contributes to decreased freezing tolerance but may also reflect biosynthesis of signaling molecules stimulating growth and floral organ differentiation. These data provide new insights into the under-researched deacclimation mechanisms and the ability of blackcurrant to reacclimate following different advancements of deacclimation and contribute to our understanding of plant responses to increasingly irregular temperature patterns.

respiration: !increases with! deacclimation
amino acids: !decrease with! deacclimation
TCA cycle intermediates: !decrease with! deacclimation
sugars: !decrease with! deacclimation
freezing tolerance: !decreases with! decreasing sugar levels
membrane lipids: !desaturate with! deacclimation
deacclimation: !causes! decreased freezing tolerance