To survive under water deficiency, plants alter gene expression patterns, make structural and physiological adjustments, and optimize the use of water. Rapid degradation and turnover of proteins is required for effective nutrient recycling. Here, we examined the transcriptional responses of the C1A cysteine protease family to drought in barley and found that four genes were up-regulated in stressed plants. Knock-down lines for the protease-encoding genes HvPap-1 and HvPap-19 showed unexpected changes in leaf cuticle thickness and stomatal pore area. The efficiency of photosystem II and the total amount of proteins were almost unaltered in stressed transgenic plants while both parameters decreased in stressed wild-type plants. Although the patterns of proteolytic activities in the knock-down lines did not change, the amino acid accumulation increased in response to drought, concomitant with a higher ABA content. Whilst jasmonic acid (JA) and JA-Ile concentrations increased in stressed leaves of the wild-type and the HvPap-1 knock-down lines, their levels were lower in the HvPap-19 knock-down lines, suggesting the involvement of a specific hormone interaction in the process. Our data indicate that the changes in leaf cuticle thickness and stomatal pore area had advantageous effects on leaf defense against fungal infection and mite feeding mediated by Magnaporthe oryzae and Tetranychus urticae, respectively.

C1A cysteine protease family: !up-regulated! in drought
HvPap-1: !affects! leaf cuticle thickness
HvPap-19: !affects! stomatal pore area
Photosystem II: !unaffected! in stressed transgenic plants
Total proteins: !decreased! in stressed wild-type plants
Proteolytic activities: !unchanged! in knock-down lines
Amino acid accumulation: !increased! in response to drought
ABA content: !increased! with amino acid accumulation
JA and JA-Ile: !increased! in stressed leaves of wild-type and HvPap-1 knock-down lines
JA and JA-Ile: !decreased! in stressed leaves of HvPap-19 knock-down lines
Fungal infection and mite feeding: !advantageously affected! by changes in leaf cuticle thickness and stomatal pore area