Rapeseed (<i>Brassica napus</i>) is an important oil crop worldwide. However, severe inhibition of rapeseed production often occurs in the field due to nitrogen (N) deficiency. The root system is the main organ to acquire N for plant growth, but little is known about the mechanisms underlying rapeseed root adaptions to N deficiency. Here, dynamic changes in root architectural traits of N-deficient rapeseed plants were evaluated by 3D in situ quantification. Root proteome responses to N deficiency were analyzed by the tandem mass tag-based proteomics method, and related proteins were characterized further. Under N deficiency, rapeseed roots become longer, with denser cells in the meristematic zone and larger cells in the elongation zone of root tips, and also become softer with reduced solidity. A total of 171 and 755 differentially expressed proteins were identified in short- and long-term N-deficient roots, respectively. The abundance of proteins involved in cell wall organization or biogenesis was highly enhanced, but most identified peroxidases were reduced in the N-deficient roots. Notably, peroxidase activities also were decreased, which might promote root elongation while lowering the solidity of N-deficient roots. These results were consistent with the cell wall components measured in the N-deficient roots. Further functional analysis using transgenic Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) plants demonstrated that the two root-related differentially expressed proteins contribute to the enhanced root growth under N deficiency conditions. These results provide insights into the global changes of rapeseed root responses to N deficiency and may facilitate the development of rapeseed cultivars with high N use efficiency through root-based genetic improvements.

N-deficiency: !affects! root architecture 
N-deficiency: !alters! proteome 
proteins: !enhance! root growth 
peroxidases: !reduce! abundance 
peroxidase activities: !decrease! solidity 
cell wall components: !measured! in N-deficient roots 
transgenic Arabidopsis plants: !demonstrate! enhanced root growth