Wheat (Triticum aestivum) is particularly vulnerable to heat stress during the grain filling stage, and this can adversely affect the final yield. However, the underlying physiological and molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. In this study, the effects of heat stress on grain filling were investigated using wheat varieties with different levels of thermotolerance. Decreased grain weights and filling durations, increased protein contents, and stable filling rates across diverse varieties under different heat regimes suggested a general mechanism for heat adaptation. Proteomic analysis identified 309 heat-responsive proteins (HRPs), and revealed a general decrease in protein synthesis components and metabolic proteins, but a significant increase in stress-response proteins and storage proteins. Metabolomic analysis identified 98 metabolites specifically changed by heat stress, and suggested a global decrease in the content of carbohydrate metabolites, an increased content of amino acids, and stable levels of starch synthesis precursors. The energy-consuming HRPs suggested that less energy was channelled into metabolism and protein synthesis, whereas more energy was allocated to the stress response under elevated heat conditions. Collectively, the data demonstrated a widely distributed mechanism for heat adaptation of metabolism, in which the assimilation and energy required for metabolism and protein synthesis are reallocated to heat protection and deposition of reserves, resulting in increased storage protein accumulation and a stable filling rate.

heat stress: !decreases! grain weight
heat stress: !decreases! filling duration
heat stress: !increases! protein content
heat stress: !stabilizes! filling rate
heat stress: !decreases! protein synthesis components
heat stress: !decreases! metabolic proteins
heat stress: !increases! stress-response proteins
heat stress: !increases! storage proteins
heat stress: !decreases! carbohydrate metabolites
heat stress: !increases! amino acids
heat stress: !stabilizes! starch synthesis precursors
heat stress: !allocates! energy to heat protection
heat stress: !allocates! energy to deposition of reserves