Oleaginous microalgae are promising sources of energy-rich triacylglycerols (TAGs) for direct use for food, feed and industrial applications. Lobosphaera incisa is a fresh water unicellular alga, which in response to nutrient stress accumulates a high amount of TAGs with a high proportion of arachidonic acid (ARA). The final committed step of de novo TAG biosynthesis is catalyzed by acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferases (DGATs), which add a fatty acid (FA) to the final sn-3 position of diacylglycerol (DAG). Genome analysis revealed the presence of five putative DGAT isoforms in L. incisa, including one DGAT of type 1, three DGATs of type 2 and a single isoform of a type 3 DGAT. For LiDGAT1, LiDGAT2.1, LiDGAT2.2 and LiDGAT2.3 enzyme activity was confirmed by expressing them in the TAG-deficient yeast strain H1246. Feeding experiments of yeast transformants with fatty acids suggest a broad substrate specificity spectrum for LiDGAT1. A significant TAG production in response to exogenous ARA was found for LiDGAT2.2. Cellular localization of the four type 1 and type 2 DGATs expressed in yeast revealed that they all localize to distinct ER domains. A prominent association of LiDGAT1 with ER domains in close proximity to forming lipid droplets (LDs) was also observed. The data revealed a distinct molecular, functional and cellular nature of type 1 and type 2 DGATs from L. incisa, with LiDGAT1 being a major contributor to the TAG pool. LiDGATs of type 2 might be in turn involved in the incorporation of unusual fatty acids into TAG and thus regulate the composition of TAG. This report provides a valuable resource for the further research of microalgae DGATs oriented towards production of fresh-water strains with higher oil content of valuable composition, not only for oil industry but also for human and animal nutrition.

LiDGAT1: !localizes to! ER domains 
LiDGAT1: !enhances! TAG production 
LiDGAT2.2: !enhances! TAG production in response to exogenous ARA 
LiDGATs of type 2: !regulate! composition of TAG