The activity of the protein kinase STN7, involved in phosphorylation of the light-harvesting complex II (LHCII) proteins, has been reported as being co-operatively regulated by the redox state of the plastoquinone pool and the ferredoxin-thioredoxin (Trx) system. The present study aims to investigate the role of plastid Trxs in STN7 regulation and their impact on photosynthesis. For this purpose, tobacco plants overexpressing Trx f or m from the plastid genome were characterized, demonstrating that only Trx m overexpression was associated with a complete loss of LHCII phosphorylation that did not correlate with decreased STN7 levels. The absence of phosphorylation in Trx m-overexpressing plants impeded migration of LHCII from PSII to PSI, with the concomitant loss of PSI-LHCII complex formation. Consequently, the thylakoid ultrastructure was altered, showing reduced grana stacking. Moreover, the electron transport rate was negatively affected, showing an impact on energy-demanding processes such as the Rubisco maximum carboxylation capacity and ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate regeneration rate values, which caused a strong depletion in net photosynthetic rates. Finally, tobacco plants overexpressing a Trx m mutant lacking the reactive redox site showed equivalent physiological performance to the wild type, indicating that the overexpressed Trx m deactivates STN7 in a redox-dependent way.

STN7: !co-operatively regulated by! redox state of plastoquinone pool and ferredoxin-thioredoxin (Trx) system
Trx f: !overexpressed in! tobacco plants
Trx m: !overexpressed in! tobacco plants
Trx m: !associated with! complete loss of LHCII phosphorylation
LHCII: !migrated from! PSII to PSI
Thylakoid ultrastructure: !altered due to! reduced grana stacking
Electron transport rate: !negatively affected due to! Trx m overexpression
Rubisco maximum carboxylation capacity: !depleted due to! Trx m overexpression
Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate regeneration rate values: !depleted due to! Trx m overexpression
Net photosynthetic rates: !strongly depleted due to! Trx m overexpression
Trx m mutant: !lacking reactive redox site! equivalent physiological performance to wild type