Basic helix-loop-helix/helix-loop-helix (bHLH/HLH) transcription factors play important roles in plant development. Many reports have suggested that bHLH/HLH proteins participate in brassinosteroid (BR) hormone signaling pathways to promote cell elongation. Cotton fibers are single-cells and derived from seed surface. To explore the roles of bHLH/HLH proteins in cotton fiber development progress by modulating BR signaling pathway, we performed a systematic analysis of the bHLH/HLH gene family in upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) genome. In this study, we identified 437 bHLH/HLH genes in upland cotton (G. hirsutum) genome. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that GhbHLH/HLH proteins were split into twenty six clades in the tree. These GhbHLH/HLH genes are distributed unevenly in different chromosomes of cotton genome. Segmental duplication is the predominant gene duplication event and the major contributor for amplification of GhbHLH/HLH gene family. The GhbHLH/HLHs within the same group have conserved exon/intron pattern and their encoding proteins show conserved motif composition. Based on transcriptome data, we identified 77 GhbHLH/HLH candidates that are expressed at relatively high levels in cotton fibers. As adding exogenous BR (brassinolide, BL) or brassinazole (Brz, a BR biosynthesis inhibitor), expressions of these GhbHLH/HLH genes were up-regulated or down-regulated in cotton fibers. Furthermore, overexpression of GhbHLH282 (one of the BR-response genes) in Arabidopsis not only promoted the plant growth, but also changed plant response to BR signaling. Collectively, these data suggested that these GhbHLH/HLH genes may participate in BR signaling transduction during cotton fiber development. Thus, our results may provide a valuable reference data as the basis for further studying the roles of these bHLH/HLH genes in cotton fiber development.

bHLH/HLH: !participates in! BR hormone signaling pathways
GhbHLH/HLH: !localizes to! cotton genome
GhbHLH/HLH: !amplified by! segmental duplication
GhbHLH/HLH: !expressed at high levels in! cotton fibers
GhbHLH/HLH: !up-regulated or down-regulated by! exogenous BR
GhbHLH282: !promotes! plant growth
GhbHLH/HLH: !participate in! BR signaling transduction