Polyploidy, or whole-genome duplication (WGD) promotes genetic diversification in plants. However, whether WGD is accompanied by epigenetic regulation especially DNA methylation remains yet elusive. Methylation of different region in genomic DNA play discrete role in gene regulation and developmental processes in plants. In our study, we used an apomictic rice line (SARII-628) that produces twin seedlings of different ploidy for methylated DNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeDIP-seq). We compared the level of methylation and mRNA expression in three different (CG, CHG, and CHH) sequence contexts of promoter region among haploid (1X), diploid (2X), and triploid (3X) seedling. We used MeDIP-Seq analysis of 14 genes to investigate whole genome DNA methylation and found that relative level of DNA methylation across different ploidy was in following order e.g. diploid > triploid > haploid. GO functional classification of differentially methylated genes into 9 comparisons group of promoter, intergenic and intragenic region discovered, these genes were mostly enriched for cellular component, molecular function, and biological process. By the comparison of methylome data, digital gene expression (DGE), mRNA expression profile, and Q-PCR findings LOC_ Os07g31450 and LOC_ Os01g59320 were analyzed for BS-Seq (Bisulphite sequencing). We found that (1) The level of the promoter DNA methylation is negatively correlated with gene expression within each ploidy level. (2) Among all ploidy levels, CG sequence context had highest methylation frequency, and demonstrated that the high CG methylation did reduce gene expression change suggesting that DNA methylation exert repressive function and ensure genome stability during WGD. (3) Alteration in ploidy (from diploid to haploid, or diploid to triploid) reveals supreme changes in methylation frequency of CHH sequence context. Our finding will contribute an understanding towards lower stability of CHH sequence context and educate the effect of promoter region methylation during change in ploidy state in rice.

Polyploidy: !promotes! Genetic diversification
Methylation: !plays discrete role in! Gene regulation
MeDIP-Seq: !compares! Methylation & mRNA expression
Diploid: !higher than! Triploid & haploid
Differentially methylated genes: !enriched for! Cellular component, molecular function, biological process
LOC_Os07g31450 & LOC_Os01g59320: !negatively correlated with! Gene expression
CG sequence context: !highest methylation frequency & reduces! Gene expression
CHH sequence context: !supreme changes in! Methylation frequency