Developing tolerant cultivars by incorporating resistant genes is regarded as a potential strategy for controlling Verticillium wilt that causes severe losses in the yield and fiber quality of cotton. Here, we identified the gene GbHyPRP1 in Gossypium barbadense, which encodes a protein containing both proline-rich repetitive and Pollen Ole e I domains. GbHyPRP1 is located in the cell wall. The transcription of this gene mainly occurs in cotton roots and stems, and is drastically down-regulated upon infection with Verticillium dahliae. Silencing HyPRP1 dramatically enhanced cotton resistance to V. dahliae. Over-expression of HyPRP1 significantly compromised the resistance of transgenic Arabidopsis plants to V. dahliae. The GbHyPRP1 promoter region contained several putative phytohormone-responsive elements, of which SA was associated with gene down-regulation. We compared the mRNA expression patterns of HyPRP1-silenced plants and the control at the global level by RNA-Seq. A total of 1735 unique genes exhibited significant differential expression. Of these, 79 DEGs involved in cell wall biogenesis and 43 DEGs associated with the production of ROS were identified. Further, we observed a dramatic thickening of interfascicular fibers and vessel walls and an increase in lignin in the HyPRP1-silenced cotton plants compared with the control after inoculation with V. dahliae. Additionally, silencing of HyPRP1 markedly enhanced ROS accumulation in the root tips of cotton inoculated with V. dahliae. Taken together, our results suggest that HyPRP1 performs a role in the negative regulation of cotton resistance to V. dahliae via the thickening of cell walls and ROS accumulation.

GbHyPRP1: !encodes! protein 
protein: !contains! proline-rich repetitive and Pollen Ole e I domains 
GbHyPRP1: !localizes to! cell wall 
GbHyPRP1: !transcription occurs in! cotton roots and stems 
GbHyPRP1: !down-regulated upon infection with! Verticillium dahliae 
HyPRP1: !silencing enhances! cotton resistance to V. dahliae 
HyPRP1: !over-expression compromises! transgenic Arabidopsis plants resistance to V. dahliae 
HyPRP1: !promoter region contains! putative phytohormone-responsive elements 
SA: !associated with! HyPRP1 gene down-regulation 
HyPRP1: !silencing increases! lignin and ROS accumulation 
HyPRP1: !negatively regulates! cotton resistance to V. dahliae