Sesame is a major oilseed crop which is widely cultivated all around the world. Flowering, the timing of transition from vegetative to reproductive growth, is one of the most important events in the life cycle of sesame. Sesame is a typical short-day (SD) plant and its flowering is largely affected by photoperiod. However, the flowering mechanism in sesame at the molecular level is still not very clear. Previous studies showed that the CONSTANS (CO) gene is the crucial photoperiod response gene which plays a center role in duration of the plant vegetative growth. In this study, the CO-like (COL) genes were identified and characterized in the sesame genome. Two homologs of the CO gene in the SiCOLs, SiCOL1 and SiCOL2, were recognized and comprehensively analyzed. However, sequence analysis showed that SiCOL2 lacked one of the B-box motifs. In addition, the flowering time of the transgenic Arabidopsis lines with overexpressed SiCOL2 were longer than that of SiCOL1, indicating that SiCOL1 was more likely to be the potential functional homologue of CO in sesame. Expression analysis revealed that SiCOL1 had high expressed levels before flowering in leaves and exhibited diurnal rhythmic expression in both SD and long-day (LD) conditions. In total, 16 haplotypes of SiCOL1 were discovered in the sesame collections from Asia. However, the mutated haplotypes did not express under both SD and LD conditions and was regarded as a nonfunctional allele. Notably, the sesame landraces from high-latitude regions harboring nonfunctional alleles of SiCOL1 flowered much earlier than landraces from low-latitude regions under LD condition, and adapted to the northernmost regions of sesame cultivation. The result indicated that sesame landraces from high-latitude regions might have undergone artificial selection to adapt to the LD environment. Our results suggested that SiCOL1 might contribute to regulation of flowering in sesame and natural variations in SiCOL1 were probably related to the expansion of sesame cultivation to high-latitude regions. The results could be used in sesame breeding and in broadening adaptation of sesame varieties to new regions.

SiCOL1: !affects! Flowering time 
SiCOL1: !localizes to! Leaves 
SiCOL1: !interacts with! SiCOL2 
SiCOL1: !enhances! Adaptation to high-latitude regions 
SiCOL1: !represses! Transition from vegetative to reproductive growth 
SiCOL1: !synthesizes! Diurnal rhythmic expression