Kohlrabi (Brassica oleracea var. gongylodes) is an important vegetable crop that is able to undergo shoot regeneration in culture from intact seedlings in a single-step regeneration process, using cytokinin as the only plant growth regulator. In this work, we present the expression profiles of seven organogenesis-related genes over the time course of shoot regeneration from intact seedlings of kohlrabi cv. Vienna Purple on shoot regeneration media containing trans-zeatin, cis-zeatin, benzyl adenine or thidiazuron. Two auxin transporter genes - PIN3 and PIN4, a cytokinin response regulator - ARR5, two shoot apical meristem-related transcription factors - CUC1 and RGD3, and two cell cycle-related genes - CDKB2;1 and CYCB2;4 - displayed bimodal expression patterns on most cytokinin-containing media when their expression levels were normalized against control plants grown on hormone-free media. The first expression peak corresponded to direct upregulation by cytokinin from the growth media, and the second one reflected transcriptional events related to callus formation and/or acquisition of organogenic competence, corresponding to the shoot regeneration phases that have already been characterized in Arabidopsis thaliana. We demonstrate that the genes involved in the two-step shoot regeneration of Arabidopsis display their expected expression profiles during the single-step shoot regeneration of its close phylogenetic relative kohlrabi confirming the universality of their roles in the distinct phases of the regeneration process in Brassicaceae. The results presented here represent a first step towards genetic characterization of the morphogenetic processes in this important crop species.

PIN3: !localizes to! shoot regeneration media 
PIN4: !localizes to! shoot regeneration media 
ARR5: !localizes to! shoot regeneration media 
CUC1: !localizes to! shoot regeneration media 
RGD3: !localizes to! shoot regeneration media 
CDKB2;1: !localizes to! shoot regeneration media 
CYCB2;4: !localizes to! shoot regeneration media 
cytokinin: !enhances! expression of genes 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !confirms! universality of roles in regeneration process