Pre-harvest contamination of fruits and vegetables by Salmonella in fields is one of the causes of food-borne outbreaks. Natural openings like stomata, hydathodes and fruit cracks are known to serve as entry points. While there are reports indicating that Salmonella colonize and enter root through lateral root emerging area, further investigations regarding how the accessibility of Salmonella to lateral root is different from phyto-pathogenic bacteria, the efficacy of lateral root to facilitate entry have remained unexplored. In this study we attempted to investigate the lateral root mediated entry of Salmonella, and to bridge this gap in knowledge. Unlike phytopathogens, Salmonella cannot utilize cellulose as the sole carbon source. This negates the fact of active entry by degrading plant cellulose and pectin. Endophytic Salmonella colonization showed a high correlation with number of lateral roots. When given equal opportunity to colonize the plants with high or low lateral roots, Salmonella internalization was found higher in the plants with more lateral roots. However, the epiphytic colonization in both these plants remained unaltered. To understand the ecological significance, we induced lateral root production by increasing soil salinity which made the plants susceptible to Salmonella invasion and the plants showed higher Salmonella burden in the aerial organs. Salmonella, being unable to degrade plant cell wall material relies heavily on natural openings. Therefore, its invasion is highly dependent on the number of lateral roots which provides an entry point because of the epidermis remodeling. Thus, when number of lateral root was enhanced by increasing the soil salinity, plants became susceptible to Salmonella invasion in roots and its transmission to aerial organs.

Salmonella: !relies on! natural openings 
natural openings: !facilitated by! number of lateral roots 
number of lateral roots: !increased by! soil salinity 
soil salinity: !makes plants susceptible to! Salmonella invasion 
Salmonella: !transmitted to! aerial organs