Tea flowering in late autumn competes for a large amount of nitrogen and carbohydrates, potentially undermines the storage of these resources in vegetative organs, and negatively influences the subsequent spring tea yield and quality. The mechanism underlying the re-allocation N and carbohydrate from source leaf to flower in tea plant has not been clearly understood. In this study, <sup>15</sup>N allocation, changes in metabolomics, and gene expression in flower buds, flowers, and adjacent leaves were characterized. Total N content of the adjacent leaves significantly decreased during flowering while such a decrease could be reversed by flower bud removal. Foliar-applied <sup>15</sup>N in the adjacent leaves markedly decreased and was readily allocated to flowers. Metabolomic analysis revealed that most sugars and benzoic acid increased by more than two-fold whereas theanine, Gln, Arg, Asp, and Asn decreased when flower buds fully opened to become flowers. In this process, Gly, Pro, and cellobiose in the adjacent leaves increased considerably whereas sucrose, galactose, benzoic acid, and many fatty acids decreased. Removal of flower buds reversed or alleviated the above decreases and led to an increase of Asn in the leaves. The expression of genes associated with autophagy (ATG5, ATG9, ATG12, ATG18), sucrose transporters (SUT1, SUT2, SUT4), amino acids permease (AAP6, AAP7, AAP8), glutamine synthetase (GS1;1, GS1;2, GS1;3), and asparagine synthetase (ASN1, ASN2) was significantly up-regulated in leaves during the flowering process and was strongly modulated by the removal of flower buds. The overall results demonstrated that leaves are the ready source providing N and carbohydrates in flowering and a series of genes related to autophagy, protein degradation, turn-over of amino acids, and phloem loading for transport are involved.

N: !allocated to! flowers 
Carbohydrates: !allocated to! flowers 
ATG5/9/12/18: !up-regulated in! leaves 
SUT1/2/4: !up-regulated in! leaves 
AAP6/7/8: !up-regulated in! leaves 
GS1;1/2/3: !up-regulated in! leaves 
ASN1/2: !up-regulated in! leaves