Auxin-induced genes regulate many aspects of plant growth and development. The Gretchen Hagen 3 (GH3) gene family, one of three major early auxin-responsive families, is ubiquitous in the plant kingdom and its members function as regulators in modulating hormonal homeostasis, and stress adaptations. Specific Auxin-amido synthetase activity of GH3 subfamily II genes is reported to reversibly inactivate or fully degrade excess auxin through the formation of amino acid conjugates. Despite these crucial roles, to date, genome-wide analysis of the GH3 gene family has not been reported in cotton. We identified a total of 10 GH3 subfamily II genes in G. arboreum, 10 in G. raimondii, and 20 in G. hirsutum, respectively. Bioinformatic analysis showed that cotton GH3 genes are conserved with the established GH3s in plants. Expression pattern analysis based on RNA-seq data and qRT-PCR revealed that 20 GhGH3 genes were differentially expressed in a temporally and spatially specific manner, indicating their diverse functions in growth and development. We further summarized the organization of promoter regulatory elements and monitored their responsiveness to treatment with IAA (indole-3-acetic acid), SA (salicylic acid), GA (gibberellic acid) and BL (brassinolide) by qRT-PCR in roots and stems. These hormones seemed to regulate the expression of GH3 genes in both a positive and a negative manner while certain members likely have higher sensitivity to all four hormones. Further, we tested the expression of GhGH3 genes in the BR-deficient mutant pag1 and the corresponding wild-type (WT) of CCRI24. The altered expression reflected the true responsiveness to BL and further suggested possible reasons, at least in part, responsible for the dramatic dwarf and shriveled phenotypes of pag1. We comprehensively identified GH3 subfamily II genes in cotton. GhGH3s are differentially expressed in various tissues/organs/stages. Their response to IAA, SA, BL and GA and altered expression in pag1 suggest that some GhGH3 genes might be simultaneously involved in multiple hormone signaling pathways. Taken together, our results suggest that members of the GhGH3 gene family could be possible candidate genes for mechanistic study and applications in cotton fiber development in addition to the reconstruction of plant architecture.

GH3 gene family: !regulates! hormonal homeostasis
GH3 gene family: !degrades! excess auxin
GH3 subfamily II genes: !synthesize! Auxin-amido 
GhGH3 genes: !respond to! IAA, SA, GA, BL
GhGH3 genes: !alter expression in! pag1 mutant