Early peanut pod development is an important process of peanut reproductive development. Modes of DNA methylation during early peanut pod development are still unclear, possibly because its allotetraploid genome may cause difficulty for the methylome analysis. To investigate the functions of the dynamic DNA methylation during the early development of the peanut pod, global methylome and gene expression analyses were carried out by Illumina high throughput sequencing. A novel mapping strategy of reads was developed and used for methylome and gene expression analysis. Differentially methylated genes, such as nodulin, cell number regulator-like protein, and senescence-associated genes, were identified during the early developmental stages of the peanut pod. The expression levels of gibberellin-related genes changed during this period of pod development. From the stage one (S1) gynophore to the stage two (S2) gynophore, the expression levels of two key methyltransferase genes, DRM2 and MET1, were up-regulated, which may lead to global DNA methylation changes between these two stages. The differentially methylated and expressed genes identified in the S1, S2, and stage 3 (S3) gynophore are involved in different biological processes such as stem cell fate determination, response to red, blue, and UV light, post-embryonic morphogenesis, and auxin biosynthesis. The expression levels of many genes were co-related by their DNA methylation levels. In addition, our results showed that the abundance of some 24-nucleotide siRNAs and miRNAs were positively associated with DNA methylation levels of their target loci in peanut pods. A novel mapping strategy of reads was described and verified in this study. Our results suggest that the methylated modes of the S1, S2, and S3 gynophore are different. The methylation changes that were identified during early peanut pod development provide useful information for understanding the roles of epigenetic regulation in peanut pod development.

DNA methylation: !affects! gene expression
nodulin: !localizes to! early peanut pod development
cell number regulator-like protein: !localizes to! early peanut pod development
senescence-associated genes: !localizes to! early peanut pod development
gibberellin-related genes: !change during! early peanut pod development
DRM2: !up-regulated between! stage one and two gynophore
MET1: !up-regulated between! stage one and two gynophore
stem cell fate determination: !involved in! early peanut pod development
response to red, blue, and UV light: !involved in! early peanut pod development
post-embryonic morphogenesis: !involved in! early peanut pod development
auxin biosynthesis: !involved in! early peanut pod development
DNA methylation levels: !correlated with! gene expression levels
24-nucleotide siRNAs: !positively associated with! DNA methylation levels
miRNAs: !positively associated with! DNA methylation levels