Abrupt drought-flood alternation (T1) is a meteorological disaster that frequently occurs during summer in southern China and the Yangtze river basin, often causing a significant loss of rice production. In this study, the response mechanism of yield decline under abrupt drought-flood alternation stress at the panicle differentiation stage was analyzed by looking at the metabolome, proteome as well as yield and physiological and biochemical indexes. The results showed that drought and flood stress caused a decrease in the yield of rice at the panicle differentiation stage, and abrupt drought-flood alternation stress created a synergistic effect for the reduction of yield. The main reason for the decrease of yield per plant under abrupt drought-flood alternation was the decrease of seed setting rate. Compared with CK0 (no drought and no flood), the net photosynthetic rate and soluble sugar content of T1 decreased significantly and its hydrogen peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, peroxidase activity increased significantly. The identified differential metabolites and differentially expressed proteins indicated that photosynthesis metabolism, energy metabolism pathway and reactive oxygen species response have changed strongly under abrupt drought-flood alteration stress, which are factors that leads to the rice grain yield reduction.

drought: !decreases! yield 
flood: !decreases! yield 
abrupt drought-flood alternation: !synergistically decreases! yield 
seed setting rate: !decreases! under abrupt drought-flood alternation 
net photosynthetic rate: !decreases! under abrupt drought-flood alternation 
soluble sugar content: !decreases! under abrupt drought-flood alternation 
hydrogen peroxidase: !increases! under abrupt drought-flood alternation 
superoxide dismutase: !increases! under abrupt drought-flood alternation 
peroxidase activity: !increases! under abrupt drought-flood alternation 
photosynthesis metabolism: !changes! under abrupt drought-flood alternation 
energy metabolism pathway: !changes! under abrupt drought-flood alternation 
reactive oxygen species response: !changes! under abrupt drought-flood alternation