The pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) gene family is one of the largest gene families in land plants (450 PPR genes in Arabidopsis, 477 PPR genes in rice and 486 PPR genes in foxtail millet) and is important for plant development and growth. Most PPR genes are encoded by plastid and mitochondrial genomes, and the gene products regulate the expression of the related genes in higher plants. However, the functions remain largely unknown, and systematic analysis and comparison of the PPR gene family in different maize genomes have not been performed. In this study, systematic identification and comparison of PPR genes from two elite maize inbred lines, B73 and PH207, were performed. A total of 491 and 456 PPR genes were identified in the B73 and PH207 genomes, respectively. Basic bioinformatics analyses, including of the classification, gene structure, chromosomal location and conserved motifs, were conducted. Examination of PPR gene duplication showed that 12 and 15 segmental duplication gene pairs exist in the B73 and PH207 genomes, respectively, with eight duplication events being shared between the two genomes. Expression analysis suggested that 53 PPR genes exhibit qualitative variations in the different genetic backgrounds. Based on analysis of the correlation between PPR gene expression in kernels and kernel-related traits, four PPR genes are significantly negatively correlated with hundred kernel weight, 12 are significantly negatively correlated with kernel width, and eight are significantly correlated with kernel number. Eight of the 24 PPR genes are also located in metaQTL regions associated with yield and kernel-related traits in maize. Two important PPR genes (GRMZM2G353195 and GRMZM2G141202) might be regarded as important candidate genes associated with maize kernel-related traits. Our results provide a more comprehensive understanding of PPR genes in different maize inbred lines and identify important candidate genes related to kernel development for subsequent functional validation in maize.

PPR gene family: !important for! plant development and growth
PPR genes: !encoded by! plastid and mitochondrial genomes
PPR genes: !regulate expression of! related genes
PPR genes: !duplicated in! B73 and PH207 genomes
PPR genes: !exhibit qualitative variations in! different genetic backgrounds
PPR genes: !correlated with! hundred kernel weight, kernel width, kernel number
PPR genes: !located in! metaQTL regions associated with yield and kernel-related traits
GRMZM2G353195 and GRMZM2G141202: !candidate genes associated with! maize kernel-related traits