['30576929', "CROWDED NUCLEI (CRWN) family in Arabidopsis consists of four members, CRWN1 to  CRWN4. It has been previously reported that the CRWN proteins are involved in the  control of nuclear morphology and degradation of ABI5. In this study, however, we  discover that CRWN-family proteins are not only involved in attenuating  responsiveness to abscisic acid (ABA), but also implicated in inhibiting reactive  oxygen species (ROS) production and DNA damage induced by genotoxic agent methyl  methanesulfonate (MMS). Our results demonstrate that three crwn double mutants,  i.e. crwn1 crwn3, crwn2 crwn3, and crwn2 crwn4, show slightly earlier leaf  senescence, enhanced leaf cell death, and obvious overaccumulation of ROS under  regular growth conditions. When treated with 0.15 muM ABA or 0.01% MMS, two double  mutants, crwn1 crwn3 and crwn2 crwn3, exhibit significant decreased germination  rates as well as leaf opening and greening rates. Moreover, subsequent  investigations indicate that the MMS treatment strongly inhibits the growth of  crwn mutant seedlings, while this inhibition is substantially relieved by  imidazole (IMZ); by contrast, DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine  (5-aza-dC) has no effect on relief of the growth inhibition. Further studies  reveal that under 0.01% MMS treatment conditions, crwn mutants, especially the  three double mutants, accumulate more ROS compared to Col-0, and their genomic  DNA suffers from more severe DNA damage relative to Col-0, which is indicated by  significantly higher 8-oxo-7-hydrodeoxyguanosine (8-oxo dG) content as observed  in the crwn mutants. Altogether, these data clearly demonstrate that the  CRWN-family proteins play important roles in diminishing ROS accumulation and  protecting genomic DNA against excessive oxidative damage caused by MMS.", '2019 Feb', 'J Plant Physiol', '10.1016/j.jplph.2018.12.005', 'La']

CRWN: !attenuates! ABA responsiveness 
CRWN: !inhibits! ROS production 
CRWN: !protects against! DNA damage 
crwn mutants: !accumulate more! ROS 
crwn mutants: !suffer from more! DNA damage 
MMS: !inhibits! crwn mutant growth 
IMZ: !relieves! MMS inhibition 
5-aza-dC: !has no effect on! relief of growth inhibition