Microspore embryogenesis is a powerful biotechnological tool that is very useful in crop breeding for the rapid production of haploid and double-haploid embryos and plants. In this in vitro system, the haploid microspore is reprogrammed by the application of specific stress treatments. A high level of cell death after the stress is a major factor that greatly reduces embryogenesis yield at its initial stages. Autophagy is a degradation pathway that is present in all eukaryotes and plays key roles in a range of processes, including stress responses. Many proteases participate in autophagy and cell death; among them, cathepsins are the most abundant enzymes with a role in plant senescence and programmed cell death (PCD). Moreover, although plant genomes do not contain homologues of caspases, caspase 3-like activity (main executioner protease of animal cell death) has been detected in many plant PCD processes. Recent studies by our group in barley microspore cultures reported that the stress treatment required for inducing microspore embryogenesis (cold treatment), also produced reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cell death, concomitantly with the induction of autophagy, as well as cathepsin-like and caspase 3-like proteolytic activities. In the present study, we report new data on microspore embryogenesis of rapeseed that indicate, as in barley, activation of cell death and autophagy processes after the inductive stress. The results revealed that treatments modulating autophagy and proteases produced the same effect in the two plant systems, regardless of the stress applied, cold in barley or heat in rapeseed. Pharmacological treatments with small bioactive compounds that inhibit ROS, autophagy and specific cell death-proteases led to reduced cell death and an increased embryogenesis initiation rate in both, barley and rapeseed. Taken together, these findings open up new intervention pathways by modulating autophagy and proteases, which are very promising in terms of increasing the efficiency of in vitro microspore embryogenesis systems for biotechnological applications in crop breeding.

Cold treatment: !induces! Autophagy 
Cold treatment: !induces! Cell death 
Autophagy: !involves! Proteases 
Proteases: !include! Cathepsins 
Cathepsins: !participate in! Plant senescence 
Caspases: !lack homologues in! Plant genomes 
Caspase 3-like activity: !detected in! Plant PCD processes 
Heat treatment: !induces! Autophagy 
Heat treatment: !induces! Cell death 
Small bioactive compounds: !inhibit! ROS 
Small bioactive compounds: !inhibit! Autophagy 
Small bioactive compounds: !inhibit! Cell death-proteases