Protein kinases play a key role in plant cell homeostasis and the activation of defense mechanisms. Partial resistance to fungi in plants is interesting because of its durability. However, the variable number of minor loci associated with this type of resistance hampers the reliable identification of the full range of genes involved. The present work reports the technique of protein kinase (PK)-profiling for the identification of the PK genes induced in the partially resistant oats line MN841801-1 following exposure to the fungus Puccinia coronata. This is the first time this technique has been used with cDNA (complementary DNA) from a suppression subtractive hybridization library obtained after the hybridization of cDNAs from inoculated and mock-inoculated plants. Six degenerate primers based on the conserved domains of protein kinases were used in a PK-profiling assay including cDNA from mock-inoculated leaves and subtracted cDNA. Of the 75.7% of sequences cloned and sequenced that showed significant similarity to resistance genes, 76% were found to code for PKs. Translation and ClustalW2 alignment of each sequence cloned with the complete sequences of the most similar B. distachyon PKs allowed those of the partially resistant oat line to be deduced and characterized. Further, a phylogenetic study carried out after alignment of these B. distachyon PK sequences with the most similar protein sequences of related species also allowed to deduce different functions for the PK cloned. RT-qPCR (Reverse Transcription-quantitative PCR) was analyzed on nine representative sequences to validate the reliability of the employed PK-profiling method as a tool for identifying the expression of resistance-associated genes. PK-profiling would appear to be a useful tool for the identification of the PKs expressed in oats after challenge by P. coronata, and perhaps other pathogens. Most of the PKs studied are related to receptor-like protein kinases expressed shortly after infection. This is in agreement with previous studies indicating a close relationship between partial resistance and the first layer of defense against pathogen used by plants.

Protein kinases: !play key role in! plant cell homeostasis 
Protein kinases: !identify! partial resistance to fungi 
PK-profiling: !used with! cDNA 
Six degenerate primers: !based on! conserved domains of protein kinases 
Sequences cloned: !showed similarity to! resistance genes 
Translation and ClustalW2 alignment: !allowed deduction of! PKs from partially resistant oat line 
Phylogenetic study: !carried out after alignment of! B. distachyon PK sequences 
RT-qPCR: !analyzed on! nine representative sequences 
PK-profiling: !useful tool for identification of! PKs expressed in oats