Genome-wide identification, expression analysis and potential functional characterization of previously uncharacterized MADS family of tartary buckwheat, emphasized the importance of this gene family in plant growth and development. The MADS transcription factor is a key regulatory factor in the development of most plants. The MADS gene in plants controls all aspects of tissue and organ growth and reproduction and can be used to regulate plant seed cracking. However, there has been little research on the MADS genes of tartary buckwheat (Fagopyrum tataricum), which is an important edible and medicinal crop. The recently published whole genome sequence of tartary buckwheat allows us to study the tissue and expression profiles of the MADS gene in tartary buckwheat at a genome-wide level. In this study, 65 MADS genes of tartary buckwheat were identified and renamed according to the chromosomal distribution of the FtMADS genes. Here, we provide a complete overview of the gene structure, gene expression, genomic mapping, protein motif organization, and phylogenetic relationships of each member of the gene family. According to the phylogenetic relationship of MADS genes, the transcription factor family was divided into two subfamilies, the M subfamily (28 genes) and the MIKC subfamily (37 genes). The results showed that the FtMADS genes belonged to related sister pairs and the chromosomal map showed that the replication of FtMADSs was related to the replication of chromosome blocks. In different tissues and at different fruit development stages, the FtMADS genes obtained by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) showed obvious expression patterns. A comprehensive analysis of the MADS genes in tartary buckwheat was conducted. Through systematic analysis, the potential genes that may regulate the growth and development of tartary buckwheat and the genes that may regulate the easy dehulling of tartary buckwheat fruit were screened, which laid a solid foundation for improving the quality of tartary buckwheat.

MADS: !controls! Plant growth and development 
MADS: !divided into! M subfamily and MIKC subfamily 
FtMADS: !localizes to! Chromosomal blocks 
FtMADS: !expressed in! Different tissues and fruit development stages 
FtMADS: !potentially regulates! Growth and development of tartary buckwheat, easy dehulling of tartary buckwheat fruit