['30626969', 'Apical growth in plants initiates upon seed germination, whereas radial growth is  primed only during early ontogenesis in procambium cells and activated later by  the vascular cambium(1). Although it is not known how radial growth is organized  and regulated in plants, this system resembles the developmental competence  observed in some animal systems, in which pre-existing patterns of developmental  potential are established early on(2,3). Here we show that in Arabidopsis the  initiation of radial growth occurs around early protophloem-sieve-element cell  files of the root procambial tissue. In this domain, cytokinin signalling  promotes the expression of a pair of mobile transcription factors-PHLOEM EARLY  DOF 1 (PEAR1) and PHLOEM EARLY DOF 2 (PEAR2)-and their four homologues (DOF6,  TMO6, OBP2 and HCA2), which we collectively name PEAR proteins. The PEAR proteins  form a short-range concentration gradient that peaks at protophloem sieve  elements, and activates gene expression that promotes radial growth. The  expression and function of PEAR proteins are antagonized by the HD-ZIP III  proteins, well-known polarity transcription factors(4)-the expression of which is  concentrated in the more-internal domain of radially non-dividing procambial  cells by the function of auxin, and mobile miR165 and miR166 microRNAs. The PEAR  proteins locally promote transcription of their inhibitory HD-ZIP III genes, and  thereby establish a negative-feedback loop that forms a robust boundary that  demarks the zone of cell division. Taken together, our data establish that during  root procambial development there exists a network in which a module that links  PEAR and HD-ZIP III transcription factors integrates spatial information of the  hormonal domains and miRNA gradients to provide adjacent zones of dividing and  more-quiescent cells, which forms a foundation for further radial growth.', '2019 Jan', 'Nature', '10.1038/s41586-018-0839-y', 'Helariutta']

Cytokinin: !promotes expression of! PEAR proteins 
PEAR proteins: !activate gene expression that! promotes radial growth 
HD-ZIP III proteins: !antagonize expression and function of! PEAR proteins 
Auxin: !concentrates expression of! HD-ZIP III proteins 
miR165/166 microRNAs: !mobile and! concentrate expression of HD-ZIP III proteins 
PEAR proteins: !locally promote transcription of! their inhibitory HD-ZIP III genes 
PEAR proteins/HD-ZIP III transcription factors: !integrate spatial information of hormonal domains and miRNA gradients to! provide adjacent zones of dividing and more-quiescent cells