Combining with a CRISPR/Cas9 system, Agrobacterium-mediated transformation can lead to precise targeted T-DNA integration in the rice genome. Agrobacterium-mediated T-DNA integration into the plant genomes is random, which often causes variable transgene expression and insertional mutagenesis. Because T-DNA preferentially integrates into double-strand DNA breaks, we adapted a CRISPR/Cas9 system to demonstrate that targeted T-DNA integration can be achieved in the rice genome. Using a standard Agrobacterium binary vector, we constructed a T-DNA that contains a CRISPR/Cas9 system using SpCas9 and a gRNA targeting the exon of the rice AP2 domain-containing protein gene Os01g04020. The T-DNA also carried a red fluorescent protein and a hygromycin resistance (hptII) gene. One version of the vector had hptII expression driven by an OsAct2 promoter. In an effort to detect targeted T-DNA insertion events, we built another T-DNA with a promoterless hptII gene adjacent to the T-DNA right border such that integration of T-DNA into the targeted exon sequence in-frame with the hptII gene would allow hptII expression. Our results showed that these constructs could produce targeted T-DNA insertions with frequencies ranging between 4 and 5.3% of transgenic callus events, in addition to generating a high frequency (50-80%) of targeted indel mutations. Sequencing analyses showed that four out of five sequenced T-DNA/gDNA junctions carry a single copy of full-length T-DNA at the target site. Our results indicate that Agrobacterium-mediated transformation combined with a CRISPR/Cas9 system can efficiently generate targeted T-DNA insertions.

CRISPR/Cas9: !combined with! Agrobacterium-mediated transformation 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation: !leads to! precise targeted T-DNA integration 
T-DNA: !integrates into! double-strand DNA breaks 
CRISPR/Cas9 system: !adapted to! demonstrate targeted T-DNA integration 
T-DNA: !contains! SpCas9 and gRNA targeting exon of rice AP2 domain-containing protein gene 
T-DNA: !carries! red fluorescent protein and hygromycin resistance (hptII) gene 
Vector: !has! hptII expression driven by OsAct2 promoter 
T-DNA: !built with! promoterless hptII gene adjacent to right border 
T-DNA/gDNA junctions: !carry! single copy of full-length T-DNA at target site 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation: !generates! targeted T-DNA insertions