WRKY transcription factors have been implicated in both plant immunity and plant responses to cadmium (Cd); however, the mechanism underlying the crosstalk between these processes is unclear. Here, we characterized the roles of CaWRKY41, a group III WRKY transcription factor, in immunity against the pathogenic bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum and Cd stress responses in pepper (Capsicum annuum). CaWRKY41 was transcriptionally up-regulated in response to Cd exposure, R. solanacearum inoculation, and H2O2 treatment. Virus-induced silencing of CaWRKY41 increased Cd tolerance and R. solanacearum susceptibility, while heterologous overexpression of CaWRKY41 in Arabidopsis impaired Cd tolerance, and enhanced Cd and zinc (Zn) uptake and H2O2 accumulation. Genes encoding reactive oxygen species-scavenging enzymes were down-regulated in CaWRKY41-overexpressing Arabidopsis plants, whereas genes encoding Zn transporters and enzymes involved in H2O2 production were up-regulated. Consistent with these findings, the ocp3 (overexpressor of cationic peroxidase 3) mutant, which has elevated H2O2 levels, displayed enhanced sensitivity to Cd stress. These results suggest that a positive feedback loop between H2O2 accumulation and CaWRKY41 up-regulation coordinates the responses of pepper to R. solanacearum inoculation and Cd exposure. This mechanism might reduce Cd tolerance by increasing Cd uptake via Zn transporters, while enhancing resistance to R. solanacearum.

CaWRKY41: !transcriptionally up-regulated in response to! Cd exposure, R. solanacearum inoculation, and H2O2 treatment
CaWRKY41: !increases! Cd tolerance and R. solanacearum susceptibility
CaWRKY41: !overexpression of! Arabidopsis !impaired! Cd tolerance
CaWRKY41: !enhanced! Cd and Zn uptake and H2O2 accumulation
CaWRKY41: !down-regulated! reactive oxygen species-scavenging enzymes
CaWRKY41: !up-regulated! Zn transporters and enzymes involved in H2O2 production
ocp3 mutant: !elevated! H2O2 levels !displayed enhanced sensitivity to! Cd stress