A U-box E3 ubiquitin ligase GhPUB17 is inhibited by GhCyP3 with antifungal activity and acts as a negative regulator involved in cotton resistance to Verticillium dahliae. E3 ubiquitin ligases, the key component enzymes of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, which contains the most diverse structural and functional members involved in the determination of target specificity and the regulation of metabolism, have been well documented in previous studies. Here, we identify GhPUB17, a U-box E3 ligase in cotton that has ubiquitination activity and is involved in the cotton immune response to Verticillium dahliae. The expression level of GhPUB17 is downregulated in the ssn mutant with a constitutively activated immune response (Sun et al., Nat Commun 5:5372, 2014). Infection with V. dahliae or exogenous hormone treatment, including jasmonic acid and salicylic acid, significantly upregulated GhPUB17 in cotton roots, which suggested a possible role for this E3 ligase in the plant immune response to pathogens. Moreover, GhPUB17-knockdown cotton plants are more resistant to V. dahliae, whereas GhPUB17-overexpressing plants are more susceptible to the pathogen, which indicated that GhPUB17 is a negative regulator of cotton resistance to V. dahliae. A yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) assay identified GhCyP3 as a protein that interacts with GhPUB17, and this finding was confirmed by further protein interaction assays. The downregulation of GhCyP3 in cotton seedlings attenuated the plants' resistance to V. dahliae. In addition, GhCyP3 showed antifungal activity against V. dahliae, and the E3 ligase activity of GhPUB17 was repressed by GhCyP3 in vitro. These results suggest that GhPUB17 negatively regulates cotton immunity to V. dahliae and that the antifungal protein GhCyP3 likely interacts with and inhibits the ligase activity of GhPUB17 and plays an important role in the cotton-Verticillium interaction.

GhPUB17: !inhibited by! GhCyP3 
GhPUB17: !involved in! cotton resistance to Verticillium dahliae 
GhPUB17: !upregulated by! infection with V. dahliae or exogenous hormone treatment 
GhPUB17: !downregulated in! ssn mutant 
GhPUB17: !repressed by! GhCyP3 in vitro 
GhCyP3: !interacts with! GhPUB17 
GhCyP3: !downregulation of! attenuates plants' resistance to V. dahliae 
GhCyP3: !antifungal activity against! V. dahliae