While plant irrigation usually increases yield, irrigation also affects seed characteristics with respect to endoreplication level, chemical composition, number of carbonyl bands, and cuticular wax profiles. Seeds of sweet varieties of the narrow-leaved lupin have good nutritional properties; however, these plants are sensitive to water deficit. Irrigation improves lupin yield, but can affect seed characteristics. The purpose of the study was to evaluate irrigation influence on lupin seed features and their chemical composition. Morphological analyses showed worse quality of seeds from the irrigated plants, with regard to their size and weight. This was confirmed by cytophotometric analyses which revealed a lower DNA content in the nuclei of cells from the apical and basal regions of the irrigated seeds. The lower degree of polyploidy of the nuclei entails lower cell sizes and limited space for storage components. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analysis demonstrated that protein and cuticular wax profiles of the irrigated seeds were different from the control. The electrophoretic analyses indicated differences in protein profiles including changes in the proportion of lupin storage proteins. Among the various studied elements, only the nitrogen content decreased in the embryo axis of irrigated plants. Although germination dynamics of the irrigated seeds was higher, the seedlings' development rate was slightly lower than in the control. The hydrogen peroxide level in root meristem cells was higher during germination in the control suggesting its regulatory role in seed metabolism/signaling. Our study indicated that irrigation of lupin plant affected seed features and composition.

irrigation: !affects! seed characteristics 
irrigation: !influences! lupin yield 
morphological analyses: !showed! worse quality of seeds 
cytophotometric analyses: !revealed! lower DNA content 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analysis: !demonstrated! different protein and cuticular wax profiles 
electrophoretic analyses: !indicated! changes in protein profiles 
nitrogen content: !decreased! in embryo axis of irrigated plants 
germination dynamics: !was higher! in irrigated seeds 
seedlings' development rate: !was slightly lower! than control 
hydrogen peroxide level: !was higher! during germination in control