['30696706', 'The control of precursor-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) splicing is emerging as an  important layer of regulation in plant responses to endogenous and external cues.  In eukaryotes, pre-mRNA splicing is governed by the activity of a large  ribonucleoprotein machinery, the spliceosome, whose protein core is composed of  the Sm ring and the related Sm-like 2-8 complex. Recently, the Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) Sm-like 2-8 complex has been characterized. However, the  role of plant Sm proteins in pre-mRNA splicing remains largely unknown. Here, we  present the functional characterization of Sm protein E1 (SME1), an Arabidopsis  homolog of the SME subunit of the eukaryotic Sm ring. Our results demonstrate  that SME1 regulates the spliceosome activity and that this regulation is  controlled by the environmental conditions. Indeed, depending on the conditions,  SME1 ensures the efficiency of constitutive and alternative splicing of selected  pre-mRNAs. Moreover, missplicing of most targeted pre-mRNAs leads to the  generation of nonsense-mediated decay signatures, indicating that SME1 also  guarantees adequate levels of the corresponding functional transcripts. In  addition, we show that the selective function of SME1 in ensuring appropriate  gene expression patterns through the regulation of specific pre-mRNA splicing is  essential for adequate plant development and adaptation to freezing temperatures.  These findings reveal that SME1 plays a critical role in plant development and  interaction with the environment by providing spliceosome activity specificity.', '2019 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.18.00689', 'ORCID:']

SME1: !regulates! spliceosome activity 
spliceosome activity: !controlled by! environmental conditions 
SME1: !ensures efficiency of! constitutive and alternative splicing 
missplicing: !leads to! nonsense-mediated decay signatures 
SME1: !guarantees adequate levels of! functional transcripts 
SME1: !essential for! adequate plant development 
SME1: !plays critical role in! plant development and interaction with environment