Amaranth is a plant naturally resistant to various types of stresses that produces seeds of excellent nutritional quality, so amaranth is a promising system for food production. Amaranth wild relatives have survived climate changes and grow under harsh conditions, however no studies about morphological and molecular characteristics of their seeds are known. Therefore, we carried out a detailed morphological and molecular characterization of wild species A. powellii and A. hybridus, and compared them with the cultivated amaranth species A. hypochondriacus (waxy and non-waxy seeds) and A. cruentus. Seed proteins were fractionated according to their polarity properties and were analysed in one-dimensional gel electrophoresis (1-DE) followed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). A total of 34 differentially accumulated protein bands were detected and 105 proteins were successfully identified. Late embryogenesis abundant proteins were detected as species-specific. Oleosins and oil bodies associated proteins were observed preferentially in A. cruentus. Different isoforms of the granule-bound starch synthase I, and several paralogs of 7S and 11S globulins were also identified. The in silico structural analysis from different isoforms of 11S globulins was carried out, including new types of 11S globulin not reported so far. The results provide novel information about 11S globulins and proteins related in seed protection, which could play important roles in the nutritional value and adaptive tolerance to stress in amaranth species.

A. powellii: !produces! Late embryogenesis abundant proteins 
A. hybridus: !produces! Late embryogenesis abundant proteins 
A. hypochondriacus (waxy): !produces! Oleosins and oil bodies associated proteins 
A. cruentus: !produces! Oleosins and oil bodies associated proteins 
Granule-bound starch synthase I: !exists in! Different isoforms 
7S and 11S globulins: !exist as! Several paralogs 
11S globulins: !structurally analyzed! In silico