Cyclic AMP plays important roles in different physiological processes, including plant defence responses. However, as little information is known on plant enzymes responsible for cAMP production/degradation, studies of cAMP functions have relied, to date, on non-specific pharmacological approaches. We therefore developed a more reliable approach, producing transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana lines overexpressing the 'cAMP-sponge' (cAS), a genetic tool that specifically buffers cAMP levels. In response to an avirulent strain of Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (PstAvrB), cAS plants showed a higher bacterial growth and a reduced hypersensitive cell death in comparison with wild-type (WT) plants. The low cAMP availability after pathogen infection delayed cytosolic calcium elevation, as well as hydrogen peroxide increase and induction of redox systems. The proteomic analysis, performed 24 h post-infection, indicated that a core of 49 proteins was modulated in both genotypes, while 16 and 42 proteins were uniquely modulated in WT and cAS lines, respectively. The involvement of these proteins in the impairment of defence response in cAS plants is discussed in this paper. Moreover, in silico analysis revealed that the promoter regions of the genes coding for proteins uniquely accumulating in WT plants shared the CGCG motif, a target of the calcium-calmodulin-binding transcription factor AtSR1 (Arabidopsis thaliana signal responsive1). Therefore, following pathogen perception, the low free cAMP content, altering timing and levels of defence signals, and likely acting in part through the mis-regulation of AtSR1 activity, affected the speed and strength of the immune response.

Cyclic AMP: !plays important roles in! physiological processes 
cAS: !buffers cAMP levels in! transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana lines 
Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato: !causes! higher bacterial growth and reduced hypersensitive cell death in cAS plants 
low cAMP availability: !delays! cytosolic calcium elevation, hydrogen peroxide increase and induction of redox systems 
CGCG motif: !is a target of! calcium-calmodulin-binding transcription factor AtSR1 
low free cAMP content: !alters timing and levels of! defence signals