Soil salinity is one of the major serious factors that affect agricultural productivity of almost all crops worldwide, including the important oilseed crop sesame. In order to improve salinity resistance in sesame, it is crucial to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the adaptive response to salinity stress. In the present study, two contrasting sesame genotypes differing in salt tolerance were used to decipher the adaptive responses to salt stress based on morphological, transcriptome and metabolome characterizations. Morphological results indicated that under salt stress, the salt-tolerant (ST) genotype has enhanced capacity to withstand salinity stress, higher seed germination rate and plant survival rate, as well as better growth rate than the salt-sensitive genotype. Transcriptome analysis revealed strongly induced salt-responsive genes in sesame mainly related to amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, plant hormone signal transduction, and oxidation-reduction process. Especially, several pathways were preferably enriched with differentially expressed genes in ST genotype, including alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism, carotenoid biosynthesis, galactose metabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism. Metabolome profiling under salt stress showed a higher accumulation degree of metabolites involved in stress tolerance in ST, and further highlighted that the amino acid metabolism, and sucrose and raffinose family oligosaccharides metabolism were enhanced in ST. These findings suggest that the candidate genes and metabolites involved in crucial biological pathways may regulate salt tolerance of sesame, and increase our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the adaptation of sesame to salt stress.

genotype: !enhances! salt tolerance
genes: !related to! amino acid metabolism
genes: !related to! carbohydrate metabolism
genes: !related to! biosynthesis of secondary metabolites
genes: !related to! plant hormone signal transduction
genes: !related to! oxidation-reduction process
metabolites: !involved in! stress tolerance
amino acid metabolism: !enhanced in! ST genotype
sucrose/raffinose family oligosaccharides metabolism: !enhanced in! ST genotype