The CmTFL1c gene of Chrysanthemum morifolium inhibits flowering, regulates inflorescence architecture and floral development. The timing of flowering is an important ornamental trait of chrysanthemum. The gene TERMINAL FLOWER1 (TFL1) has been shown to be involved in the regulation of meristem fate and flowering time regulation. Here, a TFL1 gene named as CmTFL1c, was cloned from Chrysanthemum morifolium and further characterized. The open reading frame of CmTFL1c comprises 522 bp, which encodes a polypeptide of 173 amino acids. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that CmTFL1c belongs to the CEN/TFL1 clade. CmTFL1c protein localizes to the nucleus as well as to plasma membrane, which suggests that CmTFL1c may be a transcription factor. The CmTFL1c gene was most highly expressed in vegetative stems, and weakly expressed in leaves and flower buds; both shoot apices and stems had sensitivity to photoperiod. Overexpression of CmTFL1c in wild Arabidopsis and tfl1-13 mutant led to late flowering and altered architecture, including increased secondary branching, and abnormal inflorescences and flowers. The CmTFL1c gene negatively regulated flowering by inhibiting the up-regulation of the AtFT, AtLFY and AtAP1. The biological function of CmTFL1c was further characterized in C. morifolium via Agrobacterium-mediated transformation, which showed that CmTFL1c not only delayed flowering and promoted axillary bud formation, but also played an important role in inflorescence formation of chrysanthemum. These results showed that the CmTFL1c affects flowering time and regulates inflorescence architecture.

CmTFL1c: !inhibits! flowering
CmTFL1c: !regulates! inflorescence architecture
CmTFL1c: !localizes to! nucleus and plasma membrane
CmTFL1c: !most highly expressed in! vegetative stems
CmTFL1c: !overexpression of! late flowering and altered architecture
CmTFL1c: !negatively regulates! AtFT, AtLFY and AtAP1
CmTFL1c: !delays! flowering
CmTFL1c: !promotes! axillary bud formation
CmTFL1c: !plays role in! inflorescence formation