The development and ripening of fresh fruits is an important trait for agricultural production and fundamental research. Almost all plant hormones participate in this process. Strigolactones (SLs) are a new class of plant hormones that regulate plant organ development and stress tolerance, but little is known about their roles in fruit development. In this study, we identified SL biosynthetic and signaling genes in woodland strawberry, a typical non-climacteric fruit, and analyzed the expression patterns of these genes in different plant tissues and developing fruits. One D27, two MAX1, and one LBO gene were identified as involved in SL biosynthesis, and one D14, one D3, and two D53 genes as related to SL signaling. The proteins encoded by these genes had similar motifs as SL biosynthetic and signaling proteins in rice and Arabidopsis. The genes had different expression levels in the root, stem, leaf, and petiole of woodland strawberry. In addition, the expression of most SL biosynthetic genes was high in developing carpel, anther, and style, while that of SL signaling genes was high in carpel and style, but low in anther, suggesting active SL biosynthesis and signaling in the developing carpel and style. Notably, the expression of SL biosynthetic and signaling genes was significantly increased in the receptacle after pollination and decreased during receptacle development. Moreover, low or no expression of these genes was detected in ripening fruits. Our results suggest that SLs play a role in the early stages of woodland strawberry fruit development. Our findings provide insight into the function of SLs and will facilitate further study of the regulation by SLs of fresh fruit development.

D27: !synthesizes! Strigolactones 
MAX1: !synthesizes! Strigolactones 
LBO: !synthesizes! Strigolactones 
D14: !signals! Strigolactones 
D3: !signals! Strigolactones 
D53: !signals! Strigolactones 
carpel: !expresses! SL biosynthetic genes 
anther: !expresses! SL biosynthetic genes 
style: !expresses! SL biosynthetic genes 
carpel: !expresses! SL signaling genes 
style: !expresses! SL signaling genes 
receptacle: !increases expression of! SL biosynthetic and signaling genes 
receptacle: !decreases expression of! SL biosynthetic and signaling genes 
ripening fruits: !low or no expression of! SL biosynthetic and signaling genes