Isoprene synthase converts dimethylallyl diphosphate to isoprene and appears to be necessary and sufficient to allow plants to emit isoprene at significant rates. Isoprene can protect plants from abiotic stress but is not produced naturally by all plants; for example, Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) and tobacco (<i>Nicotiana tabacum</i>) do not produce isoprene. It is typically present at very low concentrations, suggesting a role as a signaling molecule; however, its exact physiological role and mechanism of action are not fully understood. We transformed Arabidopsis with a <i>Eucalyptus globulus isoprene synthase</i> The regulatory mechanisms of photosynthesis and isoprene emission were similar to those of native emitters, indicating that regulation of isoprene emission is not specific to isoprene-emitting species. Leaf chlorophyll and carotenoid contents were enhanced by isoprene, which also had a marked positive effect on hypocotyl, cotyledon, leaf, and inflorescence growth in Arabidopsis. By contrast, leaf and stem growth was reduced in tobacco engineered to emit isoprene. Expression of genes belonging to signaling networks or associated with specific growth regulators (e.g. gibberellic acid that promotes growth and jasmonic acid that promotes defense) and genes that lead to stress tolerance was altered by isoprene emission. Isoprene likely executes its effects on growth and stress tolerance through direct regulation of gene expression. Enhancement of jasmonic acid-mediated defense signaling by isoprene may trigger a growth-defense tradeoff leading to variations in the growth response. Our data support a role for isoprene as a signaling molecule.

Isoprene synthase: !converts! dimethylallyl diphosphate 
Isoprene synthase: !allows plants to emit! isoprene 
Isoprene: !protects plants from! abiotic stress 
Isoprene: !has a role as! a signaling molecule 
Eucalyptus globulus isoprene synthase: !transformed! Arabidopsis 
Isoprene: !enhances! leaf chlorophyll and carotenoid contents 
Isoprene: !promotes growth of! hypocotyl, cotyledon, leaf, and inflorescence in Arabidopsis 
Isoprene: !reduces growth of! leaf and stem in tobacco 
Isoprene: !alters expression of! genes associated with specific growth regulators 
Isoprene: !triggers! growth-defense tradeoff 
Isoprene: !supports role as! a signaling molecule