Gibberellins (GAs) and their regulator DELLA are involved in many aspects of plant growth and development and most of our current knowledge in the DELLA-facilitated GA signaling was obtained from the studies of annual species. To understand GA-DELLA signaling in perennial species, we created ten GA-insensitive transgenic grapevines carrying a DELLA mutant allele (Vvgai1) in the background of Vitis vinifera 'Thompson Seedless' and conducted comprehensive analysis of their RNA expression profiles in the shoot, leaf and root tissues. The transgenic lines showed varying degrees of dwarf stature and other typical DELLA mutant phenotypes tightly correlated with the levels of Vvgai1 expression. A large number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the shoot, leaf and root tissues of the transgenic lines and these DEGs were involved in diverse biological processes; many of the DEGs showed strong tissue specificity and about 30% them carried a DELLA motif. We further discovered unexpected expression patterns of several key flowering induction genes VvCO, VvCOL1 and VvTFL1. Our results not only confirmed many previous DELLA study findings in annual species, but also revealed new DELLA targets and responses in grapevine, including the roles of homeodomain transcription factors as potential co-regulators with DELLA in controlling the development of grapevine which uniquely possess both vegetative and reproductive meristems at the same time. The contrasting responses of some key flowering induction pathway genes provides new insights into the divergence of GA-DELLA regulations between annual and perennial species in GA-DELLA signaling.

GAs: !regulate! DELLA
DELLA: !affects! GA signaling
Vvgai1: !expresses! dwarf stature
DEGs: !involved in! diverse biological processes
DELLA motif: !carries! 30% of DEGs
VvCO, VvCOL1, VvTFL1: !show! unexpected expression patterns
Homeodomain transcription factors: !potentially co-regulate! DELLA
GA-DELLA signaling: !diverges! between annual and perennial species