['30787133', "Although the plant Phosphorylated Pathway of l-Ser Biosynthesis (PPSB) is  essential for embryo and pollen development, and for root growth, its metabolic  implications have not been fully investigated. A transcriptomics analysis of  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) PPSB-deficient mutants at night, when PPSB  activity is thought to be more important, suggested interaction with the sulfate  assimilation process. Because sulfate assimilation occurs mainly in the light, we  also investigated it in PPSB-deficient lines in the day. Key genes in the sulfate  starvation response, such as the adenosine 5'phosphosulfate reductase genes,  along with sulfate transporters, especially those involved in sulfate  translocation in the plant, were induced in the PPSB-deficient lines. However,  sulfate content was not reduced in these lines as compared with wild-type plants;  besides the glutathione (GSH) steady-state levels in roots of PPSB-deficient  lines were even higher than in wild type. This suggested that PPSB deficiency  perturbs the sulfate assimilation process between tissues/organs. Alteration of  thiol distribution in leaves from different developmental stages, and between  aerial parts and roots in plants with reduced PPSB activity, provided evidence  supporting this idea. Diminished PPSB activity caused an enhanced flux of (35)S  into thiol biosynthesis, especially in roots. GSH turnover also accelerated in  the PPSB-deficient lines, supporting the notion that not only biosynthesis, but  also transport and allocation, of thiols were perturbed in the PPSB mutants. Our  results suggest that PPSB is required for sulfide assimilation in specific  heterotrophic tissues and that a lack of PPSB activity perturbs sulfur  homeostasis between photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic tissues.", '2019 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.18.01549', 'ORCID:']

PPSB: !perturbs! sulfate assimilation 
PPSB: !enhances! flux of (35)S into thiol biosynthesis 
PPSB: !required for! sulfide assimilation in specific heterotrophic tissues 
PPSB: !perturbs! sulfur homeostasis between photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic tissues 
adenosine 5'phosphosulfate reductase genes: !induced in! PPSB-deficient lines 
sulfate transporters: !involved in! sulfate translocation in the plant 
GSH: !steady-state levels! higher in roots of PPSB-deficient lines 
GSH: !turnover! accelerated in PPSB-deficient lines