Thirty-five IQD genes were identified and analysed in Chinese cabbage and BrIQD5 transgenic plants enhanced the drought resistance of plants. The IQD (IQ67-domain) family plays an important role in various abiotic stress responses in plant species. However, the roles of IQD genes in the Chinese cabbage response to abiotic stress remain unclear. Here, 35 IQD genes, from BrIQD1 to BrIQD35, were identified in Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis). Based on the phylogenetic analysis, these genes were clustered into three subfamilies (I-III), and members within the same subfamilies shared conserved exon-intron distribution and motif composition. The 35 BrIQD genes were unevenly distributed on 9 of the 10 chromosomes with 4 segmental duplication events. Ka/Ks ratios showed that the duplicated BrIQDs had mainly experienced strong purifying selection. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction of 35 BrIQDs under PEG6000 indicated that BrIQD5 was significantly induced by PEG6000. To verify BrIQD5 function, BrIQD5 was heterologously overexpressed in tobacco and was silenced in Chinese cabbage. BrIQD5-overexpressed plants showed more tolerance to drought stress than wild-type plants, while BrIQD5-silenced plants in Chinese cabbage showed decreased drought tolerance. Additionally, six BrIQD5 potential interactive proteins were isolated by the yeast two-hybrid assay, including BrCaMa, BrCaMb and four other stress-related proteins. Motif IQ1 of BrIQD5 is important for the interaction with BrCaMa and BrCaMb, and the isoleucine in motif IQ1 is an essential amino acid for calmodulin binding to BrIQD5. The identification and cloning of the new Chinese cabbage drought tolerance genes will promote the drought-resistant breeding of Chinese cabbage and help to better understand the mechanism of IQD involved in the drought tolerance of plants.

BrIQD5: !enhances! drought resistance
BrIQD5: !interacts with! BrCaMa
BrIQD5: !interacts with! BrCaMb
BrIQD5: !synthesizes! motif IQ1
motif IQ1: !binds to! calmodulin