Long-chain bases (LCBs), also termed sphingobases, are building blocks of sphingolipids, which make up a significant proportion of the cellular membrane system. They are also bioactive molecules regulating intracellular processes. Elevated levels of LCBs like phytosphingosine and dihydrosphingosine can induce cell death in plants and correlate with programmed cell death (PCD) reactions after pathogen recognition. We investigated the previously hypothesized antagonism between phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated LCBs with respect to cell death in Arabidopsis thaliana. Using HPLC-MS/MS, we determined levels of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated LCBs after cell death induction by LCB application or by Fumonisin B1 (FB1) treatment. We show that previously reported antagonistic effects of phosphorylated LCBs after simultaneous application with nonphosphorylated LCBs are linked to reduced uptake of nonphosphorylated LCBs into the tissue. Furthermore, phosphorylated LCBs did not antagonize PCD induced by avirulence protein recognition. In a functional approach, we used Arabidopsis lines with perturbed levels of phosphorylated LCBs. In these plants, the degree of FB1-induced cell death did not consistently correlate negatively with levels of phosphorylated LCBs, but positively with levels of major nonphosphorylated LCBs phytosphingosine and dihydrosphingosine. As treatment with phosphorylated LCBs did not antagonize cell death, and elevated in vivo levels of these LCB species did not reduce FB1-induced cell death, we conclude that the hypothesized general cell death-antagonizing effect of phosphorylated LCBs in plant cell death reactions should be rejected. Instead, our time-course analysis of LCB levels during cell death reactions showed a positive correlation between levels of nonphosphorylated LCBs and cell death.

LCBs: !induce! cell death 
LCBs: !correlate with! PCD 
LCBs: !antagonize! nonphosphorylated LCBs 
nonphosphorylated LCBs: !reduced uptake of! tissue 
nonphosphorylated LCBs: !positively correlate with! FB1-induced cell death 
phosphorylated LCBs: !do not antagonize! cell death 
phosphorylated LCBs: !do not reduce! FB1-induced cell death