['30796840', 'Malonyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) is a key building block for the synthesis of  fatty acids, which are important components of cell membranes, storage oils and  lipid-signaling molecules. Malonyl CoA-ACP malonyltransferase (MCAMT) catalyzes  the production of malonyl-ACP and CoA from malonyl-CoA and ACP. Here, we report  that MCAMT plays a critical role in cell division and has the potential to  increase the storage oil content in Arabidopsis. The quantitative real-time PCR  and MCAMT promoter:GUS analyses showed that MCAMT is predominantly expressed in  shoot and root apical meristems, leaf hydathodes and developing embryos. The  fluorescent signals of MCAMT:eYFP were observed in both chloroplasts and  mitochondria of tobacco leaf protoplasts. In particular, the N-terminal region  (amino acid residues 1-30) of MCAMT was required for mitochondrial targeting. The  Arabidopsis mcamt-1 and -2 mutants exhibited an embryo-lethal phenotype because  of the arrest of embryo development at the globular stage. The transgenic  Arabidopsis expressing antisense MCAMT RNA showed growth retardation caused by  the defects in cell division. The overexpression of MCAMT driven by the promoter  of the senescence-associated 1 (SEN1) gene, which is predominantly expressed in  developing seeds, increased the seed yield and storage oil content of  Arabidopsis. Taken together, the plastidial and mitochondrial MCAMT is essential  for Arabidopsis cell division and is a novel genetic resource useful for  enhancing storage oil content in oilseed crops.', '2019 Jun 1', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcz032', 'Suh']

MCAMT: !catalyzes! production of malonyl-ACP and CoA 
MCAMT: !predominantly expressed in! shoot and root apical meristems, leaf hydathodes and developing embryos 
MCAMT: !localizes to! chloroplasts and mitochondria 
MCAMT: !required for! mitochondrial targeting 
mcamt-1 and -2 mutants: !arrest of embryo development at! globular stage 
transgenic Arabidopsis expressing antisense MCAMT RNA: !growth retardation caused by! defects in cell division 
overexpression of MCAMT: !increases! seed yield and storage oil content of Arabidopsis