Chloroplast development and chlorophyll content in the immature fruit has a major impact on the morphology and quality in pepper (Capsicum spp.) fruit. Two major quantitative trait loci (QTLs), pc1 and pc10 that affect chlorophyll content in the pepper fruit by modulation of chloroplast compartment size were previously identified in chromosomes 1 and 10, respectively. The pepper homolog of GOLDEN2-LIKE transcription factor (CaGLK2) has been found as underlying pc10, similar to its effect on tomato chloroplast development. In the present study, we identified the pepper homolog of the zinc-finger transcription factor LOL1 (LSD ONE LIKE1; CcLOL1) as the gene underlying pc1. LOL1 has been identified in Arabidopsis as a positive regulator of programmed cell death and we report here on its role in controlling fruit development in the Solanaceae in a fruit-specific manner. The light-green C. chinense parent used for QTL mapping was found to carry a null mutation in CcLOL1. Verification of the function of the gene was done by generating CRISPR/Cas9 knockout mutants of the orthologous tomato gene resulting in light-green tomato fruits, indicating functional conservation of the orthologous genes in controlling chlorophyll content in the Solanaceae. Transcriptome profiling of light and dark-green bulks differing for pc1, showed that the QTL affects multiple photosynthesis and oxidation-reduction associated genes in the immature green fruit. Allelic diversity of three known genes CcLOL1, CaGLK2, and CcAPRR2 that influence pepper immature fruit color, was found to be associated with variation in chlorophyll content primarily in C. chinense.

CaGLK2: !affects! chloroplast development 
CcLOL1: !underlies! pc1 
CcLOL1: !regulates! programmed cell death 
CcLOL1: !controls! fruit development 
CRISPR/Cas9: !generates! light-green tomato fruits 
pc1: !affects! multiple photosynthesis and oxidation-reduction associated genes 
CcLOL1, CaGLK2, CcAPRR2: !associated with! variation in chlorophyll content