The OsPLS2 locus was isolated and cloned by map-based cloning that encodes a Upf1-like helicase. Disruption of OsPLS2 accelerated light-dependent leaf senescence in the rice mutant of ospls2. Leaf senescence is a very complex physiological process controlled by both genetic and environmental factors, however its underlying molecular mechanisms remain elusive. In this study, we report a novel Oryza sativa premature leaf senescence mutant (ospls2). Through map-based cloning, a G-to-A substitution was determined at the 1st nucleotide of the 13th intron in the OsPLS2 gene that encodes a Upf1-like helicase. This mutation prompts aberrant splicing of OsPLS2 messenger and consequent disruption of its full-length protein translation, suggesting a negative role of OsPLS2 in regulating leaf senescence. Wild-type rice accordingly displayed a progressive drop of OsPSL2 protein levels with age-dependent leaf senescence. Shading and light filtration studies showed that the ospls2 phenotype, which was characteristic of photo-oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation, was an effect of irritation by light. When continuously exposed to far-red light, exogenous H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and/or abscisic acid (ABA), the ospls2 mutant sustained hypersensitive leaf senescence. In consistence, light and ROS signal pathways in ospls2 were activated by down-regulation of phytochrome genes, and up-regulation of PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTORS (PIFs) and WRKY genes, all promoting leaf senescence. Together, these data indicated that OsPLS2 played an essential role in leaf senescence and its disruption triggered light-dependent leaf senescence in rice.

OsPLS2: !encodes! Upf1-like helicase
G-to-A substitution: !prompts aberrant splicing of! OsPLS2 messenger
OsPLS2: !regulates! leaf senescence
Wild-type rice: !displays drop of! OsPSL2 protein levels
ospls2 mutant: !sustains hypersensitive leaf senescence due to! light
light: !activates! signal pathways in ospls2
down-regulation of phytochrome genes: !up-regulates! PIFs and WRKY genes