In agriculture, heat stress (HS) has become one of the eminent abiotic threats to crop growth, productivity and nutritional security because of the continuous increase in global mean temperature. Studies have annotated that the heat stress response (HSR) in plants is highly conserved, involving complex regulatory networks of various signaling and sensor molecules. In this context, the ubiquitous-signaling molecules salicylic acid (SA) and nitric oxide (NO) have diverted the attention of the plant science community because of their putative roles in plant abiotic and biotic stress tolerance. However, their involvement in the transcriptional regulatory networks in plant HS tolerance is still poorly understood. In this review, we have conceptualized current knowledge concerning how SA and NO sense HS in plants and how they trigger the HSR leading to the activation of transcriptional-signaling cascades. Fundamentals of functional components and signaling networks associated with molecular mechanisms involved in SA/NO-mediated HSR in plants have also been discussed. Increasing evidences have suggested the involvement of epigenetic modifications in the development of a 'stress memory', thereby provoking the role of epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of plant's innate immunity under HS. Thus, we have also explored the recent advancements regarding the biological mechanisms and the underlying significance of epigenetic regulations involved in the activation of HS responsive genes and transcription factors by providing conceptual frameworks for understanding molecular mechanisms behind the 'transcriptional stress memory' as potential memory tools in the regulation of plant HSR.

Heat Stress: !triggers! HSR
SA/NO: !sense! Heat Stress
SA/NO: !trigger! HSR
HSR: !activates! Transcriptional-Signaling Cascades
Epigenetic Modifications: !involvement in! 'Stress Memory'
Epigenetic Modifications: !regulate! Plant Innate Immunity
Epigenetic Modifications: !activate! HS Responsive Genes/TFs