Insufficient production of flower buds is an intractable problem in 'Fuji' apple orchards. Although cytokinin (CK) promotes flower bud formation in apple trees, little is known about the mechanisms regulating this phenomenon. In the present study, high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) of 'Nagafu No. 2' buds was conducted to characterize the transcriptional response to 6-BA treatment during key period of floral transition. A weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) of the differentially expressed genes identified hormone signal transduction pathways, totaling 84 genes were highly correlated with the expression pattern of flowering-time genes. The up-regulation of CK signal components and a gibberellin (GA) signal repressor were found to contribute to the promotion of floral transition. In relative comparison to non-treated buds, a series of sugar metabolism- and signal- related genes were associated with relatively high levels of sucrose, fructose, and glucose during floral induction in the 6-BA treated buds. Several transcription factors (i.e. SPLs, SOC1, FD, and COL) that are involved in GA, aging, and photoperiod-regulated flowering pathways were also upregulated by the 6-BA treatment. In addition, potential transcription factors integrating CK signaling to trigger floral induction in apple were also assessed; including PHYTO-CHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR (PIF1,3), WUSCHEL-related homeobox (WOX3,13), and CK response regulators (ARR2). The present study provides insight into the response of flowering and development-related pathways and transcription factors to 6-BA during the period of floral transition in apple. It extends our knowledge of the fundamental mechanisms associated with CK-regulated floral transition in apple trees.

CK: !promotes! flower bud formation
GA signal repressor: !contributes to! promotion of floral transition
sugar metabolism-related genes: !associated with! high levels of sucrose, fructose, and glucose
SPLs: !involved in! GA-regulated flowering pathways
SOC1, FD, COL: !upregulated by! 6-BA treatment
PIF1,3, WOX3,13, ARR2: !integrate! CK signaling to trigger floral induction