MYB15 promoter of Vitis quinquangularis has potential as a target for disease resistance breeding, and its involvement in PTI is associated with a range of defense mechanisms. China is a center of origin for Vitis and is home to diverse wild Vitis genotypes, some of which show superior pathogen resistance, although the underlying molecular basis for this has not yet been elucidated. In the current study, we identified a transcription factor, MYB15, from the Chinese wild grape, Vitis quinquangularis, whose promoter region (pVqMYB15) was shown to be induced by basal immunity (also called PAMP-triggered immunity, PTI) triggered by flg22, following heterologous expression in Nicotiana benthamiana and homologous expression in grapevine. By analyzing the promoter structure and activity, we identified a unique 283 bp sequence that plays a key role in the activation of basal immunity. In addition, we showed that activation of the MYB15 promoter correlates with differences in the expression of MYB15 and RESVERATROL SYNTHASE (RS) induced by the flg22 elicitor. We further tested whether the MYB15 induction triggered by flg22 was consistent with MYB15 and RS expression following inoculation with Plasmopara viticola in grape (V. quinquangularis and Vitis vinifera) leaves. Mapping upstream signals, we found that calcium influx, an RboH-dependent oxidative burst, an MAPK cascade, and jasmonate and salicylic acid co-contributed to flg22-triggered pVqMYB15 activation. Our data suggest that the MYB15 promoter has potential as a target for disease resistance breeding, and its involvement in PTI is associated with a range of defense mechanisms.

MYB15: !induces! pVqMYB15 
pVqMYB15: !correlates with! MYB15 & RS expression 
flg22: !triggers! pVqMYB15 activation 
calcium influx: !contributes to! flg22-triggered pVqMYB15 activation 
RboH: !contributes to! flg22-triggered pVqMYB15 activation 
oxidative burst: !contributes to! flg22-triggered pVqMYB15 activation 
MAPK cascade: !contributes to! flg22-triggered pVqMYB15 activation 
jasmonate & salicylic acid: !co-contribute to! flg22-triggered pVqMYB15 activation