Mitochondria adjust their activities in response to external and internal stimuli to optimize growth via the mitochondrial retrograde response signaling pathway. The Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) NAC domain transcription factor ANAC017 has previously been identified as a regulator of the mitochondrial retrograde response. We show here that overexpression of <i>ANAC017</i> in Arabidopsis leads to growth retardation, altered leaf development with decreased cell size and viability, and early leaf senescence. RNA sequencing analyses revealed that increased <i>ANAC017</i> expression leads to higher expression of genes related to mitochondrial stress, cell death/autophagy, and leaf senescence under nonlimiting growth conditions as well as extensive repression of chloroplast function. Gene regulatory network analysis indicated that a complex hierarchy of transcription factors exists downstream of ANAC017. These involve a set of up-regulated ANAC and WRKY transcription factors associated with organellar signaling and senescence. The network also includes a number of ethylene- and gibberellic acid-related transcription factors with established functions in stress responses and growth regulation, which down-regulate their target genes. A number of BASIC LEUCINE-ZIPPER MOTIF transcription factors involved in the endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response or balancing of energy homeostasis via the SNF1-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE1 were also down-regulated by <i>ANAC017</i> overexpression. Our results show that the endoplasmic reticulum membrane tethering of the constitutively expressed ANAC017, and its controlled release, are crucial to fine-tune a fast reactive but potentially harmful signaling cascade. Thus, ANAC017 is a master regulator of cellular responses with mitochondria acting as central sensors.

ANAC017: !regulates! Mitochondrial retrograde response
ANAC017: !leads to! Growth retardation
ANAC017: !induces! Mitochondrial stress
ANAC017: !represses! Chloroplast function
ANAC017: !down-regulates! Ethylene- and gibberellic acid-related transcription factors
ANAC017: !down-regulates! BASIC LEUCINE-ZIPPER MOTIF transcription factors
ANAC017: !controlled release of! Endoplasmic reticulum membrane tethering