['30882866', 'The SENSITIVE TO PROTON RHIZOTOXICITY 1 (STOP1) transcription factor regulates  gene expression associated with multiple stress tolerances in plant roots. In  this study, we investigated the mechanism responsible for the sensitivity of the  stop1 mutant to low-oxygen stress in Arabidopsis. Transcriptomic analyses  revealed that two genes involved in low-oxygen tolerance, namely GLUTAMATE  DEHYDROGENASE 1 (GDH1) and GDH2, showed lower expression levels in the stop1  mutant than in the wild-type. Sensitivity of the gdh1gdh2 double-mutant to  low-oxygen conditions was partly attributable to the low-oxygen sensitivity of  the stop1 mutant. Two transcription factors, STOP2 and HEAT SHOCK FACTOR A2  (HsfA2), were expressed at lower levels in the stop1 mutant. An in planta  complementation assay indicated that CaMV35S::STOP2 or CaMV35S::HsfA2 partially  rescued the low-oxygen tolerance of the stop1 mutant, which was concomitant with  recovered expression of genes regulating low-pH tolerance and genes encoding  molecular chaperones. Prediction of cis-elements and in planta promoter assays  revealed that STOP1 directly activated the expression of HsfA2. Similar  STOP1-dependent low-oxygen sensitivity was detected in tobacco. Suppression of  NtSTOP1 induced low-oxygen sensitivity, which was associated with lower  expression levels of NtHsfA2 and NtGDHs compared with the wild-type. Our results  indicated that STOP1 pleiotropically regulates low-oxygen tolerance by  transcriptional regulation.', '2019 Jun 28', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/erz124', 'Koyama']

STOP1: !regulates! gene expression 
STOP1: !activates! HsfA2 
GDH1/GDH2: !lower expression in! stop1 mutant 
stop1 mutant: !sensitive to! low-oxygen stress 
gdh1gdh2 double-mutant: !partly attributable to! low-oxygen sensitivity of stop1 mutant 
STOP2/HsfA2: !expressed at lower levels in! stop1 mutant 
CaMV35S::STOP2/CaMV35S::HsfA2: !partially rescued! low-oxygen tolerance of stop1 mutant 
STOP1: !directly activated! expression of HsfA2 
NtSTOP1: !suppressed! low-oxygen sensitivity 
NtHsfA2/NtGDHs: !lower expression compared with! wild-type 
STOP1: !pleiotropically regulates! low-oxygen tolerance