Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) play critical roles in transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in a wide variety of organisms. Thousands of lincRNAs have been identified in plant genomes, although their functions remain mostly uncharacterized. Here, we report a genome-wide survey of lincRNAs involved in the response to low-nutrient conditions in Arabidopsis thaliana. We used RNA sequencing data derived from A. thaliana roots exposed to low levels of 12 different nutrients. Using bioinformatics approaches, 60 differentially expressed lincRNAs were identified that were significantly upregulated or downregulated under deficiency of at least one nutrient. To clarify their roles in nutrient response, correlations of expression patterns between lincRNAs and reference genes were examined across the 13 conditions (12 low-nutrient conditions and control). This analysis allowed us to identify lincRNA-RNA pairs with highly positive or negative correlations. In addition, calculating interaction energies of those pairs showed lincRNAs that may act as regulatory interactors; e.g. small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). Among them, trans-acting siRNA3 (TAS3), which is known to promote lateral root development by producing siRNA against Auxin response factor 2, 3, and 4, was revealed as a nitrogen (N)-responsive lincRNA. Furthermore, nitrate transporter 2 was identified as a potential target of TAS3-derived siRNA, suggesting that TAS3 participates in multiple pathways by regulating N transport and root development under low-N conditions. This study provides the first resource for candidate lincRNAs involved in multiple nutrient responses in plants.

lincRNA: !regulates! gene expression
lincRNA: !upregulated/downregulated by! nutrient deficiency
lincRNA: !correlated with! reference genes
lincRNA: !interacts with! small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
TAS3: !produces siRNA against! Auxin response factor 2, 3, and 4
TAS3: !regulates! N transport and root development
lincRNA: !involved in! multiple nutrient responses