The plasticity of plant growth response to differing nitrate availability renders the identification of biomarkers difficult, but allows access to genetic factors as tools to modulate root systems to a wide range of soil conditions. Nitrogen availability is a major determinant of crop yield. While the application of fertiliser substantially increases the yield on poor soils, it also causes nitrate pollution of water resources and high costs for farmers. Increasing nitrogen use efficiency in crop plants is a necessary step to implement low-input agricultural systems. We exploited the genetic diversity present in the worldwide Arabidopsis thaliana population to study adaptive growth patterns and changes in gene expression associated with chronic low nitrate stress, to identify biomarkers associated with good plant performance under low nitrate availability. Arabidopsis accessions were grown on agar plates with limited and sufficient supply of nitrate to measure root system architecture as well as shoot and root fresh weight. Differential gene expression was determined using Affymetrix ATH1 arrays. We show that the response to differing nitrate availability is highly variable in Arabidopsis accessions. Analyses of vegetative shoot growth and root system architecture identified accession-specific reaction modes to cope with limited nitrate availability. Transcription and epigenetic factors were identified as important players in the adaption to limited nitrogen in a global gene expression analysis. Five nitrate-responsive genes emerged as possible biomarkers for NUE in Arabidopsis. The plasticity of plant growth in response to differing nitrate availability in the substrate renders the identification of morphological and molecular features as biomarkers difficult, but at the same time allows access to a multitude of genetic factors which can be used as tools to modulate and adjust root systems to a wide range of soil conditions.

Nitrate availability: !determines! Crop yield
Nitrogen use efficiency: !necessary to implement! Low-input agricultural systems
Arabidopsis accessions: !variable in response to! Nitrate availability
Root system architecture: !identifies! Accession-specific reaction modes
Transcription/epigenetic factors: !important players in! Adaption to limited nitrogen
Five nitrate-responsive genes: !possible biomarkers for! NUE in Arabidopsis