In rice (Oryza sativa L.), later flowering inferior spikelets (IS), which are located on proximal secondary branches, fill slowly and produce smaller and lighter grains than earlier flowering superior spikelets (SS). Many genes have been reported to be involved in poor grain filling of IS, however the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. The present study determined that GF14f, a member of the 14-3-3 protein family, showed temporal and spatial differences in expression patterns between SS and IS. Using GF14f-RNAi plants, we observed that a reduction in GF14f expression in the endosperm resulted in a significant increase in both grain length and weight, which in turn improved grain yield. Furthermore, pull-down assays indicated that GF14f interacts with enzymes that are involved in sucrose breakdown, starch synthesis, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and glycolysis. At the same time, an increase in the activity of sucrose synthase (SuSase), adenosine diphosphate-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase), and starch synthase (StSase) was observed in the GF14f-RNAi grains. Comprehensive analysis of the proteome and metabolite profiling revealed that the abundance of proteins related to the TCA cycle, and glycolysis increased in the GF14f-RNAi grains together with several carbohydrate intermediates. These results suggested that GF14f negatively affected grain development and filling, and the observed higher abundance of the GF14f protein in IS compared with SS may be responsible for poor IS grain filling. The study provides insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying poor grain filling of IS and suggests that GF14f could serve as a potential tool for improving rice grain filling.

GF14f: !localizes to! IS 
GF14f: !represses! grain length and weight 
GF14f: !interacts with! enzymes involved in sucrose breakdown, starch synthesis, TCA cycle and glycolysis 
GF14f: !enhances! SuSase, AGPase and StSase activity 
GF14f: !increases! abundance of proteins related to TCA cycle and glycolysis 
GF14f: !synthesizes! carbohydrate intermediates