Flavonoids are plant pigments that provide health benefits for human and animal consumers. Understanding why domesticated crops have altered pigmentation patterns and unraveling the molecular/genetic mechanisms that underlie this will facilitate the breeding of new (healthier) varieties. We present an overview of changes in flavonoid pigmentation patterns that have occurred during crop domestication and, where possible, link them to the molecular changes that brought about the new phenotypes. We consider species that lost flavonoid pigmentation in the edible part of the plant at some point during domestication (like cereals). We also consider the converse situation, for example eggplant (aubergine), which instead gained strong anthocyanin accumulation in the skin of the fruit during domestication, and some varieties of citrus and apple that acquired anthocyanins in the fruit flesh. Interestingly, the genes responsible for such changes are sometimes closely linked to, or have pleiotropic effects on, important domestication genes, suggesting accidental and perhaps inevitable changes of anthocyanin patterning during domestication. In other cases, flavonoid pigmentation patterns in domesticated crops are the result of cultural preferences, with examples being found in varieties of citrus, barley, wheat, and maize. Finally, and more recently, in some species, anthocyanins seem to have been the direct target of selection in a second wave of domestication that followed the introduction of industrial food processing.

Flavonoids: !provide health benefits! Consumers 
Domesticated crops: !have altered pigmentation patterns! Flavonoid pigmentation 
Molecular/genetic mechanisms: !underlie! Altered pigmentation patterns 
Species: !lost flavonoid pigmentation! Edible part of plant 
Eggplant: !gained strong anthocyanin accumulation! Skin of fruit 
Citrus/apple: !acquired anthocyanins! Fruit flesh 
Genes: !closely linked to! Domestication genes 
Cultural preferences: !influence! Flavonoid pigmentation patterns 
Industrial food processing: !target of selection! Anthocyanins