The lower expression at veraison of several ripening master regulators "switch genes" can play a central role in the induction of the berry shrivel ripening physiological disorder in grapevine. Berry shrivel (BS) is a ripening physiological disorder affecting grape berry with visible symptoms appearing after veraison. Berry shrivel leads to shrinking berries with a reduced weight and a lower content of sugars and anthocyanins. In this study, for the first time a transcriptomic analysis coupled with selected metabolites quantification was undertaken to understand the metabolic modifications induced by the disorder. Different stages of berry development were considered including pre- and symptomatic berries. No metabolic alterations in the berry transcriptome and in the metabolite content was observed in pre-symptomatic and pre-veraison samples. Interestingly, at veraison, with still not visible symptoms appearing on the berry, a subset of genes, called switch genes previously suggested as master regulators of the ripening onset in grape berries, were strongly lower expressed in BS. Later during the ripening phase and with visible symptoms of the disorder, more than 3000 genes were differentially expressed. The genes up-regulated were related to hormone biosynthesis, response to stress and the phenylpropanoid pathway, while the genes down-regulated during ripening belonged mainly to the flavonoid pathway, and the sugar metabolism. In agreement, BS berries showed lower content of sugars and anthocyanins from the onset of veraison onward, while the amount of acids was not significantly affected. In conclusion, these results highlight a pivotal role of the switch genes in grapevine ripening, as well as their possible contribution to induce the ripening disorder berry shrivel, although it remains unclear whether this is part of the cause or consequences of the BS disorder.

switch genes: !lower expressed at veraison in! BS
hormone biosynthesis: !up-regulated in! BS
response to stress: !up-regulated in! BS
phenylpropanoid pathway: !up-regulated in! BS
flavonoid pathway: !down-regulated in! BS
sugar metabolism: !down-regulated in! BS
sugars: !lower content of! BS
anthocyanins: !lower content of! BS