Physical interaction and phosphorylation by CaMPK9 protects the degradation of CaWRKY40 that induces resistance response in chickpea to Fusarium wilt disease by modulating the transcription of defense responsive genes. WRKY transcription factors (TFs) are the global regulators of plant defense signaling that modulate immune responses in host plants by regulating transcription of downstream target genes upon challenged by pathogens. However, very little is known about immune responsive role of Cicer arietinum L. (Ca) WRKY TFs particularly. Using two contrasting chickpea genotypes with respect to resistance against Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ciceri Race1 (Foc1), we demonstrate transcript accumulation of different CaWRKYs under multiple stresses and establish that CaWRKY40 triggers defense. CaWRKY40 overexpressing chickpea mounts resistance to Foc1 by positively modulating the defense related gene expression. EMSA, ChIP assay and real-time PCR analyses suggest CaWRKY40 binds at the promoters and positively regulates transcription of CaDefensin and CaWRKY33. Further studies revealed that mitogen Activated Protein Kinase9 (CaMPK9) phosphorylates CaWRKY40 by directly interacting with its two canonical serine residues. Interestingly, CaMPK9 is unable to interact with CaWRKY40 when the relevant two serine residues were replaced by alanine. Overexpression of serine mutated WRKY40 isoform in chickpea fails to provide resistance against Foc1. Mutated WRKY40<sup>Ser.224/225 to AA</sup> overexpressing chickpea resumes its ability to confer resistance against Foc1 after application of 26S proteasomal inhibitor MG132, suggests that phosphorylation is essential to protect CaWRKY40 from proteasomal degradation. CaMPK9 silencing also led to susceptibility in chickpea to Foc1. Altogether, our results elucidate positive regulatory roles of CaMPK9 and CaWRKY40 in modulating defense response in chickpea upon Foc1 infection.

CaMPK9: !phosphorylates! CaWRKY40 
CaMPK9: !interacts with! CaWRKY40 
CaWRKY40: !induces! resistance response 
CaWRKY40: !regulates! transcription of downstream target genes 
CaWRKY40: !binds to! promoters 
CaWRKY40: !positively regulates! CaDefensin and CaWRKY33 
CaWRKY40: !protected from degradation by! phosphorylation 
CaMPK9: !silencing leads to! susceptibility