The soil-borne vascular pathogen Verticillium dahliae causes severe wilt symptoms in a wide range of plants including strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa). To enhance our understanding of the effects of V. dahliae on the growth and development of F. × ananassa, the expression patterns of 21 PR-10 genes were investigated by qPCR analysis and metabolite changes were determined by LC-MS in in vitro F. × ananassa plants upon pathogen infection. The expression patterns of the 21 isoforms showed a wide range of responses. Four PR-10 genes were highly induced in leaves upon pathogen infection while eight members were significantly up-regulated in roots. A simultaneously induced expression in leaves and roots was detected for five PR-10 genes. Interestingly, two isoforms were expressed upon infection in all three tissues (leaves, roots and stems) while no induction was detected for two other members. Accumulation of antifungal catechin and epicatechin was detected upon pathogen infection in roots and stems at late stages, while caffeic acid and citric acid were observed only in infected roots. Production of abscisic acid, salicylic acid, jasmonic acid (JA), gibberellic acid and indole acetic acid (IAA) was induced in infected leaves and stems at early stages. IAA and JA were the sole hormones to be ascertained in infected roots at late stages. The induction of several PR-10 genes upon infection of strawberry plants with V. dahliae suggest a role of PR-10 genes in the defense response against this pathogen. Production of phytohormones in the early stages of infection and antifungal metabolites in late stages suppose that they are implicated in this response. The results may possibly improve the control measures of the pathogen.

PR-10 genes: !highly induced in! leaves 
PR-10 genes: !significantly up-regulated in! roots 
PR-10 genes: !simultaneously induced in! leaves and roots 
PR-10 genes: !expressed in! all three tissues 
catechin/epicatechin: !accumulated in! roots and stems 
abscisic acid/salicylic acid/JA/GA/IAA: !induced in! leaves and stems 
IAA/JA: !ascertained in! infected roots 
PR-10 genes: !implicated in! defense response 
phytohormones/antifungal metabolites: !implied in! response