Nutritional rich pigeonpea (Cajanus cajan [L.]), a perennial shrub member of family Fabaceae is the sixth most important grain legume of the world. Continuous rise of temperature and current global climate scenario limits plant growth and performance but photosynthetic machineries are adversely affected. The aim of this study was the analysis of tissue specific photosynthetic pigments and photosynthetic electron transport rate under elevated temperature. Two different stages of both leaf (young and mature), and pod (young and mature) were chosen, and photosynthetic pigment and J-I-P tests were measured. Leaves and pods were detached and incubated in normal temperature (25°C) for 24 h in two different condition one light irradiance (100 µmol m<sup>-2</sup> s<sup>-1</sup>) and another darkness as control, and treated with high temperature 45°C for 24 h and repeated previous measurements were taken. Tissue specific photosynthetic pigments variation were observed; J-I-P parameters clearly revealed that elevated temperature has greater influence on photosystem II (PSII) electron transport than photosystem I (PSI), and significant changes were observed in pods than leaves. Young tissues were adversely affected by elevated temperature. In addition, the J-I-P tests and energy pipeline model indicated that PSI electron transport rate of leaves and pods appeared to be more thermo-tolerance than those in PSII. Only a minor drop in pigments pool and photosynthetic performance was observed after 24 h of darkness. O-J-I-P transients can be used as a sensitive, nondestructive method for measuring heat stress damage and a special tool for investigating action sites of high temperature stress. Findings of this study will contribute to basic understanding of photosynthetic performance, and to screen potential thermo-tolerant genotypes of pigeonpea to sustain in either current scenario of climate change or/and erratic future climatic conditions.

Temperature: !affects! Photosynthetic Pigments 
Temperature: !influences! PSII Electron Transport 
Young Tissues: !adversely affected by! Elevated Temperature 
PSI Electron Transport: !more thermo-tolerant than! PSII 
Darkness: !causes minor drop in! Pigments Pool