Light underneath Antarctic sea-ice is below detectable limits for up to 4 months of the year. The ability of Antarctic sea-ice diatoms to survive this prolonged darkness relies on their metabolic capability. This study is the first to examine the proteome of a prominent sea-ice diatom in response to extended darkness, focusing on the protein-level mechanisms of dark survival. The Antarctic diatom Fragilariopsis cylindrus was grown under continuous light or darkness for 120 d. The whole cell proteome was quantitatively analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS to investigate metabolic changes that occur during sustained darkness and during recovery under illumination. Enzymes of metabolic pathways, particularly those involved in respiratory processes, tricarboxylic acid cycle, glycolysis, the Entner-Doudoroff pathway, the urea cycle and the mitochondrial electron transport chain became more abundant in the dark. Within the plastid, carbon fixation halted while the upper sections of the glycolysis, gluconeogenesis and pentose phosphate pathways became less active. We have discovered how F. cylindrus utilises an ancient alternative metabolic mechanism that enables its capacity for long-term dark survival. By sustaining essential metabolic processes in the dark, F. cylindrus retains the functionality of the photosynthetic apparatus, ensuring rapid recovery upon re-illumination.

Light: !below detectable limits for! 4 months
Metabolic capability: !relies on! Light
Proteome: !examined in response to! Extended darkness
Fragilariopsis cylindrus: !grown under! Continuous light/darkness
Whole cell proteome: !quantitatively analysed by! Nano-LC-MS/MS
Metabolic pathways: !involved in! Respiratory processes
Tricarboxylic acid cycle: !enhanced in! Dark
Glycolysis: !enhanced in! Dark
Entner-Doudoroff pathway: !enhanced in! Dark
Urea cycle: !enhanced in! Dark
Mitochondrial electron transport chain: !enhanced in! Dark
Carbon fixation: !halted in! Plastid
Glycolysis: !repressed in! Plastid
Gluconeogenesis: !repressed in! Plastid
Pentose phosphate pathway: !repressed in! Plastid
Alternative metabolic mechanism: !utilised by! F. cylindrus
Photosynthetic apparatus: !retains functionality of! F. cylindrus