Recombination breaks up ancestral linkage disequilibrium, creates combinations of alleles, affects the efficiency of natural selection, and plays a major role in crop domestication and improvement. However, there is little knowledge regarding the variation in the population-scaled recombination rate in cotton. We constructed recombination maps and characterized the difference in the genomic landscape of the population-scaled recombination rate between Gossypium hirsutum and G. arboreum and sub-genomes based on the 381 sequenced G. hirsutum and 215 G. arboreum accessions. Comparative genomics identified large structural variations and syntenic genes in the recombination regions, suggesting that recombination was related to structural variation and occurred preferentially in the distal chromosomal regions. Correlation analysis indicated that recombination was only slightly affected by geographical distribution and breeding period. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) was performed with 15 agronomic traits using 267 cotton accessions and identified 163 quantitative trait loci (QTL) and an important candidate gene (Ghir_COL2) for early maturity traits. Comparative analysis of recombination and a GWAS revealed that the QTL of fibre quality traits tended to be more common in high-recombination regions than were those of yield and early maturity traits. These results provide insights into the population-scaled recombination landscape, suggesting that recombination contributed to the domestication and improvement of cotton, which provides a useful reference for studying recombination in other species.

Recombination: !affects! Efficiency of Natural Selection 
Recombination: !related to! Structural Variation 
Recombination: !preferentially occurs in! Distal Chromosomal Regions 
Recombination: !only slightly affected by! Geographical Distribution 
Recombination: !contributed to! Domestication and Improvement of Cotton 
QTL: !tend to be more common in! High-Recombination Regions