Light serves as the source of energy as well as an information signal for photosynthetic plants. During evolution, plants have acquired the ability to monitor environmental light radiation and adjust their developmental patterns to optimally utilize light energy for photosynthesis. The mechanisms of light perception and signal transduction have been comprehensively studied in past decades, mostly in a few model plants, including Arabidopsis thaliana. However, systematic analyses of the origin and evolution of core components involved in light perception and signaling are still lacking. In this study, we took advantage of the recently sequenced genomes and transcriptomes covering all the main Archaeplastida clades in the public domain to identify orthologous genes of core components involved in light perception and signaling and to reconstruct their evolutionary history. Our analyses suggested that acclimation to different distribution of light quality in new environments led to the origination of specific light signaling pathways in plants. The UVR8 (UV Resistance Locus 8) signaling pathway originated during the movement of plants from the deeper sea to shallow water and enabled plants to deal with ultraviolet B light (UV-B). After acquisition of UV-B adaptation, origination of the phytochrome signaling pathway helped plants to colonize water surface where red light became the prominent light energy source. The seedling emergence pathway, which is mediated by a combination of light and phytohormone signals that orchestrate plant growth pattern transitions, originated before the emergence of seed plants. Although cryptochromes and some key components of E3 ubiquitin ligase systems already existed before the divergence of the plant and animal kingdoms, the coevolution and optimization of light perception and downstream signal transduction components, including key transcription factors and E3 ubiquitin ligase systems, are evident during plant terrestrialization.

Light: !affects! Plant Development
UVR8: !originated from! Movement of Plants
Phytochrome: !enabled! Colonization of Water Surface
Seedling Emergence: !mediated by! Light & Phytohormone Signals
Cryptochromes: !existed before! Plant/Animal Kingdoms
Transcription Factors: !coevolved with! E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Systems