Plant architecture plasticity determines the efficiency at harvesting and plays a major role defining biomass and seed yield. We observed that several previously described transgenic genotypes exhibiting increased seed yield also show wider stems and more vascular bundles than wild-type plants. Here, the relationship between these characteristics and seed yield was investigated. Hanging weight on the main stem of Arabidopsis plants provoked significant stem widening. Such widening was accompanied by an increase in the number of vascular bundles and about 100% of yield increase. In parallel, lignin deposition diminished. Vascular bundle formation started in the upper internode and continued downstream. AUX/LAX carriers were essential for this response. The increase of vascular bundles was reverted 3 weeks after the treatment leading to an enlarged xylem area. Aux1, lax1, and lax3 mutant plants were also able to enlarge their stems after the treatment, whereas lax2 plants did not. However, none of these mutants exhibited more vascular bundles or seed yield compared with untreated plants. Weight-induced xylem area enhancement and increased seed yield were also observed in sunflower plants. Altogether these results showed a strong correlation between the number of vascular bundles and enhanced seed yield under a long-day photoperiod. Furthermore, changes in the levels of auxin carriers affected both these processes in the same manner, suggesting that there may be an underlying causality.

Hanging weight: !increases! stem widening
Hanging weight: !increases! number of vascular bundles
Hanging weight: !increases! seed yield
AUX/LAX carriers: !essential for! stem widening response
Aux1, lax1, lax3 mutants: !able to enlarge! stems
Aux1, lax1, lax3 mutants: !unable to increase! number of vascular bundles
Aux1, lax1, lax3 mutants: !unable to increase! seed yield
Weight-induced xylem area enhancement: !correlated with! increased seed yield
Changes in auxin carriers: !affects! xylem area enhancement and seed yield