During sexual reproduction, pollen grains land on the stigma, rehydrate and produce pollen tubes that grow through the female transmitting-tract tissue allowing the delivery of the two sperm cells to the ovule and the production of healthy seeds. Because pollen tubes are single cells that expand by tip-polarized growth, they represent a good model to study the growth dynamics, cell wall deposition and intracellular machineries. Aiming to understand this complex machinery, we used a low throughput chemical screen approach in order to isolate new tip-growth disruptors. The effect of a chemical inhibitor of monogalactosyldiacylglycerol synthases, galvestine-1, was also investigated. The present work further characterizes their effects on the tip-growth and intracellular dynamics of pollen tubes. Two small compounds among 258 were isolated based on their abilities to perturb pollen tube growth. They were found to disrupt in vitro pollen tube growth of tobacco, tomato and Arabidopsis thaliana. We show that these 3 compounds induced abnormal phenotypes (bulging and/or enlarged pollen tubes) and reduced pollen tube length in a dose dependent manner. Pollen germination was significantly reduced after treatment with the two compounds isolated from the screen. They also affected cell wall material deposition in pollen tubes. The compounds decreased anion superoxide accumulation, disorganized actin filaments and RIC4 dynamics suggesting that they may affect vesicular trafficking at the pollen tube tip. These molecules may alter directly or indirectly ROP1 activity, a key regulator of pollen tube growth and vesicular trafficking and therefore represent good tools to further study cellular dynamics during polarized-cell growth.

Pollen grains: !land on! stigma 
pollen tubes: !grow through! female transmitting-tract tissue 
chemical inhibitor: !disrupts! pollen tube growth 
compounds: !reduce! pollen germination 
compounds: !affect! cell wall material deposition 
compounds: !decrease! anion superoxide accumulation 
compounds: !disorganize! actin filaments 
compounds: !alter! RIC4 dynamics 
compounds: !affect! ROP1 activity