High temperatures are known to reduce anthocyanin accumulation in a number of diverse plant species. In potato (Solanum tuberosum L.), high temperature significantly reduces tuber anthocyanin pigment content. However, the mechanism of anthocyanin biosynthesis in potato tuber under heat stress remains unknown. Here we show that high temperature causes reduction of anthocyanin biosynthesis in both potato tuber skin and flesh, with white areas forming between the vasculature and periderm. Heat stress reduced the expression of the R2R3 MYB transcription factors (TFs) StAN1 and StbHLH1, members of the transcriptional complex responsible for coordinated regulation of the skin and flesh pigmentation, as well as anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway genes in white regions. However, the core phenylpropanoid pathway, lignin, and chlorogenic acid (CGA) pathway genes were up-regulated in white areas, suggesting that suppression of the anthocyanin branch may result in re-routing phenylpropanoid flux into the CGA or lignin biosynthesis branches. Two R2R3 MYB TFs, StMYB44-1 and StMYB44-2, were highly expressed in white regions under high temperature. In transient assays, StMYB44 represses anthocyanin accumulation in leaves of Nicotiana tabacum and N. benthamiana by directly suppressing the activity of the dihydroflavonol reductase (DFR) promoter. StMYB44-1 showed stronger repressive capacity than StMYB44-2, with both predicted proteins containing the repression-associated EAR motif with some variation. StMYB44-1 conferred repression without a requirement for a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) partner, suggesting a different repression mechanism from that of reported anthocyanin repressors. We propose that temperature-induced reduction of anthocyanin accumulation in potato flesh is caused by down-regulation of the activating anthocyanin regulatory complex, by enhancing the expression of flesh-specific StMYB44 and alteration of phenylpropanoid flux.

High temperatures: !reduce! anthocyanin accumulation
StAN1/StbHLH1: !down-regulate! anthocyanin biosynthesis
Core phenylpropanoid pathway genes: !up-regulate! in white areas
StMYB44-1/StMYB44-2: !express! in white regions under high temperature
StMYB44: !represses! anthocyanin accumulation
StMYB44-1: !stronger repressive capacity than! StMYB44-2
Temperature: !induces reduction of! anthocyanin accumulation