['31043738', "An important component of cellular biochemistry is the concentration of proteins  and nucleic acids in non-membranous compartments(1,2). These biomolecular  condensates are formed from processes that include liquid-liquid phase  separation. The multivalent interactions necessary for liquid-liquid phase  separation have been extensively studied in vitro(1,3). However, the regulation  of this process in vivo is poorly understood. Here we identify an in vivo  regulator of liquid-liquid phase separation through a genetic screen targeting  factors required for Arabidopsis RNA-binding protein FCA function. FCA contains  prion-like domains that phase-separate in vitro, and exhibits behaviour in vivo  that is consistent with phase separation. The mutant screen identified a  functional requirement for FLL2, a coiled-coil protein, in the formation of FCA  nuclear bodies. FCA reduces transcriptional read-through by promoting proximal  polyadenylation at many sites in the Arabidopsis genome(3,4). FLL2 was required  to promote this proximal polyadenylation, but not the binding of FCA to target  RNA. Ectopic expression of FLL2 increased the size and number of FCA nuclear  bodies. Crosslinking with formaldehyde captured in vivo interactions between  FLL2, FCA and the polymerase and nuclease modules of the RNA 3'-end processing  machinery. These 3' RNA-processing components colocalized with FCA in the nuclear  bodies in vivo, which indicates that FCA nuclear bodies compartmentalize 3'-end  processing factors to enhance polyadenylation at specific sites. Our findings  show that coiled-coil proteins can promote liquid-liquid phase separation, which  expands our understanding of the principles that govern the in vivo dynamics of  liquid-like bodies.", '2019 May', 'Nature', '10.1038/s41586-019-1165-8', 'Dean']

FCA: !promotes! proximal polyadenylation 
FLL2: !required for! FCA nuclear body formation 
FLL2: !interacts with! FCA 
FLL2: !colocalizes with! 3'-end processing machinery 
3'-end processing machinery: !captured in! FCA nuclear bodies