A complete understanding of ionome homeostasis requires a thorough investigation of the dynamics of the nutrient networks in plants. This review focuses on the complexity of interactions occurring between S and other nutrients, and these are addressed at the level of the whole plant, the individual tissues, and the cellular compartments. With regards to macronutrients, S deficiency mainly acts by reducing plant growth, which in turn restricts the root uptake of, for example, N, K, and Mg. Conversely, deficiencies in N, K, or Mg reduce uptake of S. TOR (target of rapamycin) protein kinase, whose involvement in the co-regulation of C/N and S metabolism has recently been unravelled, provides a clue to understanding the links between S and plant growth. In legumes, the original crosstalk between N and S can be found at the level of nodules, which show high requirements for S, and hence specifically express a number of sulfate transporters. With regards to micronutrients, except for Fe, their uptake can be increased under S deficiency through various mechanisms. One of these results from the broad specificity of root sulfate transporters that are up-regulated during S deficiency, which can also take up some molybdate and selenate. A second mechanism is linked to the large accumulation of sulfate in the leaf vacuoles, with its reduced osmotic contribution under S deficiency being compensated for by an increase in Cl uptake and accumulation. A third group of broader mechanisms that can explain at least some of the interactions between S and micronutrients concerns metabolic networks where several nutrients are essential, such as the synthesis of the Mo co-factor needed by some essential enzymes, which requires S, Fe, Zn and Cu for its synthesis, and the synthesis and regulation of Fe-S clusters. Finally, we briefly review recent developments in the modelling of S responses in crops (allocation amongst plant parts and distribution of mineral versus organic forms) in order to provide perspectives on prediction-based approaches that take into account the interactions with other minerals such as N.

S: !affects! Plant growth 
S: !reduces uptake of! N, K, Mg 
N, K, Mg: !reduce uptake of! S 
TOR protein kinase: !involves in co-regulation of! C/N and S metabolism 
Legumes: !express! Sulfate transporters 
S deficiency: !increases uptake of! Micronutrients 
Root sulfate transporters: !up-regulated during! S deficiency 
Leaf vacuoles: !accumulate! Sulfate 
Cl: !takes up! Compensate for osmotic contribution 
Mo co-factor: !synthesized by! Essential enzymes 
Fe-S clusters: !synthesized and regulated by! Nutrients 
Modelling: !predicts! S responses in crops