Ethylene receptor is crucial for PCD and aerenchyma formation in Typha angustifolia leaves. Not only does it receive and deliver the ethylene signal, but it probably can determine the cell fate during aerenchyma morphogenesis, which is due to the receptor expression quantity. Aquatic plant oxygen delivery relies on aerenchyma, which is formed by a programmed cell death (PCD) procedure. However, cells in the outer edge of the aerenchyma (palisade cells and septum cells) remain intact, and the mechanism is unclear. Here, we offer a hypothesis: cells that have a higher content of ethylene receptors do not undergo PCD. In this study, we investigated the leaf aerenchyma of the aquatic plant Typha angustifolia. Ethephon and pyrazinamide (PZA, an inhibitor of ACC oxidase) were used to confirm that ethylene is an essential hormone for PCD of leaf aerenchyma cells in T. angustifolia. That the ethylene receptor was an indispensable factor in this PCD was confirmed by 1-MCP (an inhibitor of the ethylene receptor) treatment. Although PCD can be avoided by blocking the ethylene receptor, excessive ethylene receptors also protect cells from PCD. TaETR1, TaETR2 and TaEIN4 in the T. angustifolia leaf were detected by immunofluorescence (IF) using polyclonal antibodies. The result showed that the content of ethylene receptors in PCD-unsusceptible cells was 4-14 times higher than that one in PCD-susceptible cells, suggesting that PCD-susceptible cells undergo the PCD programme, while PCD-unsusceptible cells do not due to the content difference in the ethylene receptor in different cells. A higher level of ethylene receptor content makes the cells insensitive to ethylene, thereby avoiding cell death and degradation.

ethylene receptor: !receives! ethylene signal 
ethylene receptor: !determines! cell fate 
ethelon: !induces! PCD 
PZA: !inhibits! ACC oxidase 
1-MCP: !inhibits! ethylene receptor 
TaETR1, TaETR2, TaEIN4: !localize to! T. angustifolia leaf 
PCD-unsusceptible cells: !have higher content of! ethylene receptors 
PCD-susceptible cells: !have lower content of! ethylene receptors 
higher level of ethylene receptor content: !makes cells insensitive to! ethylene