AcGST1, an anthocyanin-related GST, may functions as a carrier to transport anthocyanins from ER to tonoplast in kiwifruit. It was positively regulated by AcMYBF110 through directly binding to its promoter. Anthocyanins are synthesized in the cytoplasmic surface of the endoplasmic reticulum but accumulate predominantly in the vacuole. Previous studies in model and ornamental plants have suggested that a member of the glutathione S-transferase (GST) gene family is involved in sequestration of anthocyanins into the vacuole. However, little is known about anthocyanin-related GST protein in kiwifruit. Here, four putative AcGSTs were identified from the genome of the red-fleshed Actinidia chinensis cv 'Hongyang'. Expression analyses reveal only the expression of AcGST1 was highly consistent with anthocyanin accumulation. Molecular complementation of Arabidopsis tt19 demonstrates AcGST1 can complement the anthocyanin-less phenotype of tt19. Transient expression in Actinidia arguta fruits further confirms that AcGST1 is functional in anthocyanin accumulation in kiwifruit. In vitro assays show the recombinant AcGST1 increases the water solubility of cyanidin-3-O-galactoside (C3Gal) and cyanidin-3-O-xylo-galactoside (C3XG). We further show that AcGST1 protein is localized not only in the ER but also on the tonoplast, indicating AcGST1 (like AtTT19) may functions as a carrier protein to transport anthocyanins to the tonoplast in kiwifruit. Moreover, the promoter of AcGST1 can be activated by AcMYBF110, based on results from transient dual-luciferase assays and yeast one-hybrid assays. EMSAs show that AcMYBF110 binds directly to CAGTTG and CCGTTG motifs in the AcGST1 promoter. These results indicate that AcMYBF110 plays an important role in transcriptional regulation of AcGST1 and, therefore, in controlling accumulation of anthocyanins in kiwifruit.

AcGST1: !synthesizes! Anthocyanins 
AcMYBF110: !regulates! AcGST1 
AcGST1: !localizes to! ER & Tonoplast 
AcGST1: !transports! Anthocyanins 
AcMYBF110: !binds to! AcGST1 promoter 
AcMYBF110: !activates! AcGST1 promoter