The tRNA modification at the wobble position of Lys, Glu and Gln (wobbleU* modification) is responsible for the fine-tuning of protein translation efficiency and translation rate. This modification influences organism function in accordance with growth and environmental changes. However, the effects of wobbleU* modification at the cellular, tissue, or individual level have not yet been elucidated. In this study, we show that sulfur modification of wobbleU* of the tRNAs affects leaf development in Arabidopsis thaliana. The sulfur modification was impaired in the two wobbleU*-modification mutants: the URM1-like protein-defective mutant and the Elongator complex-defective mutants. Analyses of the mutant phenotypes revealed that the deficiency in the wobbleU* modification increased the airspaces in the leaves and the leaf size without affecting the number and the area of palisade mesophyll cells. On the other hand, both mutants exhibited increased number of leaf epidermal pavement cells but with reduced cell size. The deficiency in the wobbleU* modification also delayed the initiation of the endoreduplication processes of mesophyll cells. The phenotype of ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2-defective mutant was enhanced in the Elongator-defective mutants, while it was unchanged in the URM1-like protein-defective mutant. Collectively, the findings of this study suggest that the tRNA wobbleU* modification plays an important role in leaf morphogenesis by balancing the development between epidermal and mesophyll tissues.

wobbleU*: !affects! Protein translation efficiency
wobbleU*: !influences! Organism function
wobbleU*: !impairs! URM1-like protein-defective mutant
wobbleU*: !impairs! Elongator complex-defective mutants
wobbleU*: !increases! Airspaces in leaves
wobbleU*: !increases! Leaf size
wobbleU*: !increases! Number of leaf epidermal pavement cells
wobbleU*: !reduces! Cell size
wobbleU*: !delays! Initiation of endoreduplication processes
wobbleU*: !balances! Development between epidermal and mesophyll tissues