Evolutionary transitions from outcrossing to selfing often occur in heterostylous plants. Selfing homostyles originate within distylous populations and frequently evolve to become reproductively isolated species. We investigated this process in 10 species of Primula section Obconicolisteri using phylogenomic approaches and inferred how often homostyly originated from distyly and its consequences for population genetic diversity and floral trait evolution. We estimated phylogenetic relationships and reconstructed character evolution using the whole plastome comprised of 76 protein-coding genes. To investigate mating patterns and genetic diversity we screened 15 microsatellite loci in 40 populations. We compared floral traits among distylous and homostylous populations to determine how phenotypically differentiated homostyles were from their distylous ancestors. Section Obconicolisteri was monophyletic and we estimated multiple independent transitions from distyly to homostyly. High selfing rates characterised homostylous populations and this was associated with reduced genetic diversity. Flower size and pollen production were reduced in homostylous populations, but pollen size was significantly larger in some homostyles than in distylous morphs. Repeated transitions to selfing in section Obconicolisteri are likely to have been fostered by the complex montane environments that species occupy. Unsatisfactory pollinator service is likely to have promoted reproductive assurance in homostyles leading to subsequent population divergence through isolation.

Evolutionary transitions: !occur in! heterostylous plants 
Primula section Obconicolisteri: !investigated using! phylogenomic approaches 
Whole plastome: !comprised of! 76 protein-coding genes 
Microsatellite loci: !screened in! 40 populations 
Distylous populations: !compared to! homostylous populations 
Section Obconicolisteri: !monophyletic and! multiple independent transitions from distyly to homostyly 
High selfing rates: !characterised! homostylous populations 
Flower size: !reduced in! homostylous populations 
Pollen production: !reduced in! homostylous populations 
Pollen size: !larger in! some homostyles than in distylous morphs 
Complex montane environments: !foster! repeated transitions to selfing 
Unsatisfactory pollinator service: !promote! reproductive assurance in homostyles