In plants, DNA methylation (i.e. chromatin modification) is important for various biological processes, including growth, development and flowering. Because 'Fuji' apple trees are alternate bearing and have a long ripening period and poor-quality flower buds, we used bud types with diverse flowering capabilities to investigate the epigenetic regulatory mechanisms influencing flower bud formation. We examined the DNA methylation changes and the transcriptional responses in the selected apple bud types. We observed that in the apple genome, approximately 79.5%, 67.4% and 23.7% of the CG, CHG and CHH sequences are methylated, respectively. For each sequence context, differentially methylated regions exhibited distinct methylation patterns among the analyzed apple bud types. Global methylation and transcriptional analyses revealed that nonexpressed genes or genes expressed at low levels were highly methylated in the gene-body regions, suggesting that gene-body methylation is negatively correlated with gene expression. Moreover, genes with methylated promoters were more highly expressed than genes with unmethylated promoters, implying promoter methylation and gene expression are positively correlated. Additionally, flowering-related genes (e.g. SOC1, AP1 and SPLs) and some transcription factor genes (e.g. GATA, bHLH, bZIP and WOX) were highly expressed in spur buds (highest flowering rate), but were associated with low methylation levels in the gene-body regions. Our findings indicate a potential correlation between DNA methylation and gene expression in apple buds with diverse flowering capabilities, suggesting an epigenetic regulatory mechanism influences apple flower bud formation.

DNA methylation: !affects! biological processes
DNA methylation: !correlated with! gene expression
CG, CHG, CHH sequences: !exhibit! distinct methylation patterns
nonexpressed genes: !highly methylated in! gene-body regions
promoter methylation: !positively correlated with! gene expression
flowering-related genes: !highly expressed in! spur buds
transcription factor genes: !associated with! low methylation levels