In the French Alps, Soldanella alpina (S. alpina) grow under shade and sun conditions during the vegetation period. This species was investigated as a model for the dynamic acclimation of shade leaves to the sun under natural alpine conditions, in terms of photosynthesis and leaf anatomy. Photosynthetic activity in sun leaves was only slightly higher than in shade leaves. The leaf thickness, the stomatal density and the epidermal flavonoid content were markedly higher, and the chlorophyll/flavonoid ratio was significantly lower in sun than in shade leaves. Sun leaves also had a more oxidised plastoquinone pool, their PSII efficiency in light was higher and their non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) capacity was higher than that of shade leaves. Shade-sun transferred leaves increased their leaf thickness, stomatal density and epidermal flavonoid content, while their photosynthetic activity and chlorophyll/flavonoid ratio declined compared to shade leaves. Parameters indicating protection against high light and oxidative stress, such as NPQ and ascorbate peroxidase, increased in shade-sun transferred leaves and leaf mortality increased. We conclude that the dynamic acclimation of S. alpina leaves to high light under alpine conditions mainly concerns anatomical features and epidermal flavonoid acclimation, as well as an increase in antioxidative protection. However, this increase is not large enough to prevent damage under stress conditions and to replace damaged leaves.

Photosynthesis: !higher in! Sun leaves 
Stomatal density: !higher in! Sun leaves 
Epidermal flavonoid content: !higher in! Sun leaves 
Chlorophyll/flavonoid ratio: !lower in! Sun leaves 
Plastoquinone pool: !more oxidised in! Sun leaves 
PSII efficiency: !higher in! Sun leaves 
NPQ capacity: !higher in! Sun leaves 
Leaf thickness: !increased in! Shade-sun transferred leaves 
Stomatal density: !increased in! Shade-sun transferred leaves 
Epidermal flavonoid content: !increased in! Shade-sun transferred leaves 
Photosynthetic activity: !declined in! Shade-sun transferred leaves 
Chlorophyll/flavonoid ratio: !declined in! Shade-sun transferred leaves 
NPQ: !increased in! Shade-sun transferred leaves 
Ascorbate peroxidase: !increased in! Shade-sun transferred leaves 
Leaf mortality: !increased in! Shade-sun transferred leaves