OsHAK16 mediates K uptake and root-to-shoot translocation in a broad range of external K concentrations, thereby contributing to the maintenance of K homeostasis and salt tolerance in the rice shoot. The HAK/KUP/KT transporters have been widely associated with potassium (K) transport across membranes in both microbes and plants. Here, we report the physiological function of OsHAK16, a member belonging to the HAK/KUP/KT family in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Transcriptional expression of OsHAK16 was up-regulated by K deficiency or salt stress. OsHAK16 is localized at the plasma membrane. OsHAK16 knockout (KO) dramatically reduced root K net uptake rate and growth at both 0.1 mM and 1 mM K supplies, while OsHAK16 overexpression (OX) increased total K uptake and growth only at 0.1 mM K level. OsHAK16-KO decreased the rate of rubidium (Rb) uptake and translocation compared to WT at both 0.2 mM and 1 mM Rb levels. OsHAK16 disruption decreased while its overexpression increased K concentration in root slightly but in shoot remarkably. The relative distribution of total K between shoot and root decreased by 30% in OsHAK16-KO lines and increased by 30% in its OX lines compared to WT. OsHAK16-KO diminished K uptake and K/Na ratio, while OsHAK16-OX improved K uptake and translocation from root to shoot, resulting in increased sensitivity and tolerance to salt stress, respectively. Expression of OsHAK16 enhanced the growth of high salt-sensitive yeast mutant by increasing its K but no Na content. Taking all these together, we conclude that OsHAK16 plays crucial roles in maintaining K homeostasis and salt tolerance in rice shoot.

OsHAK16: !mediates! K uptake 
OsHAK16: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
OsHAK16: !up-regulated by! K deficiency or salt stress 
OsHAK16: !knockout! reduces root K net uptake rate and growth 
OsHAK16: !overexpression! increases total K uptake and growth 
OsHAK16: !disruption! decreases Rb uptake and translocation 
OsHAK16: !disruption! decreases K concentration in shoot 
OsHAK16: !overexpression! increases K concentration in shoot 
OsHAK16: !disruption! decreases K/Na ratio 
OsHAK16: !overexpression! increases K uptake and translocation 
OsHAK16: !enhances! growth of high salt-sensitive yeast mutant