Banana (Musa spp.) is one of the world's most important fruits and its production is largely limited by diverse stress conditions. SROs (SIMILAR TO RCD-ONE) have important functions in abiotic stress resistance and development of plants. They contain a catalytic core of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) domain and a C-terminal RST (RCD-SRO-TAF4) domain. In addition, partial SROs also include an N-terminal WWE domain. Although a few of SROs have been characterized in some model plants, little is known about their functions in banana, especially in response to biotic stress. Six MaSRO genes in banana genome were identified using the PARP and RST models as a query. Phylogenetic analysis showed that 77 SROs from 15 species were divided into two structurally distinct groups. The SROs in the group I possessed three central regions of the WWE, PARP and RST domains. The WWE domain was lacking in the group II SROs. In the selected monocots, only MaSROs of banana were present in the group II. Most of MaSROs expressed in more than one banana tissue. The stress- and hormone-related cis-regulatory elements (CREs) in the promoter regions of MaSROs supported differential transcripts of MaSROs in banana roots treated with abiotic and biotic stresses. Moreover, expression profiles of MaSROs in the group I were clearly distinct with those observed in the group II after hormone treatment. Notably, the expression of MaSRO4 was significantly upregulated by the multiple stresses and hormones. The MaSRO4 protein could directly interact with MaNAC6 and MaMYB4, and the PARP domain was required for the protein-protein interaction. Six MaSROs in banana genome were divided into two main groups based on the characteristics of conserved domains. Comprehensive expression analysis indicated that MaSROs had positive responses to biotic and abiotic stresses via a complex interaction network with hormones. MaSRO4 could interact directly with MaNAC6 and MaMYB4 through the PARP domain to regulate downstream signaling pathway.

MaSRO: !divided into! two main groups
MaSRO: !expressed in! multiple banana tissues
MaSRO: !upregulated by! multiple stresses and hormones
MaSRO4: !interacts with! MaNAC6
MaSRO4: !interacts with! MaMYB4
MaSRO4: !requires! PARP domain for interaction