['31123051', 'Energy homeostasis is vital to all living organisms. In eukaryotes, this process  is controlled by fuel gauging protein kinases: AMP-activated kinase in mammals,  Sucrose Non-Fermenting1 (SNF1) in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), and  SNF1-related kinase1 (SnRK1) in plants. These kinases are highly conserved in  structure and function and (according to this paradigm) operate as heterotrimeric  complexes of catalytic-alpha and regulatory beta- and gamma-subunits, responding to low  cellular nucleotide charge. Here, we determined that the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) SnRK1 catalytic alpha-subunit has regulatory subunit-independent activity,  which is consistent with default activation (and thus controlled repression), a  strategy more generally used by plants. Low energy stress (caused by darkness,  inhibited photosynthesis, or hypoxia) also triggers SnRK1alpha nuclear translocation,  thereby controlling induced but not repressed target gene expression to replenish  cellular energy for plant survival. The myristoylated and membrane-associated  regulatory beta-subunits restrict nuclear localization and inhibit target gene  induction. Transgenic plants with forced SnRK1alpha-subunit localization consistently  were affected in metabolic stress responses, but their analysis also revealed key  roles for nuclear SnRK1 in leaf and root growth and development. Our findings  suggest that plants have modified the ancient, highly conserved eukaryotic energy  sensor to better fit their unique lifestyle and to more effectively cope with  changing environmental conditions.', '2019 Jul', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.18.00500', 'ORCID:']

AMP-activated kinase: !controls! Energy homeostasis 
Sucrose Non-Fermenting1 (SNF1): !controls! Energy homeostasis 
SNF1-related kinase1 (SnRK1): !controls! Energy homeostasis 
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) SnRK1 catalytic alpha-subunit: !has! Regulatory subunit-independent activity 
Low energy stress: !triggers! SnRK1alpha nuclear translocation 
Myristoylated and membrane-associated regulatory beta-subunits: !restrict! Nuclear localization 
Transgenic plants: !affected in! Metabolic stress responses 
Nuclear SnRK1: !controls! Leaf and root growth and development