The accumulation of secondary metabolites and the regulation of tissue acidity contribute to the important traits of grape berry and influence plant performance in response to abiotic and biotic factors. In several plant species a highly conserved MYB-bHLH-WD (MBW) transcriptional regulatory complex controls flavonoid pigment synthesis and transport, and vacuolar acidification in epidermal cells. An additional component, represented by a WRKY-type transcription factor, physically interacts with the complex increasing the expression of some target genes and adding specificity for other targets. Here we investigated the function of MBW(W) complexes involving two MYBs (VvMYB5a and VvMYB5b) and the WRKY factor VvWRKY26 in grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.). Using transgenic grapevine plants we showed that these complexes affected different aspects of morphology, plant development, pH regulation, and pigment accumulation. Transcriptomic analysis identified a core set of putative target genes controlled by VvMYB5a, VvMYB5b, and VvWRKY26 in different tissues. Our data indicated that VvWRKY26 enhances the expression of selected target genes induced by VvMYB5a/b. Among these targets are genes involved in vacuolar hyper-acidification, such as the P-type ATPases VvPH5 and VvPH1, and trafficking, and genes involved in the biosynthesis of flavonoids. In addition, VvWRKY26 is recruited specifically by VvMYB5a, reflecting the functional diversification of VvMYB5a and VvMYB5b. The expression of MBWW complexes in vegetative organs, such as leaves, indicates a possible function of vacuolar hyper-acidification in the repulsion of herbivores and/or in developmental processes, as shown by defects in transgenic grape plants where the complex is inactivated.

VvMYB5a: !enhances! VvWRKY26
VvMYB5b: !enhances! VvWRKY26
VvWRKY26: !enhances! expression of target genes
VvWRKY26: !interacts with! MBW complex
VvMYB5a/b: !controls! flavonoid pigment synthesis and transport
VvMYB5a/b: !regulates! vacuolar acidification
VvMYB5a/b: !affects! plant development
VvMYB5a/b: !represses! herbivores