Compared with its parents, Brassica hexaploid underwent significant AS changes, which may provide diversified gene expression regulation patterns and could enhance its adaptability during evolution Polyploidization is considered a significant evolution force that promotes species formation. Alternative splicing (AS) plays a crucial role in multiple biological processes during plant growth and development. To explore the effects of allopolyploidization on the AS patterns of genes, a genome-wide AS analysis was performed by RNA-seq in Brassica hexaploid and its parents. In total, we found 7913 (27540 AS events), 14447 (70179 AS events), and 13205 (60804 AS events) AS genes in Brassica rapa, Brassica carinata, and Brassica hexaploid, respectively. A total of 920 new AS genes were discovered in Brassica hexaploid. There were 56 differently spliced genes between Brassica hexaploid and its parents. In addition, most of the alternative 5' splice sites were located 4 bp upstream of the dominant 5' splice sites, and most of the alternative 3' splice sites were located 3 bp downstream of the dominant 3' splice sites in Brassica hexapliod, which was similar to B. carinata. Furthermore, we cloned and sequenced all amplicons from the RT-PCR products of GRP7/8, namely, Bol045859, Bol016025 and Bol02880. The three genes were found to produce AS transcripts in a new way. The AS patterns of genes were diverse between Brassica hexaploid and its parents, including the loss and gain of AS events. Allopolyploidization changed alternative splicing sites of pre-mRNAs in Brassica hexaploid, which brought about alterations in the sequences of transcripts. Our study provided novel insights into the AS patterns of genes in allopolyploid plants, which may provide a reference for the study of polyploidy adaptability.

Brassica hexaploid: !underwent! AS changes
Polyploidization: !promotes! species formation
AS: !plays a crucial role in! biological processes
RNA-seq: !found! AS genes
Brassica hexaploid: !discovered! new AS genes
GRP7/8: !produced! AS transcripts
Allopolyploidization: !changed! AS sites of pre-mRNAs
AS patterns: !diverse between! Brassica hexaploid and its parents