Karrikins stimulate Arabidopsis thaliana germination, whereas parasitic weeds of the Orobanchaceae family have evolved to respond to host-exuded compounds such as strigolactones, dehydrocostus lactone, and 2-phenylethyl isothiocyanate. In Phelipanche ramosa, strigolactone-induced germination was shown to require one of the CYP707A proteins involved in abscisic acid catabolism. Here, germination and gene expression were analysed to investigate the role of CYP707As in germination of both parasitic plants and Arabidopsis upon perception of germination stimulants, after using pharmacological inhibitors and Arabidopsis mutants disrupting germination signals. CYP707A genes were up-regulated upon treatment with effective germination stimulants in both parasitic plants and Arabidopsis. Obligate parasitic plants exhibited both intensified up-regulation of CYP707A genes and increased sensitivity to the CYP707A inhibitor abscinazole-E2B, whereas Arabidopsis cyp707a mutants still positively responded to germination stimulation. In Arabidopsis, CYP707A regulation required the canonical karrikin signalling pathway KAI2/MAX2/SMAX1 and the transcription factor WRKY33. Finally, CYP707As and WRKY33 also modulated Arabidopsis root architecture in response to the synthetic strigolactone rac-GR24, and wrky33-1 exhibited a shoot hyperbranched phenotype. This study suggests that the lack of host-independent germination in obligate parasites is associated with an exacerbated CYP707A induction and that CYP707As and WRKY33 are new players involved in a variety of strigolactone/karrikin responses.

Karrikins: !stimulate! Arabidopsis thaliana germination
Strigolactones: !induce! CYP707A proteins
CYP707A genes: !up-regulate! upon germination stimulants
Obligate parasites: !exhibit intensified up-regulation of! CYP707A genes
KAI2/MAX2/SMAX1: !regulate! CYP707A in Arabidopsis
WRKY33: !regulates! CYP707A in Arabidopsis
CYP707As: !modulate! Arabidopsis root architecture
WRKY33: !modulates! Arabidopsis shoot hyperbranched phenotype