Required genetic resources for the improvement of agronomic, nutritional and economic value of rice bean are available in the world collection. International cooperative effort is required to utilize and conserve them. Rice bean [Vigna umbellata (Thunb.) Ohwi and Ohashi], a lesser known pulse among the Asiatic Vigna, has long been considered as a food security crop of small and marginal farmers of Southeast Asia. Considered as a nutritionally rich food and fodder, it is also a source of genes for biotic and abiotic stress tolerance including drought, soil acidity and storage pest. Although it spread from its centre of domestication in the Indo-China region to other parts around the world, it never became an important crop anywhere probably because of agronomic disadvantages. Crop improvement for determinate nature, good yield, less variable seed colour, pleasant organoleptic properties and lower antinutrients is required. Scanning of scientific literature indicates that genetic resources with desirable agronomic and nutritional traits exist within the current collection but are spread across countries. Genomic studies in the species indicate that except for insect resistance and aluminium toxicity tolerance, not much attention has been paid to decipher and utilize other stress tolerance and nutritional quality traits. Collaborative efforts towards improving farming, food, trade value and off-farm conservation of rice bean would not only help marginal farmers but will also help to preserve the yet to be explored genomic resources available in this sturdy pulse.

Vigna umbellata: !has! Nutritional & Fodder Value 
Vigna umbellata: !is a source of! Genes for Stress Tolerance 
Vigna umbellata: !requires! Crop Improvement 
Genetic Resources: !exist in! World Collection 
Genetic Resources: !require! International Cooperation 
Genomic Studies: !indicate! Insect Resistance & Aluminium Toxicity Tolerance 
Collaborative Efforts: !improve! Farming, Food, Trade Value & Conservation