The fungus Phakopsora pachyrhizi (Pp) causes Asian soybean rust (SBR) disease which provokes tremendous losses in global soybean production. Pp is mainly controlled with synthetic fungicides to which the fungus swiftly develops fungicide resistance. To substitute or complement synthetic fungicides in Asian soybean rust control, we aimed to identify antifungal metabolites in Arabidopsis which is not a host for Pp. Comparative transcriptional and metabolic profiling of the Pp-inoculated Arabidopsis non-host and the soybean host revealed induction of phenylpropanoid metabolism-associated genes in both species but activation of scopoletin biosynthesis only in the resistant non-host. Scopoletin is a coumarin and an antioxidant. In vitro experiments disclosed fungistatic activity of scopoletin against Pp, associated with reduced accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in fungal pre-infection structures. Non-antioxidant and antioxidant molecules including coumarins with a similar structure to scopoletin were inactive or much less effective at inhibiting fungal accumulation of ROS and germination of Pp spores. When sprayed onto Arabidopsis leaves, scopoletin also suppressed the formation of Pp pre-infection structures and penetration of the plant. However, scopoletin neither directly activated defence nor did it prime Arabidopsis for enhanced defence, therefore emphasizing fungistatic activity as the exclusive mode of action of scopoletin against Pp. Because scopletin also protected soybean from Pp infection, the coumarin may serve as a natural fungicide or as a lead for the development of near-to-nature fungicides against Asian soybean rust.

Pp: !causes! Asian soybean rust
Arabidopsis: !not a host for! Pp
Pp-inoculated Arabidopsis: !induces! phenylpropanoid metabolism-associated genes
Pp-inoculated Arabidopsis: !activates! scopoletin biosynthesis
Scopoletin: !exhibits fungistatic activity against! Pp
Scopoletin: !reduces accumulation of! ROS in fungal pre-infection structures
Scopoletin: !sprayed onto leaves suppresses! formation of Pp pre-infection structures
Scopoletin: !protects! soybean from Pp infection