Genome-wide identification, classification, expression analyses, and functional characterization of GRAS genes in oil crop, Brassica napus, indicate their importance in root development and stress response. GRAS proteins are a plant-specific transcription factor gene family involved in tissues development and stress response. We classified 87 putative GRAS genes in the Brassica napus genome (BnGRASs) into 13 subfamilies by phylogenetic analysis. The C-terminal GRAS domains of Brassica napus (B. napus) proteins were less conserved among subfamilies, but were conserved within each subfamily. A series of analyses revealed that 89.7% of the BnGRASs did not have intron insertions, and 24 specific-motifs were found at the N-terminal. A highly conserved microRNA 171 (miRNA171) target was observed specifically in the HAM subfamily across land plants. A total of 868 pairs of interaction proteins were predicted, the primary of which were transcription factors involved in transcriptional regulation and signal transduction. Integrated comparative analysis of GRAS genes across 26 species of algae, mosses, ferns, gymnosperms, and angiosperms revealed that this gene family originated in early mosses and was classified into 19 subfamilies, 14 of which may have originated prior to bryophyte evolution. RNA-Seq analysis demonstrated that most BnGRASs were widely expressed in different tissues/organs at different stages in B. napus, and 24 BnGRASs were highly/specifically expressed in roots. Results from a qRT-PCR analysis suggested that two BnGRASs belonging to SCR and LISCL subfamilies potentially have important roles in the stress response of roots.

GRAS proteins: !affect! root development and stress response
GRAS proteins: !classified into! 13 subfamilies
BnGRASs: !have! 24 specific-motifs at N-terminal
miRNA171: !targets! HAM subfamily
Interaction proteins: !predicted for! BnGRASs
GRAS genes: !originated in! early mosses
GRAS genes: !classified into! 19 subfamilies
BnGRASs: !expressed in! different tissues/organs
qRT-PCR analysis: !suggests! two BnGRASs have important roles in stress response