The 5-leaf-stage rape seedlings were more insensitive to Pi starvation than that of the 3-leaf-stage plants, which may be attributed to the higher expression levels of ethylene signaling and sugar-metabolism genes in more mature seedlings. Traditional suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) and RNA-Seq usually screen out thousands of differentially expressed genes. However, identification of the most important regulators has not been performed to date. Here, we employed two methods, namely, a two-round SSH and two-factor transcriptome analysis derived from the two-factor ANOVA that is commonly used in the statistics, to identify development-associated inorganic phosphate (Pi) starvation-induced genes in Brassica napus. Several of these genes are related to ethylene signaling (such as EIN3, ACO3, ACS8, ERF1A, and ERF2) or sugar metabolism (such as ACC2, GH3, LHCB1.4, XTH4, and SUS2). Although sucrose and ethylene may counteract each other at the biosynthetic level, they may also work synergistically on Pi-starvation-induced gene expression (such as PT1, PT2, RNS1, ACP5, AT4, and IPS1) and root acid phosphatase activation. Furthermore, three new transcription factors that are responsive to Pi starvation were identified: the zinc-finger MYND domain-containing protein 15 (MYND), a Magonashi family protein (MAGO), and a B-box zinc-finger family salt-tolerance protein. This study indicates that the two methods are highly efficient for functional gene screening in non-model organisms.

EIN3: !enhances! ethylene signaling
ACO3: !enhances! ethylene signaling
ACS8: !enhances! ethylene signaling
ERF1A: !enhances! ethylene signaling
ERF2: !enhances! ethylene signaling
ACC2: !enhances! sugar metabolism
GH3: !enhances! sugar metabolism
LHCB1.4: !enhances! sugar metabolism
XTH4: !enhances! sugar metabolism
SUS2: !enhances! sugar metabolism
PT1: !enhances! Pi-starvation-induced gene expression
PT2: !enhances! Pi-starvation-induced gene expression
RNS1: !enhances! Pi-starvation-induced gene expression
ACP5: !enhances! Pi-starvation-induced gene expression
AT4: !enhances! Pi-starvation-induced gene expression
IPS1: !enhances! Pi-starvation-induced gene expression
MYND: !enhances! transcription factor responsive to Pi starvation
MAGO: !enhances! transcription factor responsive to Pi starvation
B-box zinc-finger family salt-tolerance protein: !