['31170927', 'BACKGROUND: Plant chloroplasts and mitochondria utilize nuclear encoded proteins  to replicate their DNA. These proteins are purposely built for replication in the  organelle environment and are distinct from those involved in replication of the  nuclear genome. These organelle-localized proteins have ancestral roots in  bacterial and bacteriophage genes, supporting the endosymbiotic theory of their  origin. We examined the interactions between three of these proteins from  Arabidopsis thaliana: a DNA helicase-primase similar to bacteriophage T7 gp4  protein and animal mitochondrial Twinkle, and two DNA polymerases, Pol1A and  Pol1B. We used a three-pronged approach to analyze the interactions, including  Yeast-two-hybrid analysis, Direct Coupling Analysis (DCA), and thermophoresis.  RESULTS: Yeast-two-hybrid analysis reveals residues 120-295 of Twinkle as the  minimal region that can still interact with Pol1A or Pol1B. This region is a part  of the primase domain of the protein and slightly overlaps the zinc-finger and  RNA polymerase subdomains located within. Additionally, we observed that  Arabidopsis Twinkle interacts much more strongly with Pol1A versus Pol1B.  Thermophoresis also confirms that the primase domain of Twinkle has higher  binding affinity than any other region of the protein. Direct-Coupling-Analysis  identified specific residues in Twinkle and the DNA polymerases critical to  positive interaction between the two proteins. CONCLUSIONS: The interaction of  Twinkle with Pol1A or Pol1B mimics the minimal DNA replisomes of T7 phage and  those present in mammalian mitochondria. However, while T7 and mammals absolutely  require their homolog of Twinkle DNA helicase-primase, Arabidopsis Twinkle  mutants are seemingly unaffected by this loss. This implies that while  Arabidopsis mitochondria mimic minimal replisomes from T7 and mammalian  mitochondria, there is an extra level of redundancy specific to loss of Twinkle  function.', '2019 Jun 6', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-019-1854-3', 'ORCID:']

Twinkle: !interacts with! Pol1A 
Twinkle: !interacts with! Pol1B 
Twinkle: !enhances! DNA replication 
Twinkle: !localizes to! Arabidopsis thaliana 
Twinkle: !represses! Twinkle mutants