ZF-HD is a family of genes that play an important role in plant growth, development, some studies have found that after overexpression AtZHD1 in Arabidopsis thaliana, florescence advance, the seeds get bigger and the life span of seeds is prolonged, moreover, ZF-HD genes are also participate in responding to adversity stress. The whole genome of the ZF-HD gene family has been studied in several model plants, such as Arabidopsis thaliana and rice. However, there has been little research on the ZF-HD genes in Tartary buckwheat (Fagopyrum tataricum), which is an important edible and medicinal crop. The recently published whole genome sequence of Tartary buckwheat allows us to study the tissue and expression profiles of the ZF-HD gene family in Tartary buckwheat on a genome-wide basis. In this study, the whole genome and expression profile of the ZF-HD gene family were analyzed for the first time in Tartary buckwheat. We identified 20 FtZF-HD genes and divided them into MIF and ZHD subfamilies according to phylogeny. The ZHD genes were divided into 5 subfamilies. Twenty FtZF-HD genes were distributed on 7 chromosomes, and almost all the genes had no introns. We detected seven pairs of chromosomes with fragment repeats, but no tandem repeats were detected. In different tissues and at different fruit development stages, the FtZF-HD genes obtained by a real-time quantitative PCR analysis showed obvious expression patterns. In this study, 20 FtZF-HD genes were identified in Tartary buckwheat, and the structures, evolution and expression patterns of the proteins were studied. Our findings provide a valuable basis for further analysis of the biological function of the ZF-HD gene family. Our study also laid a foundation for the improvement of Tartary buckwheat crops.

ZF-HD: !plays role in! plant growth
ZF-HD: !overexpression of! AtZHD1
ZF-HD: !participates in! responding to adversity stress
ZF-HD: !identified in! Tartary buckwheat
ZF-HD: !divided into! MIF and ZHD subfamilies
ZF-HD: !distributed on! 7 chromosomes
ZF-HD: !showed expression patterns in! different tissues
ZF-HD: !provides basis for! further analysis