Several classes of transcription factors are involved in the activation of defensins. A new type of the transcription factor responsible for the regulation of wheat grain specific defensins was characterised in this work. HD-Zip class IV transcription factors constitute a family of multidomain proteins. A full-length cDNA of HD-Zip IV, designated TaGL7 was isolated from the developing grain of bread wheat, using a specific DNA sequence as bait in the Y1H screen. 3D models of TaGL7 HD complexed with DNA cis-elements rationalised differences that underlined accommodations of binding and non-binding DNA, while the START-like domain model predicted binding of lipidic molecules inside a concave hydrophobic cavity. The 3'-untranslated region of TaGL7 was used as a probe to isolate the genomic clone of TdGL7 from a BAC library prepared from durum wheat. The spatial and temporal activity of the TdGL7 promoter was tested in transgenic wheat, barley and rice. TdGL7 was expressed mostly in ovary at fertilisation and its promoter was active in a liquid endosperm during cellularisation and later in the endosperm transfer cells, aleurone, and starchy endosperm. The pattern of TdGL7 expression resembled that of genes that encode grain-specific lipid transfer proteins, particularly defensins. In addition, GL7 expression was upregulated by mechanical wounding, similarly to defensin genes. Co-bombardment of cultured wheat cells with TdGL7 driven by constitutive promoter and seven grain or root specific defensin promoters fused to GUS gene, revealed activation of four promoters. The data confirmed the previously proposed role of HD-Zip IV transcription factors in the regulation of genes that encode lipid transfer proteins involved in lipid transport and defence. The TdGL7 promoter could be used to engineer cereal grains with enhanced resistance to insects and fungal infections.

TaGL7: !regulates! wheat grain specific defensins
HD-Zip IV: !constitutes! family of multidomain proteins
TdGL7: !expressed in! ovary at fertilisation
TdGL7 promoter: !active in! liquid endosperm
TdGL7: !upregulated by! mechanical wounding
HD-Zip IV: !regulates! genes encoding lipid transfer proteins
TdGL7 promoter: !used to engineer! cereal grains with enhanced resistance