Reaumuria trigyna (Reaumuria Linn genus, family Tamaricaceae), an endangered dicotyledonous shrub with the features of a recretohalophyte, is endemic to the Eastern Alxa-Western Ordos area of China. Based on R. trigyna transcriptome data and expression pattern analysis of RtWRKYs, RtWRKY23, a Group II WRKY transcription factor, was isolated from R. trigyna cDNA. RtWRKY23 was mainly expressed in the stem and was induced by salt, drought, cold, ultraviolet radiation, and ABA treatments, but suppressed by heat treatment. Overexpression of RtWRKY23 in Arabidopsis increased chlorophyll content, root length, and fresh weight of the transgenic lines under salt stress. Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis and yeast one-hybrid analysis demonstrated that RtWRKY23 protein directly or indirectly modulated the expression levels of downstream genes, including stress-related genes AtPOD, AtPOD22, AtPOD23, AtP5CS1, AtP5CS2, and AtPRODH2, and reproductive development-related genes AtMAF5, AtHAT1, and AtANT. RtWRKY23 transgenic Arabidopsis had higher proline content, peroxidase activity, and superoxide anion clearance rate, and lower H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and malondialdehyde content than WT plants under salt stress conditions. Moreover, RtWRKY23 transgenic Arabidopsis exhibited later flowering and shorter pods, but little change in seed yield, compared with WT plants under salt stress. Our study demonstrated that RtWRKY23 not only enhanced salt stress tolerance through maintaining the ROS and osmotic balances in plants, but also participated in the regulation of flowering under salt stress.

RtWRKY23: !enhances! salt stress tolerance 
RtWRKY23: !induces! chlorophyll content, root length, and fresh weight 
RtWRKY23: !modulates! expression of downstream genes 
RtWRKY23: !increases! proline content, peroxidase activity, and superoxide anion clearance rate 
RtWRKY23: !decreases! H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and malondialdehyde content 
RtWRKY23: !delays! flowering 
RtWRKY23: !shortens! pods