Three- and four-dimensional imaging techniques are a prerequisite for spatially resolving the form-structure-function relationships in plants. However, choosing the right imaging method is a difficult and time-consuming process as the imaging principles, advantages and limitations, as well as the appropriate fields of application first need to be compared. The present study aims to provide an overview of three imaging methods that allow for imaging opaque, large and thick (>5 mm, up to several centimeters), hierarchically organized plant samples that can have complex geometries. We compare light microscopy of serial thin sections followed by 3D reconstruction (LMTS3D) as an optical imaging technique, micro-computed tomography (µ-CT) based on ionizing radiation, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which uses the natural magnetic properties of a sample for image acquisition. We discuss the most important imaging principles, advantages, and limitations, and suggest fields of application for each imaging technique (LMTS, µ-CT, and MRI) with regard to static (at a given time; 3D) and dynamic (at different time points; quasi 4D) structural and functional plant imaging.

Light microscopy: !allows for imaging! opaque, large and thick plant samples
Micro-computed tomography: !uses! ionizing radiation
Magnetic resonance imaging: !uses! natural magnetic properties of a sample
LMTS3D: !compares! light microscopy of serial thin sections
µ-CT: !compares! micro-computed tomography
MRI: !compares! magnetic resonance imaging
LMTS3D: !provides overview of! three imaging methods
µ-CT: !provides overview of! three imaging methods
MRI: !provides overview of! three imaging methods
LMTS3D: !discusses! advantages and limitations
µ-CT: !discusses! advantages and limitations
MRI: !discusses! advantages and limitations
LMTS3D: !suggests fields of application! for static 3D imaging
µ-CT: !suggests fields of application! for dynamic quasi 4D imaging
MRI: !suggests fields of application! for dynamic quasi 4D imaging