Asian citrus psyllid (ACP) is the primary vector responsible for the transmission of the phloem-limited bacteria Candidatus Liberibacter spp., associated with huanglongbing (HLB), which causes great loss to the citrus industry. Although the roles of leaf color and volatile compounds in the orientation of ACP have been proven, the quantification of color and allelochemicals in the host plant are kept unclear, especially in wild citrus germplasms. Chongyi wild mandarin significantly attracted more ACP than wild Hong Kong kumquat, 'Gannan zao' navel orange and orange jasmine did in the four-choice and olfactometer assays. The color parameters of the tender leaves from Chongyi wild mandarin and 'Gannan zao' were similar. The yellow color in both of them was less saturated than that of the other two plants species, but Chongyi wild mandarin had significant lower carotenoid content (P < 0.05). Notably metabolic profiling differences were observed among the healthy tender shoots from the four tested plants via UPLC-QQQ-MS and GC-MS analyses. Comparing with the other three plant species, 66 and 50 metabolites with significantly different contents in Chongyi wild mandarin were selected as UPLC-identified and GC-identified metabolites of interest (P < 0.05), respectively. Flavonoids accounted for a large group of secondary metabolites of interest, which may function as stimulants or repellents of ACP. Higher content of salicylic acid o-hexoside and lower content of (+)-jasmonic acid in Chongyi wild mandarin may lead to higher amount of methyl salicylate (an ACP attractant) and lower amount of trans-ocimene (an attractant to herbivores' natural enemies) as well as the suppression of JA-mediated wounding response. This kind of synergistic or antagonistic effect among the metabolites differentially accumulated in Chongyi wild mandarin made it a more attractive host plant to ACP. Less saturated yellow color, high amount of attractants, low amount of repellents and insensitivity of JA-mediated wounding response are the four possible reasons why Chongyi wild mandarin attracted more ACP. This work may shed light on the olfactory and visual response of ACP to wild citrus germplasm hosts, and suggest the feasibility of developing ACP attractants or repellents patterned on potential metabolites.

Chongyi wild mandarin: !attracts! ACP 
color parameters: !similar in! Chongyi wild mandarin and 'Gannan zao' 
carotenoid content: !lower in! Chongyi wild mandarin 
UPLC-QQQ-MS and GC-MS analyses: !reveal metabolic profiling differences among! four tested plants 
flavonoids: !function as stimulants or repellents of! ACP 
salicylic acid o-hexoside: !higher content in! Chongyi wild mandarin 
(+)-jasmonic acid: !lower content in! Chongyi wild mandarin 
methyl salicylate: !higher amount of in! Chongyi wild mandarin 
trans-ocimene: !lower amount of in! Chongyi wild mandarin 
JA-mediated wounding response: !suppressed in! Chongyi wild mandarin