Sesame is an important oil crop due to its high oil, antioxidant, and protein content. Drought stress is a major abiotic stress that affects sesame production as well as the quality of sesame seed. To reveal the adaptive mechanism of sesame in response to water deficient conditions, transcriptomic and metabolomics were applied in drought-tolerant (DT) and drought-susceptible (DS) sesame genotypes. Transcriptomic analysis reveals a set of core drought-responsive genes (684 up-regulated and 1346 down-regulated) in sesame that was robustly differently expressed in both genotypes. Most enriched drought-responsive genes are mainly involved in protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, plant hormone signal transduction photosynthesis, lipid metabolism, and amino acid metabolism. Drought-susceptible genotype was more disturbed by drought stress at both transcriptional and metabolic levels, since more drought-responsive genes/metabolites were identified in DS. Drought-responsive genes associated with stress response, amino acid metabolism, and reactive oxygen species scavenging were more enriched or activated in DT. According to the partial least-squares discriminate analysis, the most important metabolites which were accumulated under drought stress in both genotypes includes ABA, amino acids, and organic acids. Especially, higher levels of ABA, proline, arginine, lysine, aromatic and branched chain amino acids, GABA, saccharopine, 2-aminoadipate, and allantoin were found in DT under stress condition. Combination of transcriptomic and metabolomic analysis highlights the important role of amino acid metabolism (especially saccharopine pathway) and ABA metabolism and signaling pathway for drought tolerance in sesame. The results of the present study provide valuable information for better understanding the molecular mechanism underlying drought tolerance of sesame, and also provide useful clues for the genetic improvement of drought tolerance in sesame.

Gene: !affects! Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum
Gene: !affects! Plant hormone signal transduction
Gene: !affects! Photosynthesis
Gene: !affects! Lipid metabolism
Gene: !affects! Amino acid metabolism
Gene: !enhances! Drought tolerance
Gene: !enhances! Stress response
Gene: !enhances! Reactive oxygen species scavenging
Gene: !synthesizes! ABA
Gene: !synthesizes! Proline
Gene: !synthesizes! Arginine
Gene: !synthesizes! Lysine
Gene: !synthesizes! GABA
Gene: !synthesizes! Saccharopine
Gene: !synthesizes! 2-aminoadipate
Gene: !synthesizes! Allantoin