Understanding the genetic architecture of grain size is a prerequisite to manipulating grain development and improving the potential crop yield. In this study, we conducted a whole genome-wide quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping of grain-size-related traits by constructing a high-density genetic map using 109 recombinant inbred lines of einkorn wheat. We explored the candidate genes underlying QTLs through homologous analysis and RNA sequencing. The high-density genetic map spanned 1873 cM and contained 9937 single nucleotide polymorphism markers assigned to 1551 bins on seven chromosomes. Strong collinearity and high genome coverage of this map were revealed by comparison with physical maps of wheat and barley. Six grain size-related traits were surveyed in five environments. In total, 42 QTLs were identified; these were assigned to 17 genomic regions on six chromosomes and accounted for 52.3-66.7% of the phenotypic variation. Thirty homologous genes involved in grain development were located in 12 regions. RNA sequencing identified 4959 genes differentially expressed between the two parental lines. Twenty differentially expressed genes involved in grain size development and starch biosynthesis were mapped to nine regions that contained 26 QTLs, indicating that the starch biosynthesis pathway plays a vital role in grain development in einkorn wheat. This study provides new insights into the genetic architecture of grain size in einkorn wheat; identification of the underlying genes enables understanding of grain development and wheat genetic improvement. Furthermore, the map facilitates quantitative trait mapping, map-based cloning, genome assembly, and comparative genomics in wheat taxa.

QTL: !maps to! genomic regions
QTL: !accounts for! phenotypic variation
Homologous genes: !located in! 12 regions
Differentially expressed genes: !mapped to! 9 regions
Starch biosynthesis pathway: !plays a vital role in! grain development
High-density genetic map: !spans! 1873 cM