Bioethanol from lignocellulosic biomass is a promising step for the future energy requirements. Grass is a potential lignocellulosic biomass which can be utilised for biorefinery-based bioethanol production. Grass biomass is a suitable feedstock for bioethanol production due to its all the year around production, requirement of less fertile land and noninterference with food system. However, the processes involved, i.e. pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation for bioethanol production from grass biomass, are both time consuming and costly. Developing the grass biomass in planta for enhanced bioethanol production is a promising step for maximum utilisation of this valuable feedstock and, thus, is the focus of the present review. Modern breeding techniques and transgenic processes are attractive methods which can be utilised for development of the feedstock. However, the outcomes are not always predictable and the time period required for obtaining a robust variety is generation dependent. Sophisticated genome editing technologies such as synthetic genetic circuits (SGC) or clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) systems are advantageous for induction of desired traits/heritable mutations in a foreseeable genome location in the 1st mutant generation. Although, its application in grass biomass for bioethanol is limited, these sophisticated techniques are anticipated to exhibit more flexibility in engineering the expression pattern for qualitative and qualitative traits. Nevertheless, the fundamentals rendered by the genetics of the transgenic crops will remain the basis of such developments for obtaining biorefinery-based bioethanol concepts from grass biomass. Grasses which are abundant and widespread in nature epitomise attractive lignocellulosic feedstocks for bioethanol production. The complexity offered by the grass cell wall in terms of lignin recalcitrance and its binding to polysaccharides forms a barricade for its commercialization as a biofuel feedstock. Inspired by the possibilities for rewiring the genetic makeup of grass biomass for reduced lignin and lignin-polysaccharide linkages along with increase in carbohydrates, innovative approaches for in planta modifications are forging ahead. In this review, we highlight the progress made in the field of transgenic grasses for bioethanol production and focus our understanding on improvements of simple breeding techniques and post-harvest techniques for development in shortening of lignin-carbohydrate and carbohydrate-carbohydrate linkages. Further, we discuss about the designer lignins which are aimed for qualitable lignins and also emphasise on remodelling of polysaccharides and mixed-linkage glucans for enhancing carbohydrate content and in planta saccharification efficiency. As a final point, we discuss the role of synthetic genetic circuits and CRISPR systems in targeted improvement of cell wall components without compromising the plant growth and health. It is anticipated that this review can provide a rational approach towards a better understanding of application of in planta genetic engineering aspects for designing synthetic genetic circuits which can promote grass feedstocks for biorefinery-based bioethanol concepts.

Modern breeding techniques: !enhance! Grass biomass
Transgenic processes: !improve! Bioethanol production
Synthetic genetic circuits: !promote! In planta modifications
CRISPR systems: !target! Cell wall components