NAC (NAM, ATAF and CUC) transcriptional factors constitute a large family with more than 150 members in rice and several members of this family have been demonstrated to play crucial roles in rice abiotic stress response. In the present study, we report the function of a novel stress-responsive NAC gene, ONAC066, in rice drought and oxidative stress tolerance. ONAC066 was localized in nuclei of cells when transiently expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana and is a transcription activator with the binding ability to NAC recognition sequence (NACRS) and AtJUB1 binding site (JBS). Expression of ONAC066 was significantly induced by PEG, NaCl, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and abscisic acid (ABA). Overexpression of ONAC066 in transgenic rice improved drought and oxidative stress tolerance and increased ABA sensitivity, accompanied with decreased rate of water loss, increased contents of proline and soluble sugars, decreased accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and upregulated expression of stress-related genes under drought stress condition. By contrast, RNAi-mediated suppression of ONAC066 attenuated drought and oxidative stress tolerance and decreased ABA sensitivity, accompanied with increased rate of water loss, decreased contents of proline and soluble sugars, elevated accumulation of ROS and downregulated expression of stress-related genes under drought stress condition. Furthermore, yeast one hybrid and chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR analyses revealed that ONAC066 bound directly to a JBS-like cis-elements in OsDREB2A promoter and activated the transcription of OsDREB2A. ONAC066 is a nucleus-localized transcription activator that can respond to multiple abiotic stress factors. Functional analyses using overexpression and RNAi-mediated suppression transgenic lines demonstrate that ONAC066 is a positive regulator of drought and oxidative stress tolerance in rice.

ONAC066: !localizes to! nuclei 
ONAC066: !binds to! NACRS 
ONAC066: !binds to! JBS 
ONAC066: !responds to! PEG 
ONAC066: !responds to! NaCl 
ONAC066: !responds to! H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> 
ONAC066: !responds to! ABA 
ONAC066: !enhances! drought tolerance 
ONAC066: !enhances! oxidative stress tolerance 
ONAC066: !enhances! ABA sensitivity 
ONAC066: !represses! water loss 
ONAC066: !enhances! proline content 
ONAC066: !enhances! soluble sugar content 
ONAC066: !represses! ROS accumulation 
ONAC066: !enhances! expression of stress-related genes 
ONAC066: !binds to! OsDREB2A promoter 
ONAC066: !activates! transcription of Os