Aspartic protease (AP) is one of four large proteolytic enzyme families that are involved in plant growth and development. Little is known about the AP gene family in tree species, although it has been characterized in Arabidopsis, rice and grape. The AP genes that are involved in tree wood formation remain to be determined. A total of 67 AP genes were identified in Populus trichocarpa (PtAP) and classified into three categories (A, B and C). Chromosome mapping analysis revealed that two-thirds of the PtAP genes were located in genome duplication blocks, indicating the expansion of the AP family by segmental duplications in Populus. The microarray data from the Populus eFP browser demonstrated that PtAP genes had diversified tissue expression patterns. Semi-qRT-PCR analysis further determined that more than 10 PtAPs were highly or preferentially expressed in the developing xylem. When the involvement of the PtAPs in wood formation became the focus, many SCW-related cis-elements were found in the promoters of these PtAPs. Based on PtAP<sub>promoter</sub>::GUS techniques, the activities of PtAP66 promoters were observed only in fiber cells, not in the vessels of stems as the xylem and leaf veins developed in the transgenic Populus tree, and strong GUS signals were detected in interfascicular fiber cells, roots, anthers and sepals of PtAP17<sub>promoter</sub>::GUS transgenic plants. Intensive GUS activities in various secondary tissues implied that PtAP66 and PtAP17 could function in wood formation. In addition, most of the PtAP proteins were predicted to contain N- and (or) O-glycosylation sites, and the integration of PNGase F digestion and western blotting revealed that the PtAP17 and PtAP66 proteins were N-glycosylated in Populus. Comprehensive characterization of the PtAP genes suggests their functional diversity during Populus growth and development. Our findings provide an overall understanding of the AP gene family in trees and establish a better foundation to further describe the roles of PtAPs in wood formation.

AP: !involved in! plant growth and development
PtAP: !expanded by! segmental duplications
PtAP: !diversified in! tissue expression patterns
PtAP: !highly expressed in! developing xylem
PtAP: !contain! SCW-related cis-elements
PtAP66: !observed in! fiber cells
PtAP17: !strongly expressed in! interfascicular fiber cells, roots, anthers and sepals
PtAP: !function in! wood formation
PtAP: !predicted to contain! N- and (or) O-glycosylation sites
PtAP17/66: !N-glycosylated in! Populus