miRNAs are major regulators of gene expression and have proven their role in understanding the genetic regulation of biosynthetic pathways. Stevioside and rebaudioside-A, the two most abundant and sweetest compounds found in leaf extract of Stevia rebaudiana, have been used for many years in treatment of diabetes. It has been found that the crude extract is more potent than the purified extract. Stevioside, being accumulated in higher concentration, imparts licorice like aftertaste. Thus, in order to make the sweetener more potent and palatable, there is a need to increase the intrinsic concentration of steviol glycosides and to alter the ratio of rebaudioside-A to stevioside. Doing so would significantly increase the quality of the sweeteners, and the potential to be used on a wider scale. To do so, in previous report, miRNAs associated with genes of steviol glycosides biosynthetic pathway were identified in S. rebaudiana. In continuation to that in this study, the two miRNAs (miR319g and miRStv_11) targeting key genes of steviol glycosides biosynthetic pathway were modulated and their impact was evaluated on steviol glycosides contents. The over-expression results showed that miRStv_11 induced, while miR319g had repressive action on its target genes. The knock-down constructs for miR319g and miRStv_11 were then prepared and it was demonstrated that the expression of anti-miR319g produced inhibitory effect on its target miRNA, resulting in enhanced expression of its target genes. On the other hand, anti-miRStv_11 resulted in down-regulation of miRStv_11 and its target gene. Further miRStv_11 and anti-miR319gwere co-expressed which resulted in significant increase in stevioside (24.5%) and rebaudioside-A (51%) contents. In conclusion, the role of miR319g and miRStv_11 was successfully validated in steviol gycosides biosynthetic pathway gene regulation and their effect on steviol gycosides contents. In this study, we found the positively correlated miRNA-mRNA interaction network in plants, where miRStv_11 enhanced the expression of KAH gene. miRNAs knock-down was also successfully achieved using antisense precursors. Overall, this study thus reveals more complex nature and fundamental importance of miRNAs in biosynthetic pathway related gene networks and hence, these miRNAs can be successfully employed to enhance the ratio of rebaudioside-A to stevioside, thus enhancing the sweetening indices of this plant and making it more palatable.

miR319g: !represses! target gene 
miRStv_11: !enhances! KAH gene 
anti-miR319g: !inhibits! miRNA 
anti-miRStv_11: !down-regulates! miRNA 
co-expression of anti-miR319g and miRStv_11: !increases! stevioside and rebaudioside-A contents