['31245687', 'Anthocyanins provide ideal visual markers for the identification of mutations  that disrupt molecular responses to abiotic stress. We screened Arabidopsis  mutants of ABC (ATP-Binding Cassette) and MATE (Multidrug And Toxic compound  Extrusion) transporter genes under nutritional stress and identified four genes  (ABCG25,ABCG9,ABCG5, and MATE45) required for normal anthocyanin pigmentation.  ABCG25 was previously demonstrated to encode a vascular-localized cellular  exporter of abscisic acid (ABA). Our results show that MATE45 encodes an aerial  meristem- and a vascular-localized transporter associated with the trans-Golgi,  and that it plays an important role in controlling the levels and distribution of  ABA in growing aerial meristems and non-meristematic tissues. MATE45 promoter-GUS  reporter fusions revealed the activity localized to the leaf and influorescence  meristems and the vasculature. Loss-of-function mate45 mutants exhibited  accelerated rates of aerial organ initiation suggesting at least partial  functional conservation with the maize ortholog bige1. The aba2-1 mutant, which  is deficient in ABA biosynthesis, exhibited a number of phenotypes that were  rescued in the mate45-1 aba2-1 double mutant. mate45 exhibited enhanced the seed  dormancy, and germination was hypersensitive to ABA. Enhanced frequency of leaf  primordia growth in mate45 seedlings grown in nutrient imbalance stress was  ABA-dependent. The ABA signaling reporter construct pRD29B::GUS revealed elevated  levels of ABA signaling in the true leaf primordia of mate45 seedlings grown  under nutritional stress, and gradually reduced signaling in surrounding  cotyledon and hypocotyl tissues concomitant with reduced expressions of ABCG25.  Our results suggest a role of MATE45 in reducing meristematic ABA and in  maintaining ABA distribution in adjacent non-meristematic tissues.', '2018 Oct', 'Plant Direct', '10.1002/pld3.87', 'Grotewold']

ABCG25: !encodes! ABA exporter 
MATE45: !encodes! aerial meristem- and vascular-localized transporter 
mate45: !interacts with! aba2-1 
mate45: !enhances! seed dormancy 
mate45: !represses! leaf primordia growth 
pRD29B::GUS: !reveals! elevated ABA signaling