Sugarcane is a major crop producing about 80% of sugar globally. Increasing sugar content is a top priority for sugarcane breeding programs worldwide, however, the progress is extremely slow. Owing to its commercial significance, the physiology of sucrose accumulation has been studied extensively but it did not lead to any significant practical outcomes. Recent molecular studies are beginning to recognize genes and gene networks associated with this phenomenon. To further advance our molecular understanding of sucrose accumulation, we altered sucrose content of sugarcane genotypes with inherently large variation for sucrose accumulation using a sugarcane ripener, ethylene, and studied their transcriptomes to identify genes associated with the phenomenon. Sucrose content variation in the experimental genotypes was substantial, with the top-performing clone producing almost 60% more sucrose than the poorest performer. Ethylene treatment increased stem sucrose content but that occurred only in low-sugar genotype. Transcriptomic analyses have identified about 160,000 unigenes of which 86,000 annotated genes were classified into functional groups associated with carbohydrate metabolism, signaling, localization, transport, hydrolysis, growth, catalytic activity, membrane and storage, suggesting the structural and functional specification, including sucrose accumulation, occurring in maturing internodes. About 25,000 genes were differentially expressed between all genotypes and treatments combined. Genotype had a dominant effect on differential gene expression than ethylene treatment. Sucrose and starch metabolism genes were more responsive to ethylene treatment in low-sugar genotype. Ethylene caused differential gene expression of many stress-related transcription factors, carbohydrate metabolism, hormone metabolism and epigenetic modification. Ethylene-induced expression of ethylene-responsive transcription factors, cytosolic acid- and cell wall-bound invertases, and ATPase was more pronounced in low- than in high-sugar genotype, suggesting an ethylene-stimulated sink activity and consequent increased sucrose accumulation in low-sugar genotype. Ethylene-induced sucrose accumulation is more pronounced in low-sugar sugarcane genotype, and this is possibly achieved by the preferential activation of genes such as invertases that increase sink strength in the stem. The relatively high enrichment of differentially expressed genes associated with hormone metabolism and signaling and stress suggests a strong hormonal regulation of source-sink activity, growth and sucrose accumulation in sugarcane.

ethylene: !increases! sucrose content 
genotype: !dominates! differential gene expression 
ethylene: !stimulates! sink activity 
invertases: !increase! sink strength 
hormone metabolism: !regulates! source-sink activity 
stress: !regulates! growth and sucrose accumulation