Sand oat (Avena strigosa Schreb.), one of the four cultivated species of the genus Avena, could be considered as another alternative crop. In gene banks 865 germplasm samples of this species have been preserved that have not been thoroughly investigated so far. The results of phenotyping (36 traits), isoenzymatic (12 systems) and genetic (8 pairs of Sequence-related amplified polymorphism markers) variation were used to obtain the complete description of 56 accessions diversity originated from different parts of world. Breeded and weedy forms represented similar pool of morphological traits that indicated a short-term and extensive breeding process, albeit all accessions which we classified as cultivated were characterized by better grain and green mass parameters compared to the weedy ones. Isoenzymes showed relationships with geographical origin, which was not possible to detect by SRAP markers. There was no similarity between morphological and biochemical results. The polymorphism level of SRAP markers was lower than indicated by the available literature data for other species, however it may result from the analysis of pooled samples of accessions with a high internal variability. The extensive type of breeding and its relatively short duration was also reflected in the population structure results. Joint analysis revealed that a secondary centre of diversity is being created in South America and that it has its genealogy from the Iberian Peninsula. Despite the relatively large representation of this species is in various gene banks, it is highly probable that the vast majority of stored worldwide accessions are duplicates, and the protected gene pool is relatively narrow. Sand oat meets all the requirements for an alternative crop species, but further studies are needed to identify the genotypes/populations with the most favourable distribution of utility and quality parameters.

Avena strigosa: !has! 865 germplasm samples 
Phenotyping/isoenzymatic/genetic variation: !used to! obtain description of 56 accessions 
Breeded/weedy forms: !represented! similar pool of morphological traits 
Cultivated accessions: !characterized by! better grain and green mass parameters 
Isoenzymes: !showed relationships with! geographical origin 
Morphological/biochemical results: !no similarity between! 
SRAP markers: !lower polymorphism level than! indicated by literature 
Population structure: !reflected! extensive type of breeding 
Secondary centre of diversity: !created in! South America 
Gene pool: !relatively narrow!