Here we describe that the regulation of MdWRKY31 on MdHIR4 in transcription and translation levels associated with disease in apple. The phytohormone salicylic acid (SA) is a main factor in apple (Malus domestica) production due to its function in disease resistance. WRKY transcription factors play a vital role in response to stress. An RNA-seq analysis was conducted with 'Royal Gala' seedlings treated with SA to identify the WRKY regulatory mechanism of disease resistance in apple. The analysis indicated that MdWRKY31 was induced. A quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis demonstrated that the expression of MdWRKY31 was induced by SA and flg22. Ectopic expression of MdWRKY31 in Arabidopsis and Nicotiana benthamiana increased the resistance to flg22 and Pseudomonas syringae tomato (Pst DC3000). A yeast two-hybrid screen was conducted to further analyze the function of MdWRKY31. As a result, hypersensitive-induced reaction (HIR) protein MdHIR4 interacted with MdWRKY31. Biomolecular fluorescence complementation, yeast two-hybrid, and pull-down assays demonstrated the interaction. In our previous study, MdHIR4 conferred decreased resistance to Botryosphaeria dothidea (B. dothidea). A viral vector-based transformation assay indicated that MdWRKY31 evaluated the transcription of SA-related genes, including MdPR1, MdPR5, and MdNPR1 in an MdHIR4-dependent way. A GUS analysis demonstrated that the w-box, particularly w-box2, of the MdHIR4 promoter played a major role in the responses to SA and B. dothidea. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays, yeast one-hybrid assay, and chromatin immunoprecipitation-qPCR demonstrated that MdWRKY31 directly bound to the w-box2 motif in the MdHIR4 promoter. GUS staining activity and a protein intensity analysis further showed that MdWRKY31 repressed MdHIR4 expression. Taken together, our findings reveal that MdWRKY31 regulated plant resistance to B. dothidea through the SA signaling pathway by interacting with MdHIR4.

MdWRKY31: !induces! MdHIR4
MdWRKY31: !interacts with! MdHIR4
MdWRKY31: !binds to! w-box2 motif
MdWRKY31: !represses! MdHIR4
MdWRKY31: !evaluates transcription of! SA-related genes