Identification of the structural changes and cell wall-related genes likely involved in cell wall extension, cellular water balance and cell wall biosynthesis on embryonic axes during germination of soybean seeds. Cell wall is a highly organized and dynamic structure that provides mechanical support for the cell. During seed germination, the cell wall is critical for cell growth and seedling establishment. Although seed germination has been widely studied in several species, key aspects regarding the regulation of cell wall dynamics in germinating embryonic axes remain obscure. Here, we characterize the gene expression patterns of cell wall pathways and investigate their impact on the cell wall dynamics of embryonic axes of germinating soybean seeds. We found 2143 genes involved in cell wall biosynthesis and assembly in the soybean genome. Key cell wall genes were highly expressed at specific germination stages, such as expansins, UDP-Glc epimerases, GT family, cellulose synthases, peroxidases, arabinogalactans, and xyloglucans-related genes. Further, we found that embryonic axes grow through modulation of these specific cell wall genes with no increment in biomass. Cell wall structural analysis revealed a defined pattern of cell expansion and an increase in cellulose content during germination. In addition, we found a clear correlation between these structural changes and expression patterns of cell wall genes during germination. Taken together, our results provide a better understanding of the complex transcriptional regulation of cell wall genes that drive embryonic axes growth and expansion during soybean germination.

expansins: !enhances! Cell wall expansion
UDP-Glc epimerases: !enhances! Cell wall expansion
GT family: !enhances! Cell wall expansion
cellulose synthases: !enhances! Cell wall expansion
peroxidases: !enhances! Cell wall expansion
arabinogalactans: !enhances! Cell wall expansion
xyloglucans-related genes: !enhances! Cell wall expansion
cell wall genes: !modulates! Embryonic axes growth
cell wall structural changes: !correlates with! Expression patterns of cell wall genes