Rhizosheath comprises soil that adheres firmly to roots. In this study, two ecotypes of switchgrass with different rhizosheath sizes after drought stress were analyzed which showed metabolic differences under drought conditions. The rhizosheath comprises soil that adheres firmly to roots by a combination of root hairs and mucilage and may aid in root growth under soil drying. The aim of this work is to reveal the potential metabolites involved in rhizosheath formation under drought stress conditions. Panicum virgatum L. (switchgrass), which belongs to the Poaceae family, is an important biofuel and fodder crop in drought areas. Five switchgrass ecotypes (cv. Alamo, cv. Blackwake, cv. Summer, cv. Cave-in-Rock and cv. Kanlow) have a broad range of rhizosheath weight under drought conditions. For two selected ecotypes with contrast rhizosheath weight (cv. Alamo and cv. Kanlow), root hair length and density, lateral root number, root morphological parameters were measured, and real-time qRT-PCR was performed. Gas chromatography mass spectrophotometry (GC-MS) was used to determine the primary metabolites in the shoots and roots of selected ecotypes under drought stress conditions. The change trends of root hair length and density, lateral root number and related gene expression were consistent with rhizosheath weight in Alamo and Kanlow under drought and watered conditions. For root morphological parameters, Alamo grew deeper than Kanlow, while Kanlow exhibited higher values for other parameters. In this study, the levels of amino acids, sugars and organic acids were significantly changed in response to drought stress in two switchgrass ecotypes. Several metabolites including amino acids (arginine, isoleucine, methionine and cysteine) and sugars (kestose, raffinose, fructose, fucose, sorbose and xylose) in the large soil-sheathed roots of Alamo and Kanlow were significantly increased compared to small or no soil-sheathed roots of Alamo and Kanlow. Difference in rhizosheath size is reflected in the plant internal metabolites under drought stress conditions. Additionally, our results highlight the importance of using metabolite profiling and provide a better understanding of rhizosheath formation at the cellular level.

root hair: !adheres to! soil 
ecotype: !differs in! rhizosheath weight 
drought stress: !affects! root hair length/density 
drought stress: !affects! lateral root number 
drought stress: !affects! root morphological parameters 
drought stress: !affects! gene expression 
drought stress: !affects! primary metabolites 
Alamo: !exhibits! larger rhizosheath 
Kanlow: !exhibits! smaller rhizosheath 
Alamo: !grows deeper than! Kanlow 
Kanlow: !exhibits higher values for! other parameters 
amino acids: !increase in! large soil-sheathed roots 
sugars: !increase in! large soil-sheathed roots 
metabolites: !reflect! difference in rhizosheath size