Deeper insights into the resistance response of Cajanus platycarpus were obtained based on comparative transcriptomics under Helicoverpa armigera infestation. Devastation by pod borer, Helicoverpa armigera is one of the major factors for stagnated productivity in Pigeonpea. Despite possessing a multitude of desirable traits including pod borer resistance, wild relatives of Cajanus spp. have remained under-utilized due to linkage drag and cross-incompatibility. Discovery and deployment of genes from them can provide means to tackle key pests like H. armigera. Transcriptomic differences between Cajanus platycarpus and Cajanus cajan during different time points (0, 18, 38, 96 h) of pod borer infestation were elucidated in this study. For the first ever time, we demonstrated captivating variations in their response; C. platycarpus apparently being reasonably agile with effectual transcriptomic reprogramming to deter the insect. Deeper insights into the differential response were obtained by identification of significant GO-terms related to herbivory followed by combined KEGG and ontology analyses. C. platycarpus portrayed a multilevel response with cardinal involvement of SAR, redox homeostasis and reconfiguration of primary metabolites leading to a comprehensive defense response. The credibility of RNA-seq analyses was ascertained by transient expression of selected putative insect resistance genes from C. platycarpus viz., chitinase (CHI4), Alpha-amylase/subtilisin inhibitor (IAAS) and Flavonoid 3_5 hydroxylase (C75A1) in Nicotiana benthamiana followed by efficacy analysis against H. armigera. qPCR validated results of the study provided innovative insights and useful leads for development of durable pod borer resistance.

Helicoverpa armigera: !infests! Cajanus platycarpus 
Cajanus platycarpus: !responds to! Helicoverpa armigera 
SAR: !triggers! Cajanus platycarpus 
Redox homeostasis: !activates! Cajanus platycarpus 
Primary metabolites: !modulates! Cajanus platycarpus 
CHI4: !expresses! Nicotiana benthamiana 
IAAS: !expresses! Nicotiana benthamiana 
C75A1: !expresses! Nicotiana benthamiana 
Nicotiana benthamiana: !evaluates! Helicoverpa armigera