Control of K+ and Na+ transport plays a central role in plant adaptation to salinity. In the halophyte Hordeum maritimum, we have characterized a transporter gene, named HmHKT2;1, whose homolog HvHKT2;1 in cultivated barley, Hordeum vulgare, was known to give rise to increased salt tolerance when overexpressed. The encoded protein is strictly identical in two H. maritimum ecotypes, from two biotopes (Tunisian sebkhas) affected by different levels of salinity. These two ecotypes were found to display distinctive responses to salt stress in terms of biomass production, Na+ contents, K+ contents and K+ absorption efficiency. Electrophysiological analysis of HmHKT2;1 in Xenopus oocytes revealed distinctive properties when compared with HvHKT2;1 and other transporters from the same group, especially a much higher affinity for both Na+ and K+, and an Na+-K+ symporter behavior in a very broad range of Na+ and K+ concentrations, due to reduced K+ blockage of the transport pathway. Domain swapping experiments identified the region including the fifth transmembrane segment and the adjacent extracellular loop as playing a major role in the determination of the affinity for Na+ and the level of K+ blockage in these HKT2;1 transporters. The analysis (quantitative reverse transcription-PCR; qRT-PCR) of HmHKT2;1 expression in the two ecotypes submitted to saline conditions revealed that the levels of HmHKT2;1 transcripts were maintained constant in the most salt-tolerant ecotype whereas they decreased in the less tolerant one. Both the unique functional properties of HmHKT2;1 and the regulation of the expression of the encoding gene could contribute to H. maritimum adaptation to salinity.

HmHKT2;1: !encodes! protein 
HvHKT2;1: !overexpressed! increased salt tolerance 
HmHKT2;1: !revealed! distinctive properties 
fifth transmembrane segment and adjacent extracellular loop: !determines! affinity for Na+ and level of K+ blockage 
HmHKT2;1 expression: !maintained constant! in most salt-tolerant ecotype 
HmHKT2;1 expression: !decreased! in less tolerant ecotype