Exogenous 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) positively regulates plants chlorophyll synthesis and protects them against environmental stresses, although the protection mechanism is not fully clear. Here, we explored the effects of ALA on chlorophyll synthesis in tomato plants, which are sensitive to low temperature. We also examined the roles of the glutathione S-transferase (GSTU43) gene, which is involved in ALA-induced tolerance to oxidation stress and regulation of chlorophyll synthesis under low temperature. Exogenous ALA alleviated low temperature caused chlorophyll synthesis obstacle of uroporphyrinogen III (UROIII) conversion to protoporphyrin IX (Proto IX), and enhanced the production of chlorophyll and its precursors, including endogenous ALA, Proto IX, Mg-protoporphyrin IX (Mg-proto IX), and protochlorophyll (Pchl), under low temperature in tomato leaves. However, ALA did not regulate chlorophyll synthesis at the level of transcription. Notably, ALA up-regulated the GSTU43 gene and protein expression and increased GST activity. Silencing of GSTU43 with virus-induced gene silencing reduced the activities of GST, superoxide dismutase, catalase, ascorbate peroxidase, and glutathione reductase, and increased the membrane lipid peroxidation; while fed with ALA significant increased all these antioxidase activities and antioxidant contents, and alleviated the membrane damage. ALA triggered GST activity encoded by GSTU43, and increased tomato tolerance to low temperature-induced oxidative stress, perhaps with the assistance of ascorbate- and/or a glutathione-regenerating cycles, and actively regulated the plant redox homeostasis. This latter effect reduced the degree of membrane lipid peroxidation, which was essential for the coordinated synthesis of chlorophyll.

ALA: !positively regulates! chlorophyll synthesis
GSTU43 gene: !involved in! ALA-induced tolerance to oxidation stress
ALA: !alleviates! UROIII conversion to Proto IX
ALA: !enhances! production of chlorophyll precursors
ALA: !up-regulates! GSTU43 gene and protein expression
GSTU43: !increases! GST activity
ALA: !triggers! GST activity
ALA: !increases! tomato tolerance to low temperature-induced oxidative stress
ALA: !reduces! degree of membrane lipid peroxidation