The wild tomato relative Solanum sitiens is a xerophyte endemic to the Atacama Desert of Chile and a potential source of genes for tolerance to drought, salinity and low-temperature stresses. However, until recently, strong breeding barriers prevented its hybridization and introgression with cultivated tomato, Solanum lycopersicum L. We overcame these barriers using embryo rescue, bridging lines and allopolyploid hybrids, and synthesized a library of introgression lines (ILs) that captures the genome of S. sitiens in the background of cultivated tomato. The IL library consists of 56 overlapping introgressions that together represent about 93% of the S. sitiens genome: 65% in homozygous and 28% in heterozygous (segregating) ILs. The breakpoints of each segment and the gaps in genome coverage were mapped by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping using the SolCAP SNP array. Marker-assisted selection was used to backcross selected introgressions into tomato, to recover a uniform genetic background, to isolate recombinant sub-lines with shorter introgressions and to select homozygous genotypes. Each IL contains a single S. sitiens chromosome segment, defined by markers, in the genetic background of cv. NC 84173, a fresh market inbred line. Large differences were observed between the lines for both qualitative and quantitative morphological traits, suggesting that the ILs contain highly divergent allelic variation. Several loci contributing to unilateral incompatibility or hybrid necrosis were mapped with the lines. This IL population will facilitate studies of the S. sitiens genome and expands the range of genetic variation available for tomato breeding and research.

S. sitiens: !bridged with! S. lycopersicum
S. sitiens: !captured in! IL library
SNP genotyping: !mapped! breakpoints
Marker-assisted selection: !used to! backcross introgressions
ILs: !contain! single S. sitiens chromosome segment
ILs: !show! large differences for morphological traits
ILs: !facilitate! studies of S. sitiens genome