To efficiently protect and exploit germplasm resources for marker development and breeding purposes, we must accurately depict the features of the tea populations. This study focuses on the Camellia sinensis (C. sinensis) population and aims to (i) identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the genome level, (ii) investigate the genetic diversity and population structure, and (iii) characterize the linkage disequilibrium (LD) pattern to facilitate next genome-wide association mapping and marker-assisted selection. We collected 415 tea accessions from the Origin Center and analyzed the genetic diversity, population structure and LD pattern using the genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) approach. A total of 79,016 high-quality SNPs were identified; the polymorphism information content (PIC) and genetic diversity (GD) based on these SNPs showed a higher level of genetic diversity in cultivated type than in wild type. The 415 accessions were clustered into three groups by STRUCTURE software and confirmed using principal component analyses (PCA)-wild type, cultivated type, and admixed wild type. However, unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean (UPGMA) trees indicated the accessions should be grouped into more clusters. Further analyses identified four groups, the Pure Wild Type, Admixed Wild Type, ancient landraces and modern landraces using STRUCTURE, and the results were confirmed by PCA and UPGMA tree method. A higher level of genetic diversity was detected in ancient landraces and Admixed Wild Type than that in the Pure Wild Type and modern landraces. The highest differentiation was between the Pure Wild Type and modern landraces. A relatively fast LD decay with a short range (kb) was observed, and the LD decays of four inferred populations were different. This study is, to our knowledge, the first population genetic analysis of tea germplasm from the Origin Center, Guizhou Plateau, using GBS. The LD pattern, population structure and genetic differentiation of the tea population revealed by our study will benefit further genetic studies, germplasm protection, and breeding.

C. sinensis: !has! higher genetic diversity 
cultivated type: !has more! genetic diversity 
STRUCTURE software: !clustered! 415 accessions 
PCA: !confirmed! clustering 
UPGMA tree method: !grouped! into four clusters 
Pure Wild Type: !has less! genetic diversity 
modern landraces: !has least! genetic diversity 
LD decay: !has! short range (kb) 
four inferred populations: !have different! LD decays