The HEUKCHEEM gene plays an important role in spine color formation. A white spine occurs due to two mutations in HEUKCHEEM and is closely related to the regional distribution of these mutants. Mapping analysis revealed that the HEUKCHEEM gene is co-segregated with the B locus in the regulation of black spine color development in cucumber fruit. HEUKCHEEM induced the expression of the genes involved in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway, leading to the accumulation of anthocyanins in black spines. The transiently over-expressed HEUKCHEEM in cucumber and tobacco plants enhanced the expression of anthocyanin biosynthesis-related genes, leading to anthocyanin accumulation. However, two mutations-insertion of the 6994 bp mutator-like transposable element (MULE) sequence into the second intron and one single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of C to T in the second exon of HEUKCHEEM-were identified in white spines, leading to no accumulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis-related gene transcripts and anthocyanins. Furthermore, association analysis using 104 cucumber accessions with different geographical origins revealed that the types of mutations in HEUKCHEEM are strongly linked to geographical origins. The MULE insertion is found extensively in cucumbers with white spines in East Asia and Australia. However, cucumbers with white spines in other areas could be significantly influenced by a single SNP mutation. Our results provide fundamental information on spine color development in cucumber fruits and spine color-based cucumber breeding programs.

HEUKCHEEM: !affects! Spine color formation
HEUKCHEEM: !co-segregates with! B locus
HEUKCHEEM: !induces! Anthocyanin biosynthesis-related genes
HEUKCHEEM: !enhances! Expression of anthocyanin biosynthesis-related genes
MULE sequence: !inserted into! Second intron of HEUKCHEEM
SNP mutation: !occurs in! Second exon of HEUKCHEEM
MULE insertion: !linked to! White spines in East Asia and Australia
SNP mutation: !linked to! White spines in other areas