97 ZmPP2Cs were clustered into 10 subfamilies with biased subfamily evolution and lineage-specific expansion. Segmental duplication after the divergence of maize and sorghum might have led to primary expansion of ZmPP2Cs. The protein phosphatase 2C (PP2C) enzymes control many stress responses and developmental processes in plants. In Zea mays, a comprehensive understanding of the evolution and expansion of the PP2C family is still lacking. In the current study, 97 ZmPP2Cs were identified and clustered into 10 subfamilies. Through the analysis of the PP2C family in monocots, the ZmPP2C subfamilies displayed biased subfamily molecular evolution and lineage-specific expansion, as evidenced by their differing numbers of member genes, expansion and evolutionary rates, conserved subdomains, chromosomal distributions, expression levels, responsive-regulatory elements and regulatory networks. Moreover, while segmental duplication events have caused the primary expansion of the ZmPP2Cs, the majority of their diversification occurred following the additional whole-genome duplication that took place after the divergence of maize and sorghum (Sorghum bicolor). After this event, the PP2C subfamilies showed asymmetric evolutionary rates, with the D, F<sub>2</sub> and H subfamily likely the most closely to resemble its ancestral subfamily's genes. These findings could provide novel insights into the molecular evolution and expansion of the PP2C family in maize, and lay the foundation for the functional analysis of these enzymes in maize and related monocots.

Segmental duplication: !led to! primary expansion of ZmPP2Cs
Whole-genome duplication: !caused! diversification of ZmPP2Cs
ZmPP2Cs: !control! stress responses and developmental processes in plants
ZmPP2Cs: !clustered into! 10 subfamilies
Subfamily evolution: !biased by! number of member genes, expansion and evolutionary rates, conserved subdomains, chromosomal distributions, expression levels, responsive-regulatory elements and regulatory networks
Subfamily F<sub>2</sub>: !most closely resembles! ancestral subfamily's genes