Rice yield is influenced by inflorescence size and architecture, and inflorescences from domesticated rice accessions produce more branches and grains. Neither the molecular control of branching nor the developmental differences between wild and domesticated rice accessions are fully understood. We surveyed phenotypes related to branching, size, and grain yield across 91 wild and domesticated African and Asian accessions. Characteristics related to axillary meristem identity were the main phenotypic differences between inflorescences from wild and domesticated accessions. We used whole transcriptome sequencing in developing inflorescences to measure gene expression before and after the transition from branching axillary meristems to determinate spikelet meristems. We identified a core set of genes associated with axillary meristem identity in Asian and African rice, and another set associated with phenotypic variability between wild and domesticated accessions. AP2/EREBP-like genes were enriched in both sets, suggesting that they are key factors in inflorescence branching and rice domestication. Our work has identified new candidates in the molecular control of inflorescence development and grain yield, and provides a detailed description of the effects of domestication on phenotype and gene expression.

Rice yield: !influenced by! inflorescence size and architecture 
Inflorescences: !produce more branches and grains! domesticated rice accessions 
Axillary meristem identity: !main phenotypic differences between! wild and domesticated accessions 
Whole transcriptome sequencing: !measured gene expression before and after! transition from branching axillary meristems to determinate spikelet meristems 
Core set of genes: !associated with! axillary meristem identity in Asian and African rice 
Another set of genes: !associated with! phenotypic variability between wild and domesticated accessions 
AP2/EREBP-like genes: !enriched in both sets! suggesting key factors in inflorescence branching and rice domestication