Plum pox virus (PPV) is the causative agent of sharka, a devastating disease of stone fruits including peaches, apricots, and plums. PPV infection levels and associated disease symptoms can vary greatly, depending upon the virus strain, host species, or cultivar as well as developmental age of the infected tissues. For example, peaches often exhibit mild symptoms in leaves and fruit while European plums typically display severe chlorotic rings. Systemic virus spread into all host tissues occurs via the phloem, a process that is poorly understood in perennial plant species that undergo a period of dormancy and must annually renew phloem tissues. Currently, little is known about how phloem tissues respond to virus infection. Here, we used translating ribosome affinity purification followed by RNA sequencing to identify phloem- and nonphloem-specific gene responses to PPV infection during leaf development in European plum (<i>Prunus domestica</i> L.). Results showed that, during secondary leaf morphogenesis (4- and 6-week-old leaves), the phloem had a disproportionate response to PPV infection with two- to sixfold more differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in phloem than nonphloem tissues, despite similar levels of viral transcripts. In contrast, in mature 12-week-old leaves, virus transcript levels dropped significantly in phloem tissues but not in nonphloem tissues. This drop in virus transcripts correlated with an 18-fold drop in phloem-specific DEGs. Furthermore, genes associated with defense responses including RNA silencing were spatially coordinated in response to PPV accumulation and were specifically induced in phloem tissues at 4 to 6 weeks. Combined, these findings highlight the temporal and spatial dynamics of leaf tissue responses to virus infection and reveal the importance of phloem responses within a perennial host.

PPV: !causes! sharka
host species: !affects! PPV infection levels
phloem: !mediates! systemic virus spread
RNA sequencing: !identifies! phloem- and nonphloem-specific gene responses
4- and 6-week-old leaves: !exhibit! disproportionate response to PPV
12-week-old leaves: !show! drop in virus transcripts and DEGs
defense responses: !coordinate! spatially in response to PPV accumulation
phloem tissues: !induce! defense responses