Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) improve plant growth by altering the root architecture, although the mechanisms underlying this alteration have yet to be unravelled. Through microarray analysis of PGPR-treated rice roots, a large number of differentially regulated genes were identified. Ectopic expression of one of these genes, OsASR6 (ABA STRESS RIPENING6), had a remarkable effect on plant growth in Arabidopsis. Transgenic lines over-expressing OsASR6 had larger leaves, taller inflorescence bolts and greater numbers of siliques and seeds. The most prominent effect was observed in root growth, with the root biomass increasing four-fold compared with the shoot biomass increase of 1.7-fold. Transgenic OsASR6 over-expressing plants showed higher conductance, transpiration and photosynthesis rates, leading to an ˜30% higher seed yield compared with the control. Interestingly, OsASR6 expression led to alterations in the xylem structure, an increase in the xylem vessel size and altered lignification, which correlated with higher conductance. OsASR6 is activated by auxin and, in turn, increases auxin responses and root auxin sensitivity, as observed by the increased expression of auxin-responsive genes, such as SAUR32 and PINOID, and the key auxin transcription factor, ARF5. Collectively, these phenomena led to an increased root density. The effects of OsASR6 expression largely mimic the beneficial effects of PGPRs in rice, indicating that OsASR6 activation may be a key factor governing PGPR-mediated changes in rice. OsASR6 is a potential candidate for the manipulation of rice for improved productivity.

OsASR6: !activates! auxin 
auxin: !increases! OsASR6 expression 
OsASR6: !enhances! root growth 
OsASR6: !increases! xylem vessel size 
OsASR6: !alters! lignification 
OsASR6: !increases! conductance 
OsASR6: !increases! transpiration 
OsASR6: !increases! photosynthesis 
OsASR6: !increases! seed yield 
OsASR6: !increases! auxin responses 
OsASR6: !increases! root auxin sensitivity 
SAUR32: !increases! expression 
PINOID: !increases! expression 
ARF5: !increases! expression 
OsASR6: !increases! root density 
PGPRs: !improve! plant growth