The immuno-ultrastructural investigation localized cell-wall polysaccharides of bast fibers during hemp hypocotyl growth. Moreover, for the first time, the localization of a peroxidase and laccase is provided in textile hemp. In the hypocotyl of textile hemp, elongation and girth increase are separated in time. This organ is therefore ideal for time-course analyses. Here, we follow the ultrastructural rearrangement of cell-wall components during the development of the hemp hypocotyl. An expression analysis of genes involved in the biosynthesis of cellulose, the chief polysaccharide of bast fiber cell walls and xylan, the main hemicellulose of secondary cell walls, is also provided. The analysis shows a higher expression of cellulose and xylan-related genes at 15 and 20 days after sowing, as compared to 9 days. In the young hypocotyl, the cell walls of bast fibers show cellulose microfibrils that are not yet compacted to form a mature G-layer. Crystalline cellulose is detected abundantly in the S1-layer, together with unsubstituted/low-substituted xylan and, to a lesser extent, in the G-layer. The LM5 galactan epitope is confined to the walls of parenchymatic cells. LM6-specific arabinans are detected at the interface between the cytoplasm and the gelatinous cell wall of bast fibers. The class III peroxidase antibody shows localization in the G-layer only at older developmental stages. The laccase antibody shows a distinctive labelling of the G-layer region closest to the S1-layer; the signal becomes more homogeneous as the hypocotyl matures. The data provide important insights on the cell wall distribution of polysaccharide and protein components in bast fibers during the hypocotyl growth of textile hemp.

Cell-wall polysaccharides: !localized to! hypocotyl of textile hemp
Peroxidase: !localized to! G-layer of bast fibers
Laccase: !localized to! G-layer of bast fibers
Cellulose-related genes: !expressed at higher levels! 15 and 20 days after sowing
Xylan-related genes: !expressed at higher levels! 15 and 20 days after sowing
Crystalline cellulose: !detected in! S1-layer
Unsubstituted/low-substituted xylan: !detected in! S1-layer
LM5 galactan epitope: !confined to! walls of parenchymatic cells
LM6-specific arabinans: !detected at! interface between cytoplasm and gelatinous cell wall