['31369173', 'S-Acylation is a reversible post-translational lipid modification in which a long  chain fatty acid covalently attaches to specific cysteine(s) of proteins via a  thioester bond. It enhances the hydrophobicity of proteins, contributes to their  membrane association and plays roles in protein trafficking, stability and  signalling. A family of Protein S-Acyl Transferases (PATs) is responsible for  this reaction. PATs are multi-pass transmembrane proteins that possess a  catalytic Asp-His-His-Cys cysteine-rich domain (DHHC-CRD). In Arabidopsis, there  are currently 24 such PATs, five having been characterized, revealing their  important roles in growth, development, senescence and stress responses. Here, we  report the functional characterization of another PAT, AtPAT21, demonstrating the  roles it plays in Arabidopsis sexual reproduction. Loss-of-function mutation by  T-DNA insertion in AtPAT21 results in the complete failure of seed production.  Detailed studies revealed that the sterility of the mutant is caused by defects  in both male and female sporogenesis and gametogenesis. To determine if the  sterility observed in atpat21-1 was caused by upstream defects in meiosis, we  assessed meiotic progression in pollen mother cells and found massive chromosome  fragmentation and the absence of synapsis in the initial stages of meiosis.  Interestingly, the fragmentation phenotype was substantially reduced in atpat21-1  spo11-1 double mutants, indicating that AtPAT21 is required for repair, but not  for the formation, of SPO11-induced meiotic DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) in  Arabidopsis. Our data highlight the importance of protein S-acylation in the  early meiotic stages that lead to the development of male and female sporophytic  reproductive structures and associated gametophytes in Arabidopsis.', '2019 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.14475', 'ORCID:']

PATs: !synthesize! S-Acylation 
AtPAT21: !affects! Seed Production 
AtPAT21: !represses! Meiotic Progression 
SPO11: !induces! Meiotic DNA Double-Stranded Breaks 
AtPAT21: !repairs! SPO11-Induced Meiotic DNA Double-Stranded Breaks