Root hairs protruding from epidermal cells increase the surface area for water absorption and nutrient uptake. Various environmental factors including light, oxygen concentration, carbon dioxide concentration, calcium and mycorrhizal associations promote root hair formation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Light regulates the expression of a large number of genes at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels; however, there is little information linking the light response to root hair development. In this study, we describe a novel mutant, light-sensitive root-hair development 1 (lrh1), that displays enhanced root hair development in response to light. Hypocotyl and root elongation was inhibited in the lrh1 mutant, which had a late flowering phenotype. We identified the gene encoding the p14 protein, a putative component of the splicing factor 3b complex essential for pre-mRNA splicing, as being responsible for the lrh1 phenotype. Indeed, regulation of alternative splicing was affected in lrh1 mutants and treatment with a splicing inhibitor mimicked the lrh1 phenotype. Genome-wide alterations in pre-mRNA splicing patterns including differential splicing events of light signaling- and circadian clock-related genes were found in lrh1 as well as a difference in transcriptional regulation of multiple genes including upregulation of essential genes for root hair development. These results suggest that pre-mRNA splicing is the key mechanism regulating root hair development in response to light signals.

Light: !regulates expression of! genes
Gene: !encodes! p14 protein
p14 protein: !putative component of! splicing factor 3b complex
lrh1 mutant: !displays enhanced root hair development in response to! light
lrh1 mutant: !inhibits! hypocotyl and root elongation
lrh1 mutant: !affects! alternative splicing
Splicing inhibitor: !mimics! lrh1 phenotype
Genome-wide alterations: !found in! pre-mRNA splicing patterns
Light signaling- and circadian clock-related genes: !differentially spliced in! lrh1
Multiple genes: !transcriptionally regulated differently in! lrh1
Root hair development: !key mechanism regulated by! pre-mRNA splicing in response to light signals