An enzyme is crucial for the formation of Hedychium coronarium scent and defense responses, which may be responsible for the biosynthesis of allo-ocimene in H. coronarium. Hedychium coronarium can emit a strong scent as its main scent constituents are monoterpenes and their derivatives. Among these derivatives, allo-ocimene is not only a very important volatile substance in flower aroma, but is also crucial to plant defense. However, the molecular mechanism of allo-ocimene biosynthesis has not been characterized in plants. In this study, a new alcohol dehydrogenase gene, HcADH, was cloned. The amino acid sequences encoded by HcADH contained the most conserved motifs of short chain alcohol dehydrogenase/reductases (SDRs), which included NAD<sup>+</sup> binding domain, TGxxx[AG]xG and active site YxxxK. Real-time PCR analyses showed that the HcADH was highly expressed in the outer labellum but was almost undetectable in vegetative organs. The change in its expression level in petals was positively correlated with the emission pattern of allo-ocimene during flower development. HcADH expression coincides also the release level of allo-ocimene among different Hedychium species. Although HcADH is not expressed in the leaves, HcADH expression and allo-ocimene release in leaves can be induced by mechanical wounding or methyl jasmonate (MeJA) treatment. In addition, the expression of HcADH induced by mechanical wounding can be prevented by acetylsalicylic acid, a jasmonic acid biosynthesis inhibitor, suggesting that jasmonic acid might participate in the transmission of wounding signals. Using the Barley stripe mosaic virus (BSMV)-VIGS method, it was found that BSMV:HcADH<sub>335</sub> inoculation was able to down-regulate HcADH expression, decreasing only the release of allo-ocimene in flowers while the content of other volatile substances did not decrese. In vitro characterization showed that recombinant HcADH can catalyze geraniol into citral, and citral is an intermediate of allo-ocimene biosynthesis. HcADH may be responsible for the biosynthesis of allo-ocimene in H. coronarium, which is crucial for the formation of H. coronarium scent and defense function.

HcADH: !synthesizes! allo-ocimene 
HcADH: !localizes to! outer labellum 
HcADH: !enhances! emission of allo-ocimene 
HcADH: !represses! release of other volatile substances 
Mechanical wounding: !induces! HcADH expression 
Methyl jasmonate: !induces! HcADH expression 
Acetylsalicylic acid: !prevents! HcADH expression 
BSMV:HcADH<sub>335</sub>: !down-regulates! HcADH expression 
Recombinant HcADH: !catalyzes! geraniol into citral