European grapevine cultivars (Vitis vinifera spp.) are highly susceptible to the downy mildew pathogen Plasmopara viticola. Breeding of resistant V. vinifera cultivars is a promising strategy to reduce the impact of disease management. Most cultivars that have been bred for resistance to downy mildew, rely on resistance mediated by the Rpv3 (Resistance to P. viticola) locus. However, despite the extensive use of this locus, little is known about the mechanism of Rpv3-mediated resistance. In this study, Rpv3-mediated defense responses were investigated in Rpv3<sup>+</sup> and Rpv3- grapevine cultivars following inoculation with two distinct P. viticola isolates avrRpv3<sup>+</sup> and avrRpv3-, with the latter being able to overcome Rpv3 resistance. Based on comparative microscopic, metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses, our results show that the Rpv3-1-mediated resistance is associated with a defense mechanism that triggers synthesis of fungi-toxic stilbenes and programmed cell death (PCD), resulting in reduced but not suppressed pathogen growth and development. Functional annotation of the encoded protein sequence of genes significantly upregulated during the Rpv3-1-mediated defense response revealed putative roles in pathogen recognition, signal transduction and defense responses. This study used histochemical, transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses of Rpv3<sup>+</sup> and susceptible cultivars inoculated with avirulent and virulent P. viticola isolates to investigate mechanism underlying the Rpv3-1-mediated resistance response. We demonstrated a strong correlation between the expressions of stilbene biosynthesis related genes, the accumulation of fungi-toxic stilbenes, pathogen growth inhibition and PCD.

Rpv3: !mediates! Resistance
Rpv3: !triggers! Synthesis of fungi-toxic stilbenes
Rpv3: !induces! Programmed cell death
Pathogen recognition genes: !enhance! Signal transduction
Defense response genes: !promote! Defense responses
Stilbene biosynthesis related genes: !correlate with! Accumulation of fungi-toxic stilbenes
Pathogen growth inhibition: !inhibits! Pathogen growth and development