Boea hygrometrica can survive extreme drought conditions and has been used as a model to study desiccation tolerance. A genome-wide transcriptome analysis of B. hygrometrica showed that the plant can survive rapid air-drying after experiencing a slow soil-drying acclimation phase. In addition, a weighted gene co-expression network analysis was used to study the transcriptomic datasets. A network comprising 22 modules was constructed, and seven modules were found to be significantly related to desiccation response using an enrichment analysis. Protein ubiquitination was observed to be a common process linked to hub genes in all the seven modules. Ubiquitin-modified proteins with diversified functions were identified using immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry. The lowest level of ubiquitination was noted at the full soil drying priming stage, which coincided the accumulation of dehydration-responsive gene BhLEA2. The highly conserved RY motif (CATGCA) was identified from the promoters of ubiquitin-related genes that were downregulated in the desiccated samples. An in silico gene expression analysis showed that the negative regulation of ubiquitin-related genes is potentially mediated via a B3 domain-containing transcription repressor VAL1. This study suggests that priming may involve the transcriptional regulation of several major processes, and the transcriptional regulation of genes in protein ubiquitination may play a hub role to deliver acclimation signals to posttranslational level in the acquisition of desiccation tolerance in B. hygrometrica.

BhLEA2: !accumulates at! full soil drying priming stage
Ubiquitin-modified proteins: !identified by! immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry
Ubiquitin-related genes: !downregulated by! B3 domain-containing transcription repressor VAL1
Ubiquitin-related genes: !negatively regulated by! in silico gene expression analysis
Protein ubiquitination: !linked to! hub genes
Desiccation response: !related to! seven modules