Drought is a major environmental constraint to plant growth, development and productivity. Compared with most willows that are generally susceptible to drought, the desert willow Salix psammophila has extraordinary adaptation to drought stress. However, its molecular basis of drought tolerance is still largely unknown. During polyethylene glycol 6000 (PEG 6000)-simulated drought stress, we found that the osmotic adjustment substances were accumulated and the antioxidant enzyme activities were enhanced in S. psammophila roots. A total of 8172 differentially expressed genes were identified in roots of S. psammophila through RNA-Sequencing. Based on K-means clustering, their expression patterns were classified into nine clusters, which were enriched in several stress-related processes including transcriptional regulation, response to various stresses, cell death, etc. Moreover, 672 transcription factors from 45 gene families were differentially expressed under drought stress. Furthermore, a weighted gene co-expression network was constructed, and eight genes were identified as hub genes. We demonstrated the function of two hub genes, magnesium-dependent phosphatase 1 (SpMDP1) and SpWRKY33, through overexpression in Arabidopsis thaliana. Overexpression of the two hub genes enhanced the drought tolerance in transgenic plants, suggesting that the identification of candidate drought tolerance genes in this study was highly efficient and credible. Our study analyzed the physiological and molecular responses to drought stress in S. psammophila, and these results contribute to dissect the mechanism of drought tolerance of S. psammophila and facilitate identification of critical genes involved in drought tolerance for willow breeding.

Drought: !affects! S. psammophila
PEG 6000: !simulates! Drought Stress
S. psammophila: !accumulates! Osmotic Adjustment Substances
S. psammophila: !enhances! Antioxidant Enzyme Activities
Differentially Expressed Genes: !classify into! 9 Clusters
Transcription Factors: !differentially expressed under! Drought Stress
Weighted Gene Co-expression Network: !constructed!
Hub Genes: !identified! 8 Genes
SpMDP1: !overexpressed in! Arabidopsis thaliana
SpWRKY33: !overexpressed in! Arabidopsis thaliana
Overexpression of Hub Genes: !enhances! Drought Tolerance