['31413204', 'Photorespiration sustains photosynthesis in the presence of oxygen due to rapid  metabolization of 2-phosphoglycolate, the major side-product of the oxygenase  activity of Rubisco that also directly impedes carbon assimilation and  allocation. Despite the fact that both the biochemical reactions and the  underlying genetics are well characterized, information concerning the regulatory  mechanisms that adjust photorespiratory flux is rare. Here, we studied the impact  of mitochondrial-localized thioredoxin o1 (TRXo1) on photorespiratory metabolism.  The characterization of an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) transfer DNA  insertional line (trxo1-1) revealed an increase in the stoichiometry of  photorespiratory CO(2) release and impaired Gly-to-Ser turnover after a shift  from high-to-low CO(2) without changes in Gly decarboxylase (GDC) gene or protein  expression. These effects were distinctly pronounced in a double mutant, where  the TRXo1 mutation was combined with strongly reduced GDC T-protein expression.  The double mutant (TxGT) showed reduced growth in air but not in high CO(2),  decreased photosynthesis, and up to 54-fold more Gly alongside several  redox-stress-related metabolites. Given that GDC proteins are potential targets  for redox-regulation, we also examined the in vitro properties of recombinant GDC  l-proteins (lipoamide dehydrogenase) from plants and the cyanobacterium  Synechocystis species strain PCC6803 and observed a redox-dependent inhibition by  either artificial reducing agents or TRXo1 itself. Collectively, our results  demonstrate that TRXo1 potentially adjusts photorespiration via redox-regulation  of GDC in response to environmental changes.', '2019 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.19.00559', 'ORCID:']

TRXo1: !localizes to! mitochondria 
TRXo1: !enhances! photorespiratory CO2 release 
TRXo1: !impairs! Gly-to-Ser turnover 
GDC T-protein: !repressed by! TRXo1 
GDC l-protein: !inhibited by! artificial reducing agents 
GDC l-protein: !inhibited by! TRXo1