The PHOSPHATE1 (PHO1) gene family plays diverse roles in inorganic phosphate (Pi) transfer and signal transduction, and plant development. However, the functions and diversification of soybean PHO1 family are poorly understood. Cultivated soybean (Glycine max) was domesticated from wild soybean (Glycine soja). To illuminate their roles in this evolutionary process, we comparatively investigated the G. max PHO1 genes (GmPHO1) in Suinong 14 (SN14) and G. soja PHO1 genes (GsPHO1) in ZYD00006 (ZYD6). The sequences of the orthologous Gm-GsPHO1 pairs were grouped into two Classes. The expression of Class I in both SN14 and ZYD6 was widely but relatively high in developing fruits, whereas Class II was predominantly expressed in the roots. The whole family displayed diverse response patterns to salt stresses and Pi-starvation in roots. Between SN14 and ZYD6, most PHO1 genes responded similarly to salinity stresses, and half had sharp contrasts in response to Pi-starvation, which corroborated the differential response capacities to salinity and low-Pi stress between SN14 and ZYD6. Furthermore, in transgenic Arabidopsis plants, most Class II members and GmPHO1;H9 from Class I could enhance salt tolerance, while only two Class II genes (GmPHO1;H4 and GmPHO1;H8) differently altered sensitivity to Pi-starvation. The expression of critical genes was accordingly altered in either salt or Pi signaling pathways in transgenic Arabidopsis plants. Our work identifies some PHO1 genes as promising genetic materials for soybean improvement, and suggests that expression variation is decisive to functional divergence of the orthologous Gm-GsPHO1 pairs, which plays an adaptive role during soybean evolution.

GmPHO1: !enhances! salt tolerance
GmPHO1;H9: !enhances! salt tolerance
GmPHO1;H4: !alters! sensitivity to Pi-starvation
GmPHO1;H8: !alters! sensitivity to Pi-starvation
Class I: !expressed in! developing fruits
Class II: !expressed in! roots
SN14: !responds differently to! Pi-starvation
ZYD6: !responds differently to! Pi-starvation
PHO1 genes: !respond similarly to! salinity stresses