The MYB transcription factor family is one of the largest transcriptional factor families in plants and plays a multifaceted role in plant growth and development. However, MYB transcription factors involved in pathogen resistance in apple remain poorly understood. We identified a new MYB family member from apple, and named it MdMYB30. MdMYB30 was localized to the nucleus, and was highly expressed in young apple leaves. Transcription of MdMYB30 was induced by abiotic stressors, such as polyethylene glycol and abscisic acid. Scanning electron microscopy and gas chromatograph-mass spectrometry analyses demonstrated that ectopically expressing MdMYB30 in Arabidopsis changed the wax content, the number of wax crystals, and the transcription of wax-related genes. MdMYB30 bound to the MdKCS1 promoter to activate its expression and regulate wax biosynthesis. MdMYB30 also contributed to plant surface properties and increased resistance to the bacterial strain Pst DC3000. Furthermore, a virus-based transformation in apple fruits and transgenic apple calli demonstrated that MdMYB30 increased resistance to Botryosphaeria dothidea. Our findings suggest that MdMYB30 plays a vital role in the accumulation of cuticular wax and enhances disease resistance in apple. MdMYB30 bound to the MdKCS1 gene promoter to activate its transcription and regulate cuticular wax content and composition, which influenced the surface properties and expression of pathogenesis-related genes to resistance against pathogens. MdMYB30 appears to be a crucial element in the formation of the plant cuticle and confers apple with a tolerance to pathogens.

MdMYB30: !localizes to! nucleus 
MdMYB30: !enhances! resistance to Pst DC3000 
MdMYB30: !enhances! resistance to Botryosphaeria dothidea 
MdMYB30: !binds to! MdKCS1 gene promoter 
MdKCS1 gene promoter: !activates! MdMYB30 transcription 
MdMYB30: !regulates! cuticular wax content and composition 
cuticular wax content and composition: !influences! surface properties and expression of pathogenesis-related genes