Gynodioecy, a sexual system with hermaphrodite and female individuals in a population, raises the question how the two sexual morphs are maintained. Salvia pratensis is a gynodioecious species featured by its modified stamens that act as a lever mechanism in pollination. Given sexual dimorphism in floral traits of the species, it is predictable that two sexual morphs differ in their interplay with pollinators and thus in their fitness. In this study, we investigated sex-specific reproduction success and floral adaptation in a population of S. pratensis. We found that two sexual morphs in S. pratensis distinctly differed in their floral proportions. Female flowers fitted better to the pollinators than hermaphrodites in terms of touching the stigmas when being probed, and hence were more efficient in pollen deposition. Floral traits overall underwent stronger selection in the population, with stigma position and corolla length subject to disruptive selection mediated by different body-sized bumble bees; some selections on floral traits were significantly different in the strength, even opposite in the direction between two morphs. Flower production tended to be under correlational selection with floral structural traits, implying that a large plant with many flowers did not show an advantage in fitness unless its flower construction mechanically matched the pollinators well. In conclusion, the pollinator-mediated selection likely played an important role in the evolution and maintenance of sexual dimorphism in the gynodioecious S. pratensis; and sex-divergent mechanical interaction with pollinators served as a critical mechanism by which female individuals were maintained in the population with a female advantage in pollen deposition efficiency (i.e. receiving pollen).

Pollinator: !mediates selection on! Floral traits 
Floral traits: !undergo disruptive selection by! Bumble bees 
Female flowers: !fit better to! Pollinators 
Stigma position: !subject to! Disruptive selection 
Corolla length: !subject to! Disruptive selection 
Flower production: !under correlational selection with! Floral structural traits 
Pollinator-mediated selection: !plays important role in! Evolution and maintenance of sexual dimorphism 
Sex-divergent mechanical interaction: !serves as critical mechanism for! Female advantage in pollen deposition efficiency