Consumers purchase fresh strawberries all year long. Extending the fruiting season for new strawberry cultivars is a common breeding goal. Understanding the inheritance of repeat fruiting is key to improving breeding efficiency. Several independent research groups using multiple genotypes and analytic approaches have all identified a single genomic region in strawberry associated with repeat fruiting. Markers mapped to this region were used to evaluate breeding parents from the United States Department of Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS) strawberry breeding program at Beltsville, Maryland. Markers mapped to repeat fruiting identified once-fruiting genotypes but not repeat-fruiting genotypes. Eleven of twenty-three breeding parents with repeat-fruiting marker profiles were actually once fruiting, indicating at least one additional locus acting epistatically to suppress repeat fruiting. Family segregation ratios could not be predicted reliably by the combined use of parental phenotypes and marker profiles, when using a single-gene model. Expected segregation ratios were calculated for all phenotypic and marker-profile combinations possible from the mapped locus combined with a hypothetical dominant or recessive suppressor locus. Segregation ratios specific to an epistatic suppressor acting on the mapped locus were observed in four families. The segregation ratios for two families were best explained by a dominant suppressor acting on the mapped locus, and, for the other two, by a recessive suppressor. Not all of the observed ratios could be explained by one model or the other, and when multiple families with a common parent were compared, there was no predicted genotype for the common parent that would lead to all of the observed segregation ratios. Considering all lines of evidence in this study and others, repeat-fruiting in commercial strawberry is controlled primarily by a dominant allele at a single locus, previously mapped by multiple groups. At least two additional genes, one dominant and one recessive, exist that act epistatically to suppress repeat fruiting. Environmental effects and/or incomplete penetrance likely affect phenotype through the suppressor loci, rather than the primary mapped locus. One of the dominant suppressors acts only in the first year, the year the plant is germinated from seed, and not after the plant has experienced a winter.

Gene: !affects! Repeat-fruiting 
Gene: !interacts with! Environmental effects 
Gene: !enhances! Fruiting season 
Gene: !represses! Repeat-fruiting 
Gene: !synthesizes! Phenotype