A homologue of the ribosomal protein L22e, Rpf84, regulates root nodule symbiosis by mediating the infection process of rhizobia and preventing bacteroids from degradation in Robinia pseudoacacia. Ribosomal proteins (RPs) are known to have extraribosomal functions, including developmental regulation and stress responses; however, the effects of RPs on symbiotic nodulation of legumes are still unclear. Ribosomal protein 22 of the large 60S subunit (RPL22), a non-typical RP that is only found in eukaryotes, has been shown to function as a tumour suppressor in animals. Here, a homologue of RPL22, Rpf84, was identified from the leguminous tree R. pseudoacacia. Subcellular localization assays showed that Rpf84 was expressed in the cytoplasm and nucleus. Knockdown of Rpf84 by RNA interference (RNAi) technology impaired the infection process and nodule development. Compared with the control, root and stem length, dry weight and nodule number per plant were drastically decreased in Rpf84-RNAi plants. The numbers of root hair curlings, infection threads and nodule primordia were also significantly reduced. Ultrastructure analyses showed that Rpf84-RNAi nodules contained fewer infected cells with fewer bacteria. In particular, remarkable deformation of bacteroids and fusion of multiple symbiosomes occurred in infected cells. By contrast, overexpression of Rpf84 promoted nodulation, and the overexpression nodules maintained a larger infection/differentiation region and had more infected cells filled with bacteroids than the control at 45 days post inoculation, suggesting a retarded ageing process in nodules. These results indicate for the first time that RP regulates the symbiotic nodulation of legumes and that RPL22 may function in initiating the invasion of rhizobia and preventing bacteroids from degradation in R. pseudoacacia.

Rpf84: !mediates! infection process 
Rpf84: !prevents! bacteroid degradation 
RPL22: !initiates! rhizobia invasion 
RPL22: !prevents! bacteroid degradation 
RNAi: !impairs! nodule development 
Overexpression: !promotes! nodulation