Phytophthora cinnamomi (Pc) is a dangerous pathogen that causes root rot (ink disease) and threatens the production of chestnuts worldwide. Despite all the advances recently reported at molecular and physiological level, there are still gaps of knowledge that would help to unveil the defence mechanisms behind plant-Pc interactions. Bearing this in mind we quantified constitutive and Pc-induced stress-related signals (hormones and metabolites) complemented with changes in photosynthetic related parameters by exploring susceptible and resistant Castanea spp.-Pc interactions. In a greenhouse experiment, five days before and nine days after inoculation with Pc, leaves and fine roots from susceptible C. sativa and resistant C. sativa × C. crenata clonal 2-year-old plantlets were sampled (clones Cs14 and 111-1, respectively). In the resistant clone, stomatal conductance (g<sub>s</sub>) and net photosynthesis (A) decreased significantly and soluble sugars in leaves increased, while in the susceptible clone g<sub>s</sub> and A remained unchanged and proline levels in leaves increased. In the resistant clone, higher constitutive content of root SA and foliar ABA, JA and JA-Ile as compared to the susceptible clone were observed. Total phenolics and condensed tannins were highest in roots of the susceptible clone. In response to infection, a dynamic hormonal response in the resistant clone was observed, consisting of accumulation of JA, JA-Ile and ABA in roots and depletion of total phenolics in leaves. However, in the susceptible clone only JA diminished in leaves and increased in roots. Constitutive and Pc-induced levels of JA-Ile were only detectable in the resistant clone. From the hormonal profiles obtained in leaves and roots before and after infection, it is concluded that the lack of effective hormonal changes in C. sativa explains the lack of defence responses to Pc of this susceptible species.

Gene: !affects! Hormonal response 
Gene: !enhances! Resistance 
Gene: !represses! Susceptibility 
Gene: !synthesizes! JA-Ile