C2H2-zinc finger protein family is commonly found in the plant, and it is known as the key actors in the regulation of transcription and vital component of chromatin structure. A large number of the C2H2-zinc finger gene members have not been well characterized based on their functions and structure in cotton. However, in other plants, only a few C2H2-zinc finger genes have been studied. In this work, we performed a comprehensive analysis and identified 386, 196 and 195 C2H2-zinc finger genes in Gossypium hirsutum (upland cotton), Gossypium arboreum and Gossypium raimondii, respectively. Phylogenetic tree analysis of the C2H2-zinc finger proteins encoding the C2H2-zinc finger genes were classified into seven (7) subgroups. Moreover, the C2H2-zinc finger gene members were distributed in all cotton chromosomes though with asymmetrical distribution patterns. All the orthologous genes were detected between tetraploid and the diploid cotton, with 154 orthologous genes pair detected between upland cotton and Gossypium arboreum while 165 orthologous genes were found between upland cotton and Gossypium raimondii. Synonymous (Ks) and non-synonymous (Ka) nucleotide substitution rates (Ka/Ks) analysis indicated that the cotton C2H2-zinc finger genes were highly influenced mainly by negative selection, which maintained their protein levels after the duplication events. RNA-seq data and RT-qPCR validation of the RNA seq result revealed differential expression pattern of some the C2H2-zinc finger genes at different stages of cotton fiber development, an indication that the C2H2-zinc finger genes play an important role in initiating and regulating fiber development in cotton. This study provides a strong foundation for future practical genome research on C2H2-zinc finger genes in upland cotton. The expression levels of C2H2-zinc finger genes family is a pointer of their involvement in various biochemical and physiological functions which are directly related to cotton fiber development during initiation and elongation stages. This work not only provides a basis for determining the nominal role of the C2H2-zinc finger genes in fiber development but also provide valuable information for characterization of potential candidate genes involved in regulation of cotton fiber development.

C2H2-zinc finger protein family: !localizes to! all cotton chromosomes 
C2H2-zinc finger genes: !influenced by! negative selection 
C2H2-zinc finger genes: !differentially expressed! at different stages of cotton fiber development 
C2H2-zinc finger genes: !play role in! initiating and regulating fiber development in cotton