Andean tomatoes differed from the wild ancestor in the metabolic composition and the expression of genes related with mitochondrial functions, and environmental stresses, making them potentially suitable for breeding programmes. Traditional landraces or "criollo" tomatoes (Solanum lycopersicum L.) from Andean areas of Argentina, selected for their fruit quality, were analysed in this study. We explored the metabolome and transcriptome of the ripe fruit in nine landrace accessions representing the seven genetic groups and compared them to the mature fruit of the wild progenitor Solanum pimpinellifolium. The content of branched- (isoleucine and valine) and aromatic (phenylalanine and tryptophan) amino acids, citrate and sugars were significantly different in the fruit of several "criollo" tomatoes compared to S. pimpinellifolium. The transcriptomic profile of the ripe fruit showed several genes significantly and highly regulated in all varieties compared to S. pimpinellifolium, like genes encoding histones and mitochondrial proteins. Additionally, network analysis including transcripts and metabolites identified major hubs with the largest number of connections such as constitutive photomorphogenic protein 1 (a RING finger-type ubiquitin E3 ligase), five Zn finger transcription factors, ascorbate peroxidase, acetolactate synthase, and sucrose non-fermenting 1 kinase. Co-expression analysis of these genes revealed a potential function in acquiring tomato fruit quality during domestication.

S. lycopersicum: !differs from! S. pimpinellifolium
metabolome: !differs in! branched- and aromatic amino acids, citrate and sugars
transcriptome: !shows! genes encoding histones and mitochondrial proteins
network analysis: !identifies! major hubs with largest number of connections
constitutive photomorphogenic protein 1: !connects! transcripts and metabolites
Zn finger transcription factors: !connects! transcripts and metabolites
ascorbate peroxidase: !connects! transcripts and metabolites
acetolactate synthase: !connects! transcripts and metabolites
sucrose non-fermenting 1 kinase: !connects! transcripts and metabolites