The galling insect manipulates the host plant tissue to its own benefit, building the gall structure where it spends during most of its life cycle. These specialist herbivore insects can induce and manipulate plant structure and metabolism throughout gall development and may affect plant volatile emission. Consequently, volatile emission from altered metabolism contribute to eavesdropping cueing. Eavesdropping can be part of adaptive strategies used by evolution for both galling insects and the entire-associated community in order to cue some interaction response. This is in contrast to some herbivores associated with delayed induced responses, altering plant metabolites during the short time while they feed. Due to the different lifestyles of the galling organism, which are associated with different plant tissues and organs (<i>e.g</i> leaves, flowers or fruits), a distinct diversity of organisms may eavesdrop on induced volatiles interacting with the galls. Furthermore, the eavesdropping cues may be defined according to the phenological coupling between galling organism and host plant, which results from the development of a gall structure. For instance, when plants release volatile-induced defenses after galling insects' activity, another interactor may perceive these volatiles and change its behavior and interactions with host plants and galls. Thus, natural enemies could be attracted by different volatiles emitted by the gall tissues. Considering the duration of the life cycle of the galling organism and the gall, the temporal extent of gall-induced volatiles may include more persistent volatile cues and eavesdropping effects than the volatiles induced by non-galling herbivores. Accordingly, from chemical ecology perspective we expect that galling herbivore-induced volatiles may exhibit robust effects on neighboring-plant interactions including those ones during different plant developmental or phenological periods. Information about multitrophic interactions between insects and plants supports the additional understanding of direct and indirect effects, and allows insight into new hypotheses.

Galling insect: !manipulates! Plant tissue
Galling insect: !affects! Plant volatile emission
Galling insect: !induces! Plant metabolites
Galling insect: !couples with! Host plant
Galling insect: !attracts! Natural enemies
Galling insect: !emits! Volatile cues
Plant: !releases! Volatile-induced defenses