In grape (Vitis), stilbene phytoalexins can either be in situ synthesized or transported to the site of response during powdery mildew infection, enhancing disease resistance. Resveratrol is a phytoprotective stilbenoid compound that is synthesized by stilbene synthase (STS) in response to biotic and abiotic stresses, and is also known to have health benefits in the human diet. We have previously shown that transgenic Vitis vinifera cv. Thompson Seedless plants overexpressing a stilbene synthase gene, VqSTS6, from wild Chinese Vitis quinquangularis had a higher stilbenoid content, leading to an enhanced resistance to powdery mildew (Uncinula necator (Schw.) Burr). However, the biosynthesis and transportation in the plant tissue under powdery mildew infection are still unclear. Here, inhibitor and micro-grafting technologies were used to study the accumulation of resveratrol following powdery mildew infection. We observed that the levels of STS expression and stilbenoids increased in response to powdery mildew infection. Powdery mildew and inhibitor treatment on detached grape branches showed that resveratrol was in situ synthesized. Experiments with grafted plantlets showed that the abundance of stilbenoid compounds increased in the shoot during VqSTS6 overexpression in the root, while VqSTS6-Flag fusion was not tranported to the scions and only expressed in the transgenic rootstocks. Compared with wild-type Thompson Seedless plants, the non-transgenic/VqSTS6 transgenic (scion/rootstock) grafted Thompson Seedless plantlets exhibited increased resistance to powdery mildew. In addition, overexpression of VqSTS6 in roots led to increased levels of stilbenoid compounds in five other European grape varieties (V. vinifera cvs. Chardonnay, Perlette, Cabernet Sauvignon, Riesling and Muscat Hamburg). In conclusion, stilbenoid compounds can be either in situ synthesized or transported to the site of powdery mildew infection, and overexpression of VqSTS6 in the root promotes stilbenoids accumulation and disease resistance in European grapevine varieties.

Powdery mildew: !enhances! Disease resistance
STS: !synthesizes! Resveratrol
Inhibitor/micro-grafting: !reveals! In situ synthesis
VqSTS6: !overexpresses in! Rootstocks
VqSTS6: !increases! Stilbenoid compounds
VqSTS6: !promotes! Disease resistance