Specific combinations of physiological and molecular parameters associated with N and S remobilization measured at the onset of flowering were predictive of final crop performances in oilseed rape. Oilseed rape (Brassica napus L.) is a high nitrogen (N) and sulphur (S) demanding crop. Nitrogen- and S-remobilization processes allow N and S requirements to reproductive organs to be satisfied when natural uptake is reduced, thus ensuring high yield and seed quality. The quantification of physiological and molecular indicators of early N and S remobilization could be used as management tools to correct N and S fertilization. However, the major limit of this corrective strategy is to ensure the correlation between final performances-related variables and early measured parameters. In our study, four genotypes of winter oilseed rape (OSR) were grown until seed maturity under four nutritional modalities combining high and/or low N and S supplies. Plant final performances, i.e., seed production, N- and S-harvest indexes, seed N and S use efficiencies, and early parameters related to N- or S-remobilization processes, i.e., photosynthetic leaf area, N and S leaf concentrations, leaf soluble protein and leaf sulphate concentrations, and leaf RuBisCO abundance at flowering, were measured. We demonstrated that contrasting final performances existed according to the N and S supplies. An optimal N:S ratio supply could explain the treatment-specific crop performances, thus justifying N and S concurrent managements. Specific combinations of early measured plant parameters could be used to predict final performances irrespective of the nutritional supply and the genotype. This work demonstrates the potential of physiological and molecular indicators measured at flowering to reflect the functioning of N- and S-compound remobilization and to predict yield and quality penalties. However, because the predictive models are N and S independent, instant N and S leaf analyses are required to further adjust the adequate fertilization. This study is a proof of a concept which opens prospects regarding instant diagnostic tools in the context of N and S mineral fertilization management.

N: !affects! S remobilization
N: !influences! final crop performances
S: !affects! N remobilization
S: !influences! final crop performances
N: !correlates with! S supply
S: !correlates with! N supply
N: !predicts! final performances
S: !predicts! final performances