Despite of important functions of strigolactones (SLs) and karrikins (KARs) in plant development, plant-parasite and plant-fungi interactions, their roles in soybean-rhizobia interaction remain elusive. SL/KAR signaling genes GmMAX2a, GmD14s, and GmKAIs are activated by rhizobia infection. GmMAX2a restored atmax2 root hair defects and soybean root hairs were changed in GmMAX2a overexpression (GmMAX2a-OE) or knockdown (GmMAX2a-KD) mutants. GmMAX2a-KD gave fewer, whereas GmMAX2a-OE produced more nodules than GUS hairy roots. Mutation of GmMAX2a in its KD or OE transgenic hairy roots affected the rhizobia infection-induced increases in early nodulation gene expression. Both mutant hairy roots also displayed the altered auxin, jasmonate and abscisic acid levels, as further verified by transcriptomic analyses of their synthetic genes. Overexpression of an auxin synthetic gene GmYUC2a also affected SL and KAR signaling genes. GmMAX2a physically interacted with SL/KAR receptors GmD14s, GmKAIs, and GmD14Ls with different binding affinities, depending on variations in the critical amino acids, forming active D14/KAI-SCF<sup>MAX2</sup> complexes. The knockdown mutant roots of the nodule-specifically expressing GmKAIs and GmD14Ls gave fewer nodules, with altered expression of several early nodulation genes. The expression levels of GmKAIs, and GmD14Ls were markedly changed in GmMAX2a mutant roots, so did their target repressor genes GmD53s and GmSMAX1s. Thus, SL and KAR signaling were involved in soybean-rhizobia interaction and nodulation partly through interactions with hormones, and this may explain the different effects of MXA2 orthologs on legume determinate and indeterminate nodulation. The study provides fresh insights into the roles of GmMAX2-mediated SL/KAR signaling in soybean root hair and nodule formation.

GmMAX2a: !restores! root hair defects 
GmMAX2a: !affects! early nodulation gene expression 
GmMAX2a: !interacts with! GmD14s, GmKAIs, and GmD14Ls 
GmMAX2a: !alters! auxin, jasmonate and abscisic acid levels 
GmYUC2a: !affects! SL and KAR signaling genes 
GmKAIs: !knockdown! fewer nodules 
GmD14Ls: !knockdown! altered expression of several early nodulation genes 
GmD53s: !repressed by! GmMAX2a 
GmSMAX1s: !repressed by! GmMAX2a