Temperatures from 2 to 8°C transiently induce quantitative resistance to powdery mildew in several host species (cold stress-induced disease resistance [SIDR]). Although cold SIDR events occur in vineyards worldwide an average of 14 to 21 times after budbreak of grapevine and can significantly delay grapevine powdery mildew (<i>Erysiphe necator</i>) epidemics, its molecular basis was poorly understood. We characterized the biology underlying the <i>Vitis vinifera</i> cold SIDR phenotype-which peaks at 24 h post-cold (hpc) treatment and results in a 22 to 28% reduction in spore penetration success-through highly replicated (<i>n</i> = 8 to 10) RNA sequencing experiments. This phenotype was accompanied by a sweeping transcriptional downregulation of photosynthesis-associated pathways whereas starch and sugar metabolism pathways remained largely unaffected, suggesting a transient imbalance in host metabolism and a suboptimal target for pathogen establishment. Twenty-six cold-responsive genes peaked in their differential expression at the 24-hpc time point. Finally, a subset of genes associated with nutrient and amino acid transport accounted for four of the eight most downregulated transcripts, including two nodulin 1A gene precursors, a nodulin MtN21 precursor, and a Dynein light chain 1 motor protein precursor. Reduced transport could exacerbate localized nutrient sinks that would again be transiently suboptimal for pathogen growth. This study links the transient cold SIDR phenotype to underlying transcriptional changes and provides an experimental framework and library of candidate genes to further explore cold SIDR in several systems, with an ultimate goal of identifying novel breeding or management targets for reduced disease.

cold stress: !induces! resistance
host species: !experience! cold SIDR
RNA sequencing: !reveals! transcriptional downregulation
photosynthesis-associated pathways: !downregulated! starch/sugar metabolism
26 cold-responsive genes: !peaked in! differential expression
nutrient/amino acid transport: !accounted for! 8 most downregulated transcripts