['31570580', 'Vacuoles are essential organelles in plants, playing crucial roles, such as  cellular material degradation, ion and metabolite storage, and turgor  maintenance. Vacuoles receive material via the endocytic, secretory, and  autophagic pathways. Membrane fusion is the last step during which prevacuolar  compartments (PVCs) and autophagosomes fuse with the vacuole membrane (tonoplast)  to deliver cargoes. Protein components of the canonical intracellular fusion  machinery that are conserved across organisms, including Arabidopsis thaliana,  include complexes, such as soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment  protein receptors (SNAREs), that catalyze membrane fusion, and homotypic fusion  and vacuole protein sorting (HOPS), that serve as adaptors which tether cargo  vesicles to target membranes for fusion under the regulation of RAB-GTPases. The  mechanisms regulating the recruitment and assembly of tethering complexes are not  well-understood, especially the role of RABs in this dynamic regulation. Here, we  report the identification of the small synthetic molecule Endosidin17 (ES17),  which interferes with synthetic, endocytic, and autophagic traffic by impairing  the fusion of late endosome compartments with the tonoplast. Multiple independent  target identification techniques revealed that ES17 targets the VPS35 subunit of  the retromer tethering complex, preventing its normal interaction with the  Arabidopsis RAB7 homolog RABG3f. ES17 interference with VPS35-RABG3f interaction  prevents the retromer complex to endosome anchoring, resulting in retention of  RABG3f. Using multiple approaches, we show that VPS35-RABG3f-GTP interaction is  necessary to trigger downstream events like HOPS complex assembly and fusion of  late compartments with the tonoplast. Overall, our results support a role for the  interaction of RABG3f-VPS35 as a checkpoint in the control of traffic toward the  vacuole.', '2019 Oct 15', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1905321116', 'Hicks']

VPS35: !interacts with! RABG3f 
RABG3f: !triggers! HOPS complex assembly 
VPS35: !anchors! retromer complex to endosome 
ES17: !impairs! fusion of late endosome compartments with tonoplast 
ES17: !targets! VPS35 
RABG3f: !retains! GTP interaction