Some microRNAs (miRNAs) are key regulators of developmental processes, mainly by controlling the accumulation of transcripts encoding transcription factors that are important for morphogenesis. MADS-box genes encode a family of transcription factors which control diverse developmental processes in flowering plants. Here we study the convergent evolution of two MIRNA (MIR) gene families, named MIR444 and MIR824, targeting members of the same clade of MIKC<sup>C</sup> -group MADS-box genes. We show that these two MIR genes most likely originated independently in monocots (MIR444) and in Brassicales (eudicots, MIR824). We provide evidence that, in both cases, the future target gene was transcribed in antisense prior to the evolution of the MIR genes. Both MIR genes then likely originated by a partial inverted duplication of their target genes, resulting in natural antisense organization of the newly evolved MIR gene and its target gene at birth. We thus propose a model for the origin of MIR genes, MEPIDAS (MicroRNA Evolution by Partial Inverted Duplication of Antisense-transcribed Sequences). MEPIDAS is a refinement of the inverted duplication hypothesis. According to MEPIDAS, a MIR gene evolves at a genomic locus at which the future target gene is also transcribed in the antisense direction. A partial inverted duplication at this locus causes the antisense transcript to fold into a stem-loop structure that is recognized by the miRNA biogenesis machinery to produce a miRNA that regulates the gene at this locus. Our analyses exemplify how to elucidate the origin of conserved miRNAs by comparative genomics and will guide future studies. OPEN RESEARCH BADGE: This article has earned an Open Data Badge for making publicly available the digitally-shareable data necessary to reproduce the reported results. The data is available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/.

MIR444: !originated in! monocots 
MIR824: !originated in! Brassicales 
MIR444/MIR824: !target! MIKC<sup>C</sup>-group MADS-box genes 
MIR444/MIR824: !evolved from! partial inverted duplication of target gene 
MIR444/MIR824: !regulate! transcription factors important for morphogenesis