Double-flower loquat (Eriobotrya japonica) is a new germplasm with homeotic transformation of stamen into petal in whorl 3. However, little information is available on the molecular mechanism of this transformation. Herein, we analyzed the transcriptome, candidate genes and endogenous hormones to investigate the mechanisms underlying this homeotic transformation. Some transcription factors, such as MADS-box, TCP and MYB, were significantly differentially expressed. Importantly, we confirmed that one of these (DN39625_c0_g1), which encoded a C-class floral homeotic protein referred to as AGAMOUS ortholog (EjAG), was significantly downregulated. Subcellular localization of EjAG was found to be in the nucleus. Ectopic expression of EjAG rescued the development of stamens and carpels from the double-flower phenotype in an Arabidopsis ag mutant, suggesting that EjAG expression is associated with double-flower formation. Meanwhile, enrichment analyses showed that the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were mainly involved in the metabolic pathways of hormone signal transduction. The DEGs of auxin, gibberellin A (GA) and cytokinin signaling pathways were mainly upregulated. However, the DEGs of abscisic acid (ABA) and the ethylene signaling pathway were mainly downregulated. Accordingly, the concentrations of indoleacetic acid, kinetin and GA<sub>3</sub> were high at the petaloid stamen stage, but the ABA concentration remained low. The identified genes and pathways provide abundant sequence resources for studying the mechanisms underlying the homeotic transformation in loquat and other Rosaceae species.

MADS-box: !differentially expressed! in double-flower loquat
TCP: !differentially expressed! in double-flower loquat
MYB: !differentially expressed! in double-flower loquat
EjAG: !downregulated! in double-flower loquat
EjAG: !localizes to! nucleus
EjAG: !rescues! Arabidopsis ag mutant
DEGs: !enriched! in hormone signal transduction pathways
Auxin: !upregulated! in double-flower loquat
GA: !upregulated! in double-flower loquat
Cytokinin: !upregulated! in double-flower loquat
ABA: !downregulated! in double-flower loquat
Ethylene: !downregulated! in double-flower loquat