To explore the regulatory mechanisms involved in the adaption to nitrogen (N) deficiency of wild soybean, the ion balance, photosynthetic characteristics, metabolic and transcriptional changes in leaves of common and low N (LN)-tolerant wild soybean seedlings under LN stress were determined. The LN-tolerant wild soybean seedlings showed a stronger ability to maintain photosynthesis and nutrient balance than common wild soybean. A total of 52 differentially accumulated metabolites, mainly related to carbon and N metabolism, were identified between the control and the LN treatment group. In general, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, shikimic acid pathway, synthetase/glutamate synthase (GS/GOGAT) cycle and accumulation of most organic acids were enhanced in LN-tolerant wild soybean, while reduced in common wild soybean under LN stress compared with their respective control group. Moreover, glycolysis, sugar and polyol and fatty acid metabolism increased in both wild soybean genotypes, and increased more in LN-tolerant wild soybean. A total of 3381 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in leaves of both wild soybean genotypes and the expressed level of DEGs associated with sugars, polyols, fatty acids and energy metabolism was significantly higher in LN-tolerant wild soybean than in common wild soybean, consistent with changes in metabolite level. Our results suggest new ideas for the study of LN tolerance of wild soybean and provide a theoretical basis for development and utilization of wild soybean resources.

LN-tolerant wild soybean: !maintains! Photosynthesis 
LN-tolerant wild soybean: !enhances! TCA cycle 
LN-tolerant wild soybean: !enhances! Shikimic acid pathway 
LN-tolerant wild soybean: !enhances! GS/GOGAT cycle 
LN-tolerant wild soybean: !enhances! Organic acids 
Common wild soybean: !reduces! TCA cycle 
Common wild soybean: !reduces! Shikimic acid pathway 
Common wild soybean: !reduces! GS/GOGAT cycle 
Common wild soybean: !reduces! Organic acids 
Gene: !enhances! Sugar metabolism 
Gene: !enhances! Polyol metabolism 
Gene: !enhances! Fatty acid metabolism 
Gene: !enhances! Energy metabolism