Taxus spp. produces the anticancer drug, taxol, and hence is planted as an industrial crop in China. APETALA2/ethylene response element binding proteins (AP2/EREBPs) are the key regulators of plant development, growth, and stress responses. Several homologues control taxol biosynthesis. Identifying the AP2/EREBP proteins from Taxus is important to increase breeding and production and clarify their evolutionary processes. Among the 90 genes from multi Taxus chinensis transcriptome datasets, 81 encoded full-length AP2-containing proteins. A domain structure highly similar to that of angiosperm AP2/EREBPs was found in 2 AP2, 2 ANT, 1 RAV, 28 dehydration-responsive element-binding proteins, and 47 ethylene-responsive factors contained, indicating that they have extremely conservative evolution processes. A new subgroup protein, TcA3Bz1, contains three conserved AP2 domains and, a new domain structure of AP2/EREBPs that is different from that of known proteins. The new subtype AP2 proteins were also present in several gymnosperms (Gingko biloba) and bryophytes (Marchantia polymorpha). However, no homologue was found in Selaginella moellendorffii, indicating unknown evolutionary processes accompanying this plant's evolution. Moreover, the structures of the new subgroup AP2/EREBPs have different conserved domains, such as B3, zf-C3Hc3H, and agent domains, indicating their divergent evolution in bryophytes and gymnosperms. Interestingly, three repeats of AP2 domains have separately evolved from mosses to gymnosperms for most of the new proteins, but the AP2 domain of Gb_11937 has been replicated. The new subtype AP2/EREBPs have different origins and would enrich our knowledge of the molecular structure, origin, and evolutionary processes of AP2/EREBP transcription factors in plants.

AP2/EREBP: !regulates! plant development
Taxus spp.: !produces! taxol
AP2/EREBP: !controls! taxol biosynthesis
AP2/EREBP: !contains! domain structure
AP2/EREBP: !evolved from! mosses to gymnosperms
TcA3Bz1: !has! new domain structure
Gingko biloba: !contains! homologues
Marchantia polymorpha: !contains! homologues
Selaginella moellendorffii: !lacks! homologues