Thylakoid membranes in land plant chloroplasts are organized into appressed and nonappressed membranes, which contribute to the control of energy distribution between the two photosystems (PSI and PSII) from the associated light-harvesting complexes (LHCs). Under fluctuating light conditions, fast reversible phosphorylation of the N-terminal thylakoid protein domains and changes in electrostatic forces induce modifications in thylakoid organization. To gain insight into the role and dynamics of thylakoid protein phosphorylation, we used targeted proteomics to quantify amounts of the structural proteins CURVATURE THYLAKOID1 (CURT1), including the levels of CURT1B N terminus phosphorylation and acetylation, after short-term fluctuating light treatments of Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>). The CURT1B protein was localized to a specific curvature domain separated from the margin domain, and specifically depleted of chlorophyll-binding protein complexes. The acetylation and phosphorylation of the CURT1B N terminus were mutually exclusive. The level of CURT1B phosphorylation, but not of acetylation, increased upon light shifts that also led to an increase in PSII core protein phosphorylation. These dynamics were largely absent in the knockout mutant of PSII core protein kinase SER/THR PROTEIN KINASE8 (STN8). Moreover, in mutants impaired in interaction between phosphorylated LHCII and PSI, the phosphorylation dynamics of CURT1B and the amount of the other CURT1 proteins were misregulated, indicating a functional interaction between CURT1B and PSI-LHCII complexes in grana margins. The complex relationships between phosphorylation of PSII, LHCII, and CURT1B support the dynamics of thylakoid protein complexes that are crucial in the optimization of photosynthesis under fluctuating light intensities.

CURT1B: !localizes to! curvature domain
CURT1B: !exhibits mutually exclusive! phosphorylation and acetylation
CURT1B: !increases in phosphorylation with! light shifts
CURT1B: !regulated by! STN8
CURT1B: !interacts with! PSI-LHCII complexes