Synonymous mutations do not change amino acids but do sometimes change the tRNAs (anticodons) that decode a particular codon. An isoaccepting codon is a synonymous codon that shares the same tRNA. If a mutated codon could base pair with the same anticodon as the original, the mutation is termed an isoaccepting mutation. An interesting but less-studied type of codon bias is codon co-occurrence bias. There is a trend to cluster the isoaccepting codons in the genome. The proposed advantage of codon co-occurrence bias is that the tRNA released from the ribosome E site could be quickly recharged and subsequently decode the following isoaccepting codons. This advantage would enhance translation efficiency. In plant species, whether there are signals of positive selection on isoaccepting mutations in the codon co-occurred regions has not been studied. We termed polymorphic mutations in coding regions using publicly available RNA-seq data in maize (Zea mays). Next, we classified all synonymous mutations into three categories according to the context, i.e., the relationship between the focal codon and the previous codon, as follows: isoaccepting, nonisoaccepting and nonsynonymous. We observed higher fractions of isoaccepting mutations in the isoaccepting context. If we looked at the minor allele frequency (MAF) spectrum, the isoaccepting mutations have a higher MAF in the isoaccepting context than that in other regions, and accordingly, the nonisoaccepting mutations have a higher MAF in the nonisoaccepting context. Our results indicate that in regions with codon co-occurrence bias, natural selection maintains this pattern by suppressing the nonisoaccepting mutations. However, if the consecutive codons are nonisoaccepting, mutations tend to switch these codons to become isoaccepting. Our study demonstrates that the codon co-occurrence bias in the maize genome is selectively maintained by natural selection and that the advantage of this trend could potentially be the rapid recharging and reuse of tRNAs to increase translation efficiency.

tRNA: !decodes! codon 
mutation: !changes! tRNA 
mutation: !classified as! isoaccepting/nonisoaccepting/nonsynonymous 
context: !influences! mutation 
MAF: !higher in! isoaccepting context 
selection: !suppresses! nonisoaccepting mutations 
selection: !switches! nonisoaccepting codons to isoaccepting 
advantage: !increases! translation efficiency