We investigated the functions of two cyanobacterial HemY protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase (PPO) genes with in vitro and in vivo assays and evaluated their applicability as resistance traits to PPO-inhibiting herbicides. We isolated HemY-type protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase (PPO) genes from cyanobacteria, OnPPO gene from Oscillatoria nigro-viridis PCC7112 and HaPPO gene from Halothece sp. PCC7418. The alignment of amino acid sequences as well as phylogenetic analyses conducted showed that OnPPO and HaPPO are classified as HemY-type PPO and are more closely related to plastidic PPOs than to mitochondrial PPOs. The PPO-deficient Escherichia coli BT3 strain, which requires heme supplementation, could obtain normal growth in the absence of heme supplementation when complemented with OnPPO and HaPPO. The enzyme assays of OnPPO, HaPPO, and Arabidopsis thaliana PPO1 (AtPPO1) proteins each revealed different kinetic properties in terms of catalytic efficiency, substrate affinity, and the degree of inhibition by PPO inhibitors. In particular, the catalytic efficiencies (k<sub>cat</sub>/Km) of OnPPO and HaPPO were approximately twofold higher than that of AtPPO1. The elution profiles of all three PPOs, acquired by size-exclusion chromatography, showed only a single peak with a molecular weight of approximately 52-54 kDa, which corresponds to a monomeric form. Moreover, functional complementation with OnPPO and HaPPO in AtPPO1-silenced Arabidopsis resulted in restored growth, whereas AtPPO1-silenced wild type Arabidopsis suffered necrotic death. In addition, we observed that overexpression of OnPPO and HaPPO in Arabidopsis conferred resistance to the PPO-inhibiting herbicides tiafenacil and saflufenacil. These results suggest that two HemY-type PPOs of cyanobacteria can functionally substitute for plastidic PPO activity in Arabidopsis and can enhance resistance to tiafenacil and saflufenacil.

OnPPO: !substitutes for! AtPPO1 
HaPPO: !substitutes for! AtPPO1 
OnPPO: !enhances! resistance to tiafenacil 
HaPPO: !enhances! resistance to saflufenacil 
OnPPO: !catalyzes! heme supplementation 
HaPPO: !catalyzes! heme supplementation 
OnPPO: !localizes to! Oscillatoria nigro-viridis PCC7112 
HaPPO: !localizes to! Halothece sp. PCC7418