In the wheat TCMS line YS3038, the anther development is inhibited from late uninucleate stage to the binucleate stage. The disruption of energy metabolism pathways by aberrant transcriptional regulation causes the male sterility under low temperatures. The utilization of thermosensitive male sterile (TMS) lines provides a basis for two-line breeding. Previous work, including morphological and cytological observations, has shown that the development process of the TMS line YS3038 is inhibited from the late uninucleate stage to the binucleate stage. Transcriptomics studies could now help to elucidate the overall expression of related genes in a specific reproductive process, revealing the metabolic network and its regulatory mechanism of the reproductive process from the transcription level. Considering the fertility characteristics of YS3038, three important stages for transcriptome analysis were determined to be the early uninucleate, late uninucleate and binucleate stages. The number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was found to be highest in the binucleate stage, and most were related to energy metabolism. Quantitative PCR analysis of selected genes related to energy metabolism revealed that their expression patterns were consistent with the sequencing results. Analysis of the fertility mechanism of YS3038 showed that although the tapetum of anthers was degraded in advance of the tetrad stage, the development of microspores did not result in obvious abnormalities until the binucleate stage, because the genes involved in energy metabolism pathways, including starch and sucrose metabolism (SSM), glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, and respiration electron transport chain are differentially expressed under sterile and fertile conditions. Therefore, the pollen in YS3038 was sterile.

energy metabolism pathways: !disrupted by! aberrant transcriptional regulation
TMS line YS3038: !inhibited from! late uninucleate stage to binucleate stage
DEGs: !highest in! binucleate stage
DEGs: !related to! energy metabolism
selected genes: !expression patterns consistent with! sequencing results
tapetum: !degraded in advance of! tetrad stage
genes involved in energy metabolism pathways: !differentially expressed under sterile and fertile conditions!