Cotton fiber length and strength are both key traits of fiber quality, and fiber strength (FS) is tightly correlated with secondary cell wall (SCW) biosynthesis. The three-amino-acid-loop-extension (TALE) superclass homeoproteins are involved in regulating diverse biological processes in plants, and some TALE members has been identified to play a key role in regulating SCW formation. However, little is known about the functions of TALE members in cotton (Gossypium spp.). In the present study, based on gene homology, 46, 47, 88 and 94 TALE superfamily genes were identified in G. arboreum, G. raimondii, G. barbadense and G. hirsutum, respectively. Phylogenetic and evolutionary analysis showed the evolutionary conservation of two cotton TALE families (including BEL1-like and KNOX families). Gene structure analysis also indicated the conservation of GhTALE members under selection. The analysis of promoter cis-elements and expression patterns suggested potential transcriptional regulation functions in fiber SCW biosynthesis and responses to some phytohormones for GhTALE proteins. Genome-wide analysis of colocalization of TALE transcription factors with SCW-related QTLs revealed that some BEL1-like genes and KNAT7 homologs may participate in the regulation of cotton fiber strength formation. Overexpression of GhKNAT7-A03 and GhBLH6-A13 significantly inhibited the synthesis of lignocellulose in interfascicular fibers of Arabidopsis. Yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) experiments showed extensive heteromeric interactions between GhKNAT7 homologs and some GhBEL1-like proteins. Yeast one-hybrid (Y1H) experiments identified the upstream GhMYB46 binding sites in the promoter region of GhTALE members and defined the downstream genes that can be directly bound and regulated by GhTALE heterodimers. We comprehensively identified TALE superfamily genes in cotton. Some GhTALE members are predominantly expressed during the cotton fiber SCW thicking stage, and may genetically correlated with the formation of FS. Class II KNOX member GhKNAT7 can interact with some GhBEL1-like members to form the heterodimers to regulate the downstream targets, and this regulatory relationship is partially conserved with Arabidopsis. In summary, this study provides important clues for further elucidating the functions of TALE genes in regulating cotton growth and development, especially in the fiber SCW biosynthesis network, and it also contributes genetic resources to the improvement of cotton fiber quality.

TALE: !regulates! SCW formation
TALE: !correlated with! FS
TALE: !predominantly expressed during! cotton fiber SCW thicking stage
GhKNAT7: !interacts with! GhBEL1-like proteins
GhMYB46: !binds to! GhTALE members
GhKNAT7: !regulates! downstream targets