Frost stress severely affects agriculture and agroforestry worldwide. Although many studies about frost hardening and resistance have been published, most of them focused on the aboveground organs and only a minority specifically targets the roots. However, roots and aboveground tissues have different physiologies and stress response mechanisms. Climate models predict an increase in the magnitude and frequency of late-frost events, which, together with an observed loss of soil insulation, will greatly decrease plant primary production due to damage at the root level. Molecular and metabolic responses inducing root cold hardiness are complex. They involve a variety of processes related to modifications in cell wall composition, maintenance of the cellular homeostasis and the synthesis of primary and secondary metabolites. After a summary of the current climatic models, this review details the specificity of freezing stress at the root level and explores the strategies roots developed to cope with freezing stress. We then describe the level to which roots can be frost hardy, depending on their age, size category and species. After that, we compare the environmental signals inducing cold acclimation and frost hardening in the roots and aboveground organs. Subsequently, we discuss how roots sense cold at a cellular level and briefly describe the following signal transduction pathway, which leads to molecular and metabolic responses associated with frost hardening. Finally, the current options available to increase root frost tolerance are explored and promising lines of future research are discussed.

Root: !senses! Cold
Signal transduction pathway: !leads to! Molecular/metabolic responses
Environmental signals: !induce! Cold acclimation/frost hardening
Frost stress: !affects! Agriculture/agroforestry
Cell wall composition: !modifies! Physiology/stress response mechanisms
Primary/secondary metabolites: !synthesizes! Roots
Molecular/metabolic responses: !maintain! Cellular homeostasis