Carbon reserves in rice straw before flowering contribute greatly to grain filling. Moderate soil drying imposed at the post-anthesis stage significantly promotes carbon reserve remobilization in straws of rice, but the regulation of this process at the proteomic and transcriptomic level remains poorly understood. In this study, we applied moderate soil drying (MD) to rice at the post-anthesis stage, which was followed by dynamic proteomic and transcriptomic studies using SWATH-MS and RNA-seq analysis. MD treatment upregulated the proteins alpha-glucosidase, beta-glucosidase and starch phosphorylase, which are responsible for starch degradation. Furthermore, MD treatment enhanced the expression of proteins involved in the sucrose synthesis pathway, including SPS8 and SPP1. In addition, various monosaccharide transporters (MSTs) and sucrose transporter 2 (SUT2), which are pivotal in carbon reserve remobilization, were also upregulated in straw by MD treatment. Differentially expressed transcription factors, including GRAS, TCP, trihelix, TALE, C3H, and NF-YC, were predicted to interact with other proteins to mediate carbon reserve remobilization in response to MD treatment. Further correlation analysis revealed that the abundances of most of the differentially expressed proteins were not correlated with the corresponding transcript levels, indicating that the carbon reserve remobilization process was probably regulated by posttranscriptional modification. Our results provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of carbon reserve remobilization from straw to grain in rice under MD conditions.

alpha-glucosidase: !enhances! starch degradation
beta-glucosidase: !enhances! starch degradation
starch phosphorylase: !enhances! starch degradation
SPS8: !enhances! sucrose synthesis
SPP1: !enhances! sucrose synthesis
MSTs: !enhances! carbon reserve remobilization
SUT2: !enhances! carbon reserve remobilization
GRAS: !interacts with! other proteins
TCP: !interacts with! other proteins
trihelix: !interacts with! other proteins
TALE: !interacts with! other proteins
C3H: !interacts with! other proteins
NF-YC: !interacts with! other proteins