Walnut production is challenged by climate change and abiotic stresses. Elucidating the genomic basis of adaptation to climate is essential to breeding drought-tolerant cultivars for enhanced productivity in arid and semi-arid regions. Here, we aimed to identify loci potentially involved in water use efficiency (WUE) and adaptation to drought in Persian walnut using a diverse panel of 95 walnut families (950 seedlings) from Iran, which show contrasting levels of water availability in their native habitats. We analyzed associations between phenotypic, genotypic, and environmental variables from data sets of 609 000 high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), three categories of phenotypic traits [WUE-related traits under drought, their drought stress index, and principal components (PCs)], and 21 climate variables and their combination (first three PCs). Our genotype-phenotype analysis identified 22 significant and 266 suggestive associations, some of which were for multiple traits, suggesting their correlation and a possible common genetic control. Also, genotype-environment association analysis found 115 significant and 265 suggestive SNP loci that displayed potential signals of local adaptation. Several sets of stress-responsive genes were found in the genomic regions significantly associated with the aforementioned traits. Most of the candidate genes identified are involved in abscisic acid signaling, stomatal regulation, transduction of environmental signals, antioxidant defense system, osmotic adjustment, and leaf growth and development. Upon validation, the marker-trait associations identified for drought tolerance-related traits would allow the selection and development of new walnut rootstocks or scion cultivars with superior WUE.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Gene: !localizes to! SNP loci 
Gene: !interacts with! Abscisic acid signaling 
Gene: !enhances! Stomatal regulation 
Gene: !represses! Environmental signals 
Gene: !synthesizes! Antioxidant defense system