The development of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated base editing has made genomic modification more efficient. However, selection of genetically modified cells from millions of treated cells, especially plant cells, is still challenging. In this study, an efficient surrogate reporter system based on a defective hygromycin resistance gene was established in rice to enrich base-edited cells. After step-by-step optimization, the Discriminated sgRNAs-based SurroGate system (DisSUGs) was established by artificially differentiating the editing abilities of a wild-type single guide RNA (sgRNA) targeting the surrogate reporter gene and an enhanced sgRNA targeting endogenous sites. The DisSUGs enhanced the efficiency of screening base-edited cells by 3- to 5-fold for a PmCDA1-based cytosine-to-tyrosine base editor (PCBE), and 2.5- to 6.5-fold for an adenine base editor (ABE) at endogenous targets. These targets showed editing efficiencies of <25% in the conventional systems. The DisSUGs greatly enhanced the frequency of homozygous substitutions and expanded the activity window slightly for both a PCBE and an ABE. Analyses of the total number of single-nucleotide variants from whole-genome sequencing revealed that, compared with the no-enrichment PCBE strategy, the DisSUGs did not alter the frequency of genome-wide sgRNA-independent off-target mutations, but slightly increased the frequency of target-dependent off-target mutations. Collectively, the DisSUGs developed in this study greatly enhances the efficiency of screening plant base-edited cells and will be a useful system in future applications.

CRISPR/Cas9-mediated base editing: !makes more efficient! genomic modification 
Defective hygromycin resistance gene: !established in! rice 
DisSUGs system: !enhances efficiency of! screening base-edited cells 
PCBE/ABE: !expands activity window! slightly 
No-enrichment PCBE strategy: !does not alter! frequency of genome-wide sgRNA-independent off-target mutations 
DisSUGs: !slightly increases! frequency of target-dependent off-target mutations