Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is the most important food legume for direct human consumption around the world, as it represents a valuable source of components with nutritional and health benefits. We conducted a study to define and explain the genetic relatedness and diversification level of common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) germplasm from Portugal to Ukraine, along a western-to-eastern line of southern European countries, including Poland. This was based on the P. vulgaris genetic structure, and was designed to better describe its distribution and domestication pathways in Europe. Using the multi-crop passport descriptors that include geographic origin and different phaseolin types (corresponding to the Mesoamerican and Andean gene pools), 782 accessions were obtained from nine gene banks and 12 geographic origins. We selected 33 genome/ gene-related/ gene-pool-related nuclear simple sequence repeat markers that covered the genetic diversity across the P. vulgaris genome. The overall polymorphic information content was 0.800. Without specifying geographic origin, global structure cluster analysis generated 10 genetic clusters. Among the PvSHP1 markers, the most informative for gene pool assignment of the European P. vulgaris germplasm was PvSHP1-B. Results of AMOVA show that 89% of the molecular variability is shared within the 782 accessions, with 4% molecular variability among the different geographic origins along this western-to-eastern line of southern Europe (including Poland). This study shows that the diversification line of the European P. vulgaris germplasm followed from the western areas of southern Europe (Portugal, Spain, Italy, Slovenia) to the more eastern areas of southern Europe. This progression defines three geographically separated subgroups, as the northern (Poland, Ukraine, Romania), southern (Albania, Bulgaria), and central (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Hungary) areas of eastern Europe.

Gene: !affects! Genetic diversity
Gene: !localizes to! P. vulgaris genome
Gene: !interacts with! Nuclear simple sequence repeat markers
Gene: !enhances! Molecular variability
Gene: !represses! Geographic origin
Gene: !synthesizes! Genetic clusters