HbMBF1a was isolated and characterized in H. brevisubulatum, and overexpressed HbMBF1a could enhance the salt tolerance and ABA insensitivity in Arabidopsis thaliana. The transcript levels of stress-responsive genes were significantly increased in the transgenic lines under salt and ABA conditions. Salinity is an abiotic stress that considerably affects plant growth, yield, and distribution. Hordeum brevisubulatum is a halophyte that evolved to become highly tolerant to salinity. Multiprotein bridging factor 1 (MBF1) is a transcriptional coactivator and an important regulator of stress tolerance. In this study, we isolated and characterized HbMBF1a based on the transcriptome data of H. brevisubulatum grown under saline conditions. We overexpressed HbMBF1a in Arabidopsis thaliana and compared the phenotypes of the transgenic lines and the wild-type in response to stresses. The results indicated that HbMBF1a expression was induced by salt and ABA treatments during the middle and late stages. The overexpression of HbMBF1a in A. thaliana resulted in enhanced salt tolerance and ABA insensitivity. More specifically, the enhanced salt tolerance manifested as the increased seed germination and seedling growth and development. Similarly, under ABA treatments, the cotyledon greening rate and seedling root length were higher in the HbMBF1a-overexpressing lines, suggesting the transgenic plants were better adapted to high exogenous ABA levels. Furthermore, the transcript levels of stress-responsive genes were significantly increased in the transgenic lines under salt and ABA conditions. Thus, HbMBF1a is a positive regulator of salt and ABA responses, and the corresponding gene may be useful for producing transgenic plants that are salt tolerant and/or ABA insensitive, with few adverse effects. This study involved a comprehensive analysis of HbMBF1a. The results may provide the basis and insight for the application of MBF1 family genes for developing stress-tolerant crops.

HbMBF1a: !enhances! salt tolerance and ABA insensitivity 
HbMBF1a: !induces! stress-responsive gene expression 
H. brevisubulatum: !evolved to become! highly tolerant to salinity 
Multiprotein bridging factor 1 (MBF1): !is a! transcriptional coactivator 
A. thaliana: !overexpresses! HbMBF1a 
HbMBF1a: !increases! seed germination and seedling growth and development 
HbMBF1a: !promotes! cotyledon greening rate and seedling root length 
HbMBF1a: !regulates! salt and ABA responses