Long non-coding (lnc) RNAs are a class of functional RNA molecules greater than 200 nucleotides in length, and lncRNAs play important roles in various biological regulatory processes and response to the biotic and abiotic stresses. LncRNAs associated with salt stress in cotton have been identified through RNA sequencing, but the function of lncRNAs has not been reported. We previously identified salt stress-related lncRNAs in cotton (Gossypium spp.), and discovered the salt-related lncRNA-lncRNA973. In this study, we identified the expression level, localization, function, and preliminary mechanism of action of lncRNA973. LncRNA973, which was localized in the nucleus, was expressed at a low level under nonstress conditions but can be significantly increased by salt treatments. Here lncRNA973 was transformed into Arabidopsis and overexpressed. Along with the increased expression compared with wild type under salt stress conditions in transgenic plants, the seed germination rate, fresh weights and root lengths of the transgenic plants increased. We also knocked down the expression of lncRNA973 using virus-induced gene silencing technology. The lncRNA973 knockdown plants wilted, and the leaves became yellowed and dropped under salt-stress conditions, indicating that the tolerance to salt stress had decreased compared with wild type. LncRNA973 may be involved in the regulation of reactive oxygen species-scavenging genes, transcription factors and genes involved in salt stress-related processes in response to cotton salt stress. LncRNA973 was localized in the nucleus and its expression was increased by salt treatment. The lncRNA973-overexpression lines had increased salt tolerance compared with the wild type, while the lncRNA973 knockdown plants had reduced salt tolerance. LncRNA973 regulated cotton responses to salt stress by modulating the expression of a series of salt stress-related genes. The data provides a basis for further studies on the mechanisms of lncRNA973-associated responses to salt stress in cotton.

lncRNA973: !localizes to! nucleus 
lncRNA973: !increases expression of! salt stress-related genes 
lncRNA973: !enhances! salt tolerance 
lncRNA973: !represses! salt tolerance