Salicylic acid (SA) is a significant signaling molecule that induces rice resistance against pathogen invasion. Protein phosphorylation carries out an important regulatory function in plant defense responses, while the global phosphoproteome changes in rice response to SA-mediated defense response has not been reported. In this study, a comparative phosphoproteomic profiling was conducted by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, with two near-isogenic rice cultivars after SA treatment. Thirty-seven phosphoprotein spots were differentially expressed after SA treatment, twenty-nine of which were identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS, belonging to nine functional categories. Phosphoproteins involved in photosynthesis, antioxidative enzymes, molecular chaperones were similarly expressed in the two cultivars, suggesting SA might alleviate decreases in plant photosynthesis, regulate the antioxidant defense activities, thus improving basal resistance response in both cultivars. Meanwhile, phosphoproteins related to defense, carbohydrate metabolism, protein synthesis and degradation were differentially expressed, suggesting phosphorylation regulation mediated by SA may coordinate complex cellular activities in the two cultivars. Furthermore, the phosphorylation sites of four identified phosphoproteins were verified by NanoLC-MS/MS, and phosphorylated regulation of three enzymes (cinnamoyl-CoA reductase, phosphoglycerate mutase and ascorbate peroxidase) was validated by activity determination. Our study suggested that phosphorylation regulation mediated by SA may contribute to the different resistance response of the two cultivars. To our knowledge, this is the first report to measure rice phosphoproteomic changes in response to SA, which provides new insights into molecular mechanisms of SA-induced rice defense.

SA: !induces! Rice resistance
Protein phosphorylation: !carries out! Regulatory function
SA: !alleviates! Decreases in plant photosynthesis
SA: !regulates! Antioxidant defense activities
SA: !coordinates! Complex cellular activities
SA: !contributes to! Different resistance response
Phosphorylation: !verifies! Phosphoproteins
Phosphorylation: !validates! Enzymes