Flesh color is one of the most important traits for the commercial value of peach fruit. To unravel the underlying regulatory network in Prunus mira, we performed an integrated analysis of the transcriptome and metabolome of 3 fruit types with various flesh pigmentations (milk-white, yellow and blood) at 3 developmental stages (pit-hardening, cell enlargement and fruit ripening). Transcriptome analysis showed that an intense transcriptional adjustment is required for the transition from the pit-hardening to the cell enlargement stage. In contrast, few genes were differentially expressed (DEGs) from the cell enlargement to the fruit ripening stage and importantly, the 3 fruits displayed diverse transcriptional activities, indicating that difference in fruit flesh pigmentations mainly occurred during the ripening stage. We further investigated the DEGs between pairs of fruit types during the ripening stage and identified 563 DEGs representing the 'core transcriptome' associated with major differentiations between the 3 fruit types, including flesh pigmentation. Meanwhile, we analyzed the metabolome, particularly, at the ripening stage and uncovered 40 differential metabolites ('core metabolome') between the 3 fruit types including 5 anthocyanins, which may be the key molecules associated with flesh coloration. Finally, we constructed the regulatory network depicting the interactions between anthocyanins and important transcripts involved in fruit flesh coloration. The major metabolites and transcripts involved in fruit flesh coloration in P. mira were unraveled in this study providing valuable information which will undoubtedly assist in breeding towards improved fruit quality in peach.

Flesh color: !associated with! Anthocyanins 
Transcripts: !involved in! Fruit flesh coloration 
Metabolites: !differential between! 3 fruit types 
Anthocyanins: !key molecules for! Flesh coloration 
Metabolome: !analyzed at! Ripening stage 
Transcriptome: !adjusted for! Transition from pit-hardening to cell enlargement