['31685645', "Members of the mitochondrial transcription terminator factor (mTERF) family,  originally identified in vertebrate mitochondria, are involved in the termination  of organellular transcription. In plants, mTERF proteins are mainly localized in  chloroplasts and mitochondria. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana),  mTERF8/pTAC15 was identified in the plastid-encoded RNA polymerase (PEP) complex,  the major RNA polymerase of chloroplasts. In this work, we demonstrate that  mTERF8 is associated with the PEP complex. An mTERF8 knockout line displayed a  wild-type-like phenotype under standard growth conditions, but showed impaired  efficiency of photosystem II electron flow. Transcription of most chloroplast  genes was not substantially affected in the mterf8 mutant; however, the level of  the psbJ transcript from the psbEFLJ polycistron was increased. RNA blot analysis  showed that a larger transcript accumulates in mterf8 than in the wild type.  Thus, abnormal transcription and/or RNA processing occur for the psbEFLJ  polycistron. Circular reverse transcription PCR and sequence analysis showed that  the psbJ transcript terminates 95 nucleotides downstream of the translation stop  codon in the wild type, whereas its termination is aberrant in mterf8 Both  electrophoresis mobility shift assays and chloroplast chromatin  immunoprecipitation analysis showed that mTERF8 specifically binds to the 3'  terminal region of psbJ Transcription analysis using the in vitro T7 RNA  polymerase system showed that mTERF8 terminates psbJ transcription. Together,  these results suggest that mTERF8 is specifically involved in the transcription  termination of the chloroplast gene psbJ.", '2020 Jan', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.19.00906', 'ORCID:']

mTERF8: !localizes to! PEP complex 
mTERF8: !interacts with! psbJ transcript 
mTERF8: !enhances! efficiency of photosystem II electron flow 
mTERF8: !represses! transcription of psbEFLJ polycistron 
mTERF8: !synthesizes! larger psbJ transcript