Chinese hickory (Carya cathayensis) is a popular nut plant having high economic value. Grafting is applied to accelerate the transition from vegetative phase to reproductive phase. Lysine succinylation occurs frequently in the proteins associated with metabolic pathways, which may participate in the regulation of the grafting process. However, the exact regulatory mechanism underlying grafting process in Chinese hickory has not been studied at post-translational modification level. A comprehensive proteome-wide lysine succinylation profiling of Chinese hickory was explored by a newly developed method combining affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS. In total, 259 succinylation sites in 202 proteins were identified, representing the first comprehensive lysine succinylome in Chinese hickory. The succinylation was biased to occur in the cytosolic proteins of Chinese hickory. Moreover, four conserved succinylation motifs were identified in the succinylated peptides. Comparison of two grafting stages of Chinese hickory revealed that the differential expressed succinylated proteins were mainly involved in sugar metabolism, carbon fixation, amino acid metabolism and plant-pathogen interaction. Besides, seven heat shock proteins (HSPs) with 11 succinylation sites were also identified, all of which were observed to be up-regulated during the grafting process. Succinylation of the proteins involved in amino acid biosynthesis might be required for a successful grafting. Succinylated HSPs might play a role in stress tolerance of the grafted Chinese hickory plants. Our results can be a good resource for functional validation of the succinylated proteins and a starting point for the investigation of molecular mechanisms during lysine succinylation occurring at grafting site.

gene: !affects! sugar metabolism
gene: !affects! carbon fixation
gene: !affects! amino acid metabolism
gene: !affects! plant-pathogen interaction
gene: !enhances! stress tolerance
gene: !synthesizes! amino acid biosynthesis
gene: !localizes to! cytosolic proteins