The quality and amount of yellow lupine yield depend on water availability. Water scarcity negatively affects germination, flowering, and pod formation, and thus introduction of an artificial irrigation system is needed. The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of irrigation on the quality of yellow lupine seeds. Raining was applied with a semi-solid device with sprinklers during periods of greatest water demand. It was shown that watered plants produced seeds of lesser quality, having smaller size and weight. To find out why seeds of irrigated plants were of poor quality, interdisciplinary research at the cellular level was carried out. DNA cytophotometry evidenced the presence of nuclei with lower polyploidy in the apical zone of mature seeds. This may lead to formation of smaller cells and reduce depositing of storage materials. The electrophoretic and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analyses revealed differences in protein and cuticular wax profiles, while scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy revealed, among various chemical elements, decreased calcium content in one of seed zones (near plumule). Seeds from irrigated plants showed slightly higher germination dynamics but growth rate of seedlings was slightly lower. The studies showed that irrigation of lupine affected seed features and their chemical composition, an ability to germination and seedlings growth.

water: !affects! germination 
water: !affects! flowering 
water: !affects! pod formation 
irrigation: !influences! quality of yellow lupine seeds 
DNA cytophotometry: !evidences! nuclei with lower polyploidy 
electrophoretic and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analyses: !reveal! differences in protein and cuticular wax profiles 
scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy: !reveal! decreased calcium content 
irrigation: !affects! seed features 
irrigation: !affects! chemical composition 
irrigation: !affects! ability to germinate 
irrigation: !affects! seedlings growth