The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors (TFs), as one of the largest families of TFs, play important roles in the regulation of many secondary metabolites including flavonoids. Their involvement in flavonoids synthesis is well established in vascular plants, but not as yet in the bryophytes. In liverworts, both bisbibenzyls and flavonoids are derived through the phenylpropanoids pathway and share several upstream enzymes. In this study, we cloned and characterized the function of PabHLH1, a bHLH family protein encoded by the liverworts species Plagiochasma appendiculatum. PabHLH1 is phylogenetically related to the IIIf subfamily bHLHs involved in flavonoids biosynthesis. A transient expression experiment showed that PabHLH1 is deposited in the nucleus and cytoplasm, while the yeast one hybrid assay showed that it has transactivational activity. When PabHLH1 was overexpressed in P. appendiculatum thallus, a positive correlation was established between the content of bibenzyls and flavonoids and the transcriptional abundance of corresponding genes involved in the biosynthesis pathway of these compounds. The heterologous expression of PabHLH1 in Arabidopsis thaliana resulted in the activation of flavonoids and anthocyanins synthesis, involving the up-regulation of structural genes acting both early and late in the flavonoids synthesis pathway. The transcription level of PabHLH1 in P. appendiculatum thallus responded positively to stress induced by either exposure to UV radiation or treatment with salicylic acid. PabHLH1 was involved in the regulation of the biosynthesis of flavonoids as well as bibenzyls in liverworts and stimulated the accumulation of the flavonols and anthocyanins in Arabidopsis.

PabHLH1: !localizes to! nucleus and cytoplasm 
PabHLH1: !enhances! bibenzyls and flavonoids biosynthesis 
PabHLH1: !activates! flavonoids and anthocyanins synthesis 
PabHLH1: !up-regulates! structural genes in flavonoids synthesis pathway 
PabHLH1: !responds to! UV radiation and salicylic acid