Root hydraulic conductivity is a limiting factor along the water pathways between the soil and the leaf, and root radial conductivity is itself defined by cell-scale hydraulic properties and anatomical features. However, quantifying the influence of anatomical features on the radial conductivity remains challenging due to complex time-consuming experimental procedures. We present an open-source computational tool, the Generator of Root Anatomy in R (GRANAR; http://granar.github.io), that can be used to rapidly generate digital versions of contrasted monocotyledon root anatomical networks. GRANAR uses a limited set of root anatomical parameters, easily acquired with existing image analysis tools. The generated anatomical network can then be used in combination with hydraulic models to estimate the corresponding hydraulic properties. We used GRANAR to reanalyze large maize (<i>Zea mays</i>) anatomical datasets from the literature. Our model was successful at creating virtual anatomies for each experimental observation. We also used GRANAR to generate anatomies not observed experimentally over wider ranges of anatomical parameters. The generated anatomies were then used to estimate the corresponding radial conductivities with the hydraulic model MECHA (model of explicit cross-section hydraulic architecture). Our simulations highlight the large importance of the width of the stele and the cortex. GRANAR is a computational tool that generates root anatomical networks from experimental data. It enables the quantification of the effect of individual anatomical features on the root radial conductivity.

Root: !limited by! Hydraulic conductivity 
Cell-scale hydraulic properties: !define! Root radial conductivity 
GRANAR: !generates! Digital versions of contrasted monocotyledon root anatomical networks 
GRANAR: !uses! Limited set of root anatomical parameters 
Anatomical network: !used in combination with! Hydraulic models 
GRANAR: !reanalyzes! Maize anatomical datasets 
Virtual anatomies: !created for! Experimental observations 
GRANAR: !generates! Anatomies not observed experimentally 
MECHA: !estimates! Corresponding radial conductivities 
Stele width: !largely important for! Root radial conductivity