The twining habit is a climbing strategy that helps slender plants grow upward by using circumnutation around other plants. In geological history, climbing may have already been present in the first Middle Devonian forests, as indicated by possible climbers among aneurophytalean progymnosperms [1] and lycopsids [2]. By the late Carboniferous, climbing was both more common and diverse - preserved in swamp forests with modes of attachment ranging from aerial roots to appendages modified into hooks and tendrils on the leaves [3]. However, all of these diagnoses of a climbing habit are based upon either indirect morphological characteristics of the purported climber or on direct physical contact with a host plant, but without direct preservation of twining [3,4]. Permineralized epiphytes have been preserved in the Carboniferous [5], but the interpretation of scars purported to have been caused by twiners that have been found on trunk compressions of potential host-plants has been questioned [5] (see Supplemental Information). Direct preservation of a climber engaged in true twining around a host has only been documented in the Miocene Shanwang Formation of Eastern China, albeit with the identity of the twiner difficult to establish and likely to be a self-twiner [6]. Here, we report a climbing fern engaged in left-handed twining around a seed plant from the early Permian Wuda Tuff fossil Lagerstätte of Inner Mongolia, China [7]. Moreover, the host plant is likely to also be a climber based on its overall form. Such a climber-climbing-a-climber phenomenon signals the potential ecological complexity of late Paleozoic forests.

Anurophytalean progymnosperms: !indicate! Climbing
Lycopsids: !indicate! Climbing
Aerial roots: !attach to! Host plant
Appendages: !modify into! Hooks and tendrils
Permineralized epiphytes: !preserve in! Carboniferous
Scars: !purport to be caused by! Twiners
Miocene Shanwang Formation: !document! Twining
Early Permian Wuda Tuff: !report! Climbing fern
Climbing fern: !twines around! Seed plant