Considerable genetic variation in agronomic nitrogen (N) use efficiency (NUE) has been reported among genotypes of Brassica napus. However, the physiological and molecular mechanisms underpinning these differences remain poorly understood. In this study, physiological and genetic factors impacting NUE were identified in field trials and hydroponic experiments using two B. napus genotypes with contrasting NUE. The results showed that the N-efficient genotype (D4-15) had greater N uptake and utilization efficiencies, more root tips, larger root surface and root volume, and higher N assimilation and photosynthesis capacity than the N-inefficient genotype (D2-1). Genomic analysis revealed that D4-15 had a greater genome diversity related to NUE than D2-1. By combining genomic and transcriptomic analysis, genes involved in photosynthesis and C/N metabolism were implicated in conferring NUE. Co-expression network analysis of genes that differed between the two genotypes suggested gene clusters impacting NUE. A nitrate transporter gene BnaA06g04560D (NRT2.1) and two vacuole nitrate transporter CLC genes (BnaA02g11800D and BnaA02g28670D) were up-regulated by N starvation in D4-15 but not in D2-1. The study revealed that high N uptake and utilization efficiencies, maintained photosynthesis and coordinated C/N metabolism confer high NUE in B. napus, and identified candidate genes that could facilitate breeding for enhanced NUE in B. napus.

N-efficient genotype: !has greater! N uptake and utilization efficiencies
N-efficient genotype: !has more! root tips
N-efficient genotype: !has larger! root surface and root volume
N-efficient genotype: !has higher! N assimilation and photosynthesis capacity
Genomic analysis: !revealed greater! genome diversity related to NUE
Photosynthesis and C/N metabolism: !implicated in conferring! NUE
Co-expression network analysis: !suggested gene clusters! impacting NUE
Nitrate transporter gene: !up-regulated by! N starvation
Vacuole nitrate transporter CLC genes: !up-regulated by! N starvation