Ascorbate is a powerful antioxidant in plants and an essential micronutrient for humans. The GDP-L-galactose phosphorylase (GGP) gene encodes the rate-limiting enzyme of the L-galactose pathway-the dominant ascorbate biosynthetic pathway in plants-and is a promising gene candidate for increasing ascorbate in crops. In addition to transcriptional regulation, GGP production is regulated at the translational level through an upstream open reading frame (uORF) in the long 5'-untranslated region (5'UTR). The GGP genes have yet to be identified in bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.), one of the most important food grain sources for humans. Bread wheat chromosomal groups 4 and 5 were found to each contain three homoeologous TaGGP genes on the A, B, and D subgenomes (TaGGP2-A/B/D and TaGGP1-A/B/D, respectively) and a highly conserved uORF was present in the long 5'UTR of all six genes. Phylogenetic analyses demonstrated that the TaGGP genes separate into two distinct groups and identified a duplication event of the GGP gene in the ancestor of the Brachypodium/Triticeae lineage. A microsynteny analysis revealed that the TaGGP1 and TaGGP2 subchromosomal regions have no shared synteny suggesting that TaGGP2 may have been duplicated via a transposable element. The two groups of TaGGP genes have distinct expression patterns with the TaGGP1 homoeologs broadly expressed across different tissues and developmental stages and the TaGGP2 homoeologs highly expressed in anthers. Transient transformation of the TaGGP coding sequences in Nicotiana benthamiana leaf tissue increased ascorbate concentrations more than five-fold, confirming their functional role in ascorbate biosynthesis in planta. We have identified six TaGGP genes in the bread wheat genome, each with a highly conserved uORF. Phylogenetic and microsynteny analyses highlight that a transposable element may have been responsible for the duplication and specialized expression of GGP2 in anthers in the Brachypodium/Triticeae lineage. Transient transformation of the TaGGP coding sequences in N. benthamiana demonstrated their activity in planta. The six TaGGP genes and uORFs identified in this study provide a valuable genetic resource for increasing ascorbate concentrations in bread wheat.

TaGGP: !encodes! rate-limiting enzyme
TaGGP: !duplicated via! transposable element
TaGGP1: !broadly expressed! across tissues/stages
TaGGP2: !highly expressed! in anthers
TaGGP coding sequences: !increase! ascorbate concentrations
uORF: !present in! long 5'UTR