Present review provides a thorough insight on some significant aspects of CHSs over a period of about past three decades with a better outlook for future studies toward comprehending the structural and mechanistic intricacy of this symbolic enzyme. Polyketide synthases (PKSs) form a large family of iteratively acting multifunctional proteins that are involved in the biosynthesis of spectrum of natural products. They exhibit remarkable versatility in the structural configuration and functional organization with an incredible ability to generate different classes of compounds other than the characteristic secondary metabolite constituents. Architecturally, chalcone synthase (CHS) is considered to be the simplest representative of Type III PKSs. The enzyme is pivotal for phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and is also well known for catalyzing the initial step of the flavonoid/isoflavonoid pathway. Being the first Type III enzyme to be discovered, CHS has been subjected to ample investigations which, to a greater extent, have tried to understand its structural complexity and promiscuous functional behavior. In this context, we vehemently tried to collect the fragmented information entirely focussed on this symbolic enzyme from about past three-four decades. The aim of this review is to selectively summarize data on some of the fundamental aspects of CHSs viz, its history and distribution, localization, structure and analogs in non-plant hosts, promoter analyses, and role in defense, with an emphasis on mechanistic studies in different species and vis-à-vis mutation-led changes, and evolutionary significance which has been discussed in detail. The present review gives an insight with a better perspective for the scientific community for future studies devoted towards delimiting the mechanistic and structural basis of polyketide biosynthetic machinery vis-à-vis CHS.

CHS: !catalyzes! Initial step of flavonoid/isoflavonoid pathway
CHS: !involved in! Biosynthesis of natural products
CHS: !structurally complex! Promiscuous functional behavior
CHS: !subjected to! Ample investigations
CHS: !localized in! Different species
CHS: !promoter analyses! Role in defense
CHS: !mutation-led changes! Evolutionary significance