We report the first comparative study of protein expression profiles in tuber sprouts between Katahdin-derived potato cultivars resistant and susceptible to Synchytrium endobioticum. Synchytrium endobioticum causes wart disease in potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) and is considered as the most important quarantine pathogen in almost all countries where potatoes are grown. We performed a comparative analysis of differentially expressed proteins in the tuber sprouts of potato cultivars differing in resistance to pathotype 1(D1) of S. endobioticum using two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approaches. Bulks prepared from two resistant (Calrose and Humalda) and three susceptible (Sebago, Seneca and Wauseon) potato cultivars were studied. When protein profiles were compared between mock- and S. endobioticum-inoculated sprouts, 35 and 63 protein spots, indicating qualitative or quantitative differences, were detected in the resistant and susceptible cultivars, respectively. In turn, 24 proteins associated with resistance to S. endobioticum were revealed by comparison of the resistant and susceptible bulks. These proteins were changed in a constitutive or induced manner and were grouped into four categories: stress and defence, cell structure, protein turnover, and metabolism. Among the 13 proteins classified into the stress and defence group, seven proteins were related to heat-shock proteins (HSPs)/chaperone factors. In addition, four proteins, S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase-like, superoxide dismutase [Mn], inactive patatin-3-Kuras 1 and patatin-15, were induced in the resistant bulk; whereas two proteins, patatin-01 and nucleoredoxin 1, showed significant differences in expression between the S. endobioticum-inoculated resistant and susceptible bulks. The detection of such a large number of S. endobioticum-mediated proteins representing the HSP70, HSP60 and HSP20 families suggests their significant role in restricting wart disease in potato tubers.

Synchytrium endobioticum: !causes! Wart Disease 
Calrose/Humalda: !resistant to! Synchytrium endobioticum 
Sebago/Seneca/Wauseon: !susceptible to! Synchytrium endobioticum 
Proteins: !associated with! Resistance to Synchytrium endobioticum 
Heat-shock proteins (HSPs)/Chaperone Factors: !related to! Stress and Defence 
S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine Hydrolase-like/Superoxide Dismutase [Mn]/Inactive Patatin-3-Kuras 1/Patatin-15: !induced in! Resistant Bulk 
Patatin-01/Nucleoredoxin 1: !showed differences in expression between! S. endobioticum-inoculated Resistant and Susceptible Bulks 
HSP70/HSP60/HSP20 Families: !suggested role in! Restricting Wart Disease