Conserved motif, gene structure, expression and interaction analysis of C2H2-ZFPs in Brassica rapa, and identified types of genes may play essential roles in flower development, and BrZFP38 was proved to function in flower development by affecting pollen formation. Flower development plays a central role in determining the reproduction of higher plants, and Cys<sub>2</sub>/His<sub>2</sub> zinc-finger proteins (C2H2-ZFPs) widely participate in the transcriptional regulation of flower development. C2H2-ZFPs with various structures are the most widespread DNA-binding transcription factors in plants. In this study, conserved protein motif and gene structures were analyzed to investigate systematically the molecular features of Brassica rapa C2H2-ZFP genes. Expression of B. rapa C2H2-ZFPs in multiple tissues showed that more than half of the family members with different types ZFs were expressed in flowers. The specific expression profiles of these C2H2-ZFPs in different B. rapa floral bud stages were further evaluated to identify their potential roles in flower development. Interaction networks were constructed in B. rapa based on the orthology of flower-related C2H2-ZFP genes in Arabidopsis. The putative cis-regulatory elements in the promoter regions of these C2H2-ZFP genes were thoroughly analyzed to elucidate their transcriptional regulation. Results showed that the orthologs of known-function flower-related C2H2-ZFP genes were conserved and differentiated in B. rapa. A C2H2-ZFP was proved to function in B. rapa flower development. Our study provides a systematic investigation of the molecular characteristics and expression profiles of C2H2-ZFPs in B. rapa and promotes further work in function and transcriptional regulation of flower development.

C2H2-ZFPs: !participate in! flower development
Conserved motif, gene structure: !analyzed to investigate! molecular features of B. rapa C2H2-ZFP genes
Expression profiles: !evaluated to identify! potential roles in flower development
Interaction networks: !constructed in! B. rapa
Cis-regulatory elements: !analyzed to elucidate! transcriptional regulation
BrZFP38: !affects! pollen formation