The homeobox transcription factor has a diversity of functions during plant growth and development process. Previous transcriptome analyses of seed development in grape hybrids suggested that specific homeodomain transcription factors are involved in seed development in seedless cultivars. However, the molecular mechanism of homeobox gene regulating seed development in grape is rarely reported. Here, we report that the grapevine VvHB58 gene, encoding a homeodomain-leucine zipper (HD-Zip I) transcription factor, participates in regulating fruit size and seed number. The VvHB58 gene was differentially expressed during seed development between seedless and seeded cultivars. Subcellular localization assays revealed that the VvHB58 protein was located in the nucleus. Transgenic expression of VvHB58 in tomato led to loss of apical dominance, a reduction in fruit pericarp expansion, reduced fruit size and seed number, and larger endosperm cells. Analysis of the cytosine methylation levels within the VvHB58 promoter indicated that the differential expression during seed development between seedless and seeded grapes may be caused by different transcriptional regulatory mechanisms rather than promoter DNA methylation. Measurements of five classic endogenous hormones and expression analysis of hormone-related genes between VvHB58 transgenic and nontransgenic control plants showed that expression of VvHB58 resulted in significant changes in auxin, gibberellin and ethylene signaling pathways. Additionally, several DNA methylation-related genes were expressed differentially during seed development stages in seedless and seeded grapes, suggesting changes in methylation levels during seed development may be associated with seed abortion. VvHB58 has a potential function in regulating fruit and seed development by impacting multiple hormonal pathways. These results expand understanding of homeodomain transcription factors and potential regulatory mechanism of seed development in grapevine, and provided insights into molecular breeding for grapes.

VvHB58: !regulates! Fruit size and seed number 
VvHB58: !localizes to! Nucleus 
VvHB58: !affects! Apical dominance 
VvHB58: !enhances! Endosperm cell size 
VvHB58: !alters! Auxin, gibberellin and ethylene signaling pathways 
VvHB58: !influences! DNA methylation-related genes