Both root nodules and the rhizosphere of Fabaceae plants grown on organic farms are a rich source of bacteria, mainly from the families Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonadaceae. The enhanced root system growth in M. truncatula after inoculation with selected bacteria includes an increase of nuclei in the cell cycle S phase and a reduction in phase G2 as well as an enhanced expression of the WOX5 gene. Synthetic fertilizers and pesticides are commonly used to improve plant quality and health. However, it is necessary to look for other efficient and also environmentally safe methods. One such method involves the use of bacteria known as plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB). Seventy-two bacterial isolates from the rhizospheric soil and root nodule samples of legumes, including bean, alfalfa, lupine and barrel medic, grown on an organic farm in Western Pomerania (Poland) were screened for their growth-promoting capacities and 38 selected isolates were identified based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The analysis showed the isolates to represent 17 strains assigned to 6 families: Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonadaceae, Xanthomonadaceae, Rhizobiaceae, Bacillaceae and Alcaligenaceae. Pot experiments showed that 13 strains, capable of producing indole compounds from tryptophan in vitro, could significantly enhance the root and shoot weight of 10-week-old Medicago truncatula seedlings. Compared to non-inoculated seedlings, the root system of inoculated ones was more branched; in addition, the root length, surface area and, especially, the root volume were higher. The 24-h root inoculation with the three selected strains increased the nuclei population in the G1 and S phases, decreased it in the G2 phase and enhanced the WUSCHEL-related Homeobox5 (WOX5) gene expression in root tips and lateral zones. The "arrest" of nuclei in the S phase and the enhancement of the WOX5 gene expression were observed to gradually disappear once the bacterial suspension was rinsed off the seedling roots and the roots were transferred to water for further growth. This study shows that the nodules and rhizosphere of legumes grown on organic farms are a rich source of different PGPB species and provides new data on the ability of these bacteria to interfere with cell cycle and gene expression during the root development.

Enterobacteriaceae: !enhances! root system growth 
Pseudomonadaceae: !enhances! root system growth 
Xanthomonadaceae: !enhances! root system growth 
Rhizobiaceae: !enhances! root system growth 
Bacillaceae: !enhances! root system growth 
Alcaligenaceae: !enhances! root system growth 
PGPB: !enhances! root and shoot weight 
PGPB: !arrests! nuclei in S phase 
PGPB: !enhances! WOX5 gene expression