['31793101', 'Synthesis of the D1 reaction center protein of Photosystem II is dynamically  regulated in response to environmental and developmental cues. In chloroplasts,  much of this regulation occurs at the post-transcriptional level, but the  proteins responsible are largely unknown. To discover proteins that impact psbA  expression, we identified proteins that associate with maize psbA mRNA by: (i)  formaldehyde cross-linking of leaf tissue followed by antisense oligonucleotide  affinity capture of psbA mRNA; and (ii) co-immunoprecipitation with HCF173, a  psbA translational activator that is known to bind psbA mRNA. The S1 domain  protein SRRP1 and two RNA Recognition Motif (RRM) domain proteins, CP33C and  CP33B, were enriched with both approaches. Orthologous proteins were also among  the enriched protein set in a previous study in Arabidopsis that employed a  designer RNA-binding protein as a psbA RNA affinity tag. We show here that CP33B  is bound to psbA mRNA in vivo, as was shown previously for CP33C and SRRP1.  Immunoblot, pulse labeling, and ribosome profiling analyses of mutants lacking  CP33B and/or CP33C detected some decreases in D1 protein levels under some  conditions, but no change in psbA RNA abundance or translation. However,  analogous experiments showed that SRRP1 represses psbA ribosome association in  the dark, represses ycf1 ribosome association, and promotes accumulation of ndhC  mRNA. As SRRP1 is known to harbor RNA chaperone activity, we postulate that SRRP1  mediates these effects by modulating RNA structures. The uncharacterized proteins  that emerged from our analyses provide a resource for the discovery of proteins  that impact the expression of psbA and other chloroplast genes.', '2020 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.14629', 'ORCID:']

SRRP1: !represses! psbA ribosome association 
SRRP1: !represses! ycf1 ribosome association 
SRRP1: !promotes! ndhC mRNA accumulation 
CP33B: !bound to! psbA mRNA 
CP33C: !bound to! psbA mRNA 
HCF173: !co-immunoprecipitates with! psbA mRNA