Thus study found the temporal and spatial relationship between production of aliphatic glucosinolate compounds and the expression profile of glucosinolate-related genes during growth and development in radish, Chinese cabbage, and their intergeneric hybrid baemoochae plants. Glucosinolates (GSLs) are one of major bioactive compounds in Brassicaceae plants. GSLs play a role in defense against microbes as well as chemo-preventative activity against cancer, which draw attentions from plant scientists. We investigated the temporal relationship between production of aliphatic Glucosinolate (GSLs) compounds and the expression profile of GSL related genes during growth and development in radish, Chinese cabbage, and their intergeneric hybrid, baemoochae. Over the complete life cycle, Glucoraphasatin (GRH) and glucoraphanin (GRE) predominated in radish, whereas gluconapin (GNP), glucobrassicanapin (GBN), and glucoraphanin (GRA) abounded in Chinese cabbage. Baemoochae contained intermediate levels of all GSLs studied, indicating inheritance from both radish and Chinese cabbage. Expression patterns of BCAT4, CYP79F1, CYP83A1, UGT74B1, GRS1, FMOgs-ox1, and AOP2 genes showed a correlation to their corresponding encoded proteins in radish, Chinese cabbage, and baemoochae. Interestingly, there is a sharp change in gene expression pattern involved in side chain modification, particularly GRS1, FMOgs-ox1, and AOP2, among these plants during the vegetative and reproductive stage. For instance, the GRS1 was strongly expressed during leaf development, while both of FMOgs-ox1 and AOP2 was manifested high in floral tissues. Furthermore, expression of GRS1 gene which is responsible for GRH production was predominantly expressed in leaf tissues of radish and baemoochae, whereas it was only slightly detected in Chinese cabbage root tissue, explaining why radish has an abundance of GRH compared to other Brassica plants. Altogether, our comprehensive and comparative data proved that aliphatic GSLs biosynthesis is dynamically and precisely regulated in a tissue- and development-dependent manner in Brassicaceae family members.

GRS1: !strongly expressed in! leaf development 
FMOgs-ox1: !manifested high in! floral tissues 
AOP2: !manifested high in! floral tissues 
GRS1: !predominantly expressed in! radish and baemoochae 
GRS1: !slightly detected in! Chinese cabbage root tissue 
GRH: !abundant in! radish 
GRH: !low in! Chinese cabbage