['31799493', 'The unfolded protein response (UPR), a highly conserved set of eukaryotic  intracellular signaling cascades, controls the homeostasis of the endoplasmic  reticulum (ER) in normal physiological growth and situations causing accumulation  of potentially toxic levels of misfolded proteins in the ER, a condition known as  ER stress. During evolution, eukaryotic lineages have acquired multiple UPR  effectors, which have increased the pliability of cytoprotective responses to  physiological and environmental stresses. The ER-associated protein kinase and  ribonuclease IRE1 is a UPR effector that is conserved from yeast to metazoans and  plants. IRE1 assumes dispensable roles in growth in yeast but it is essential in  mammals and plants. The Arabidopsis genome encodes two isoforms of IRE1, IRE1A  and IRE1B, whose protein functional domains are conserved across eukaryotes.  Here, we describe the identification of a third Arabidopsis IRE1 isoform, IRE1C.  This protein lacks the ER lumenal domain that has been implicated in sensing ER  stress in the IRE1 isoforms known to date. Through functional analyses, we  demonstrate that IRE1C is not essential in growth and stress responses when  deleted from the genome singularly or in combination with an IRE1A knockout  allele. However, we found that IRE1C exerts an essential role in gametogenesis  when IRE1B is also depleted. Our results identify a novel, plant-specific IRE1  isoform and highlight that at least the control of gametogenesis in Arabidopsis  requires an unexpected functional coordination of IRE1C and IRE1B. More broadly,  our findings support the existence of a functional form of IRE1 that is required  for development despite the remarkable absence of a protein domain that is  critical for the function of other known IRE1 isoforms.', '2019 Nov', 'Plant Direct', '10.1002/pld3.187', 'Brandizzi']

IRE1A: !controls! Homeostasis 
IRE1B: !controls! Gametogenesis 
IRE1C: !coordinates with! IRE1B 
IRE1C: !essential for! Gametogenesis