Nectar is a major floral attractant and reward for insects that ensures pollination. Liriodendron, a genus of the Magnoliaceae family, includes only two relict species, L. chinense and L. tulipifera, which are considered "basal angiosperms" according to plant evolutionary history. The flowers of Liriodendron plants are insect pollinated and secrete nectar to attract pollinators. To date, the morphology and anatomy of nectaries, the mechanism of nectar secretion and the molecular mechanism of nectary development in Liriodendron remain poorly understood. In this study, we examined the nectary surface cells and change in starch in L. tulipifera by using scanning electron microscopy and periodic acid-Schiff techniques to select appropriate samples for subsequent research. Transcriptome sequencing was of the top and middle parts of immature nectaries and the middle part of mature and postsecretory nectaries in L. tulipifera was performed. We evaluated the expression profiles of 21 DEGs that are closely related to nectary development and nectar secretion for real-time quantitative PCR analysis. L. tulipifera nectaries are starch-storing nectaries and are located in the top and middle parts of L. tulipifera petals. After analyzing the RNA-seq data, we obtained 115.26 Gb of clean data in 12 libraries and mapped the results to the L. chinense reference genome with 71.02-79.77% efficiency. In total, 26,955 DEGs were identified by performing six pairwise comparisons. The flavonoid biosynthesis, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, anthocyanin biosynthesis and starch and sucrose metabolism pathways were enriched and related to nectar secretion and pigment change. We identified 56 transcription factor families, and members of the TCP, Trihelix, C2H2, ERF, and MADS families changed dynamically during nectary development. Moreover, to further verify the accuracy of the RNA-seq results, we validated the expression profiles of 21 candidate genes. We evaluated the nectary development and secretion processes comprehensively and identified many related candidate genes in L. tulipifera. These findings suggest that nectaries play important roles in flavonoid synthesis and petal color presentation.

Nectar: !attracts! Insects 
Flavonoid biosynthesis: !enhances! Nectar secretion 
Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis: !enhances! Nectar secretion 
Anthocyanin biosynthesis: !enhances! Nectar secretion 
Starch and sucrose metabolism: !enhances! Nectar secretion 
TCP family: !changes dynamically! During nectary development 
Trihelix family: !changes dynamically! During nectary development 
C2H2 family: !changes dynamically! During nectary development 
ERF family: !changes dynamically! During nectary development 
MADS family: !changes dynamically! During nectary development