Arabidopsis ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR12 (ERF12), the rice MULTIFLORET SPIKELET1 orthologue pleiotropically affects meristem identity, floral phyllotaxy and organ initiation and is conserved among angiosperms. Reproductive development necessitates the coordinated regulation of meristem identity and maturation and lateral organ initiation via positive and negative regulators and network integrators. We have identified ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR12 (ERF12) as the Arabidopsis orthologue of MULTIFLORET SPIKELET1 (MFS1) in rice. Loss of ERF12 function pleiotropically affects reproductive development, including defective floral phyllotaxy and increased floral organ merosity, especially supernumerary sepals, at incomplete penetrance in the first-formed flowers. Wildtype floral organ number in early formed flowers is labile, demonstrating that floral meristem maturation involves the stabilisation of positional information for organogenesis, as well as appropriate identity. A subset of erf12 phenotypes partly defines a narrow developmental time window, suggesting that ERF12 functions heterochronically to fine-tune stochastic variation in wild type floral number and similar to MFS1, promotes meristem identity. ERF12 expression encircles incipient floral primordia in the inflorescence meristem periphery and is strong throughout the floral meristem and intersepal regions. ERF12 is a putative transcriptional repressor and genetically opposes the function of its relatives DORNRÖSCHEN, DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE and PUCHI and converges with the APETALA2 pathway. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that ERF12 is conserved among all eudicots and appeared in angiosperm evolution concomitant with the generation of floral diversity.

ERF12: !pleiotropically affects! reproductive development 
ERF12: !promotes! meristem identity 
ERF12: !encircles! incipient floral primordia 
ERF12: !opposes! DORNRÖSCHEN, DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE and PUCHI 
ERF12: !converges with! APETALA2 pathway 
ERF12: !is conserved among! eudicots