Exploration with high-throughput transcriptomics and metabolomics of two varieties of Ceropegia bulbosa identifies candidate genes, crucial metabolites and a potential cerpegin biosynthetic pathway. Ceropegia bulbosa is an important medicinal plant, used in the treatment of various ailments including diarrhea, dysentery, and syphilis. This is primarily attributed to the presence of pharmaceutically active secondary metabolites, especially cerpegin. As this plant belongs to an endemic threatened category, genomic resources are not available hampering exploration on the molecular basis of cerpegin accumulation till now. Therefore, we undertook high-throughput metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses using different tissues from two varieties namely, C. bulbosa var. bulbosa and C. bulbosa var. lushii. Metabolomic analysis revealed spatial and differential accumulation of various metabolites. We chemically synthesized and characterized the cerpegin and its derivatives by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Importantly, these comparisons suggested the presence of cerpegin and 5-allyl cerpegin in all C. bulbosa tissues. Further, de novo transcriptome analysis indicated the presence of significant transcripts for secondary metabolic pathways through the Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes database. Tissue-specific profiling of transcripts and metabolites showed a significant correlation, suggesting the intricate mechanism of cerpegin biosynthesis. The expression of potential candidate genes from the proposed cerpegin biosynthetic pathway was further validated by qRT-PCR and NanoString nCounter. Overall, our findings propose a potential route of cerpegin biosynthesis. Identified transcripts and metabolites have built a foundation as new molecular resources that could facilitate future research on biosynthesis, regulation, and engineering of cerpegin or other important metabolites in such non-model plants.

Ceropegia bulbosa: !contains! cerpegin
Metabolomic analysis: !reveals! spatial and differential accumulation of metabolites
De novo transcriptome analysis: !indicates! presence of secondary metabolic pathways
Tissue-specific profiling: !shows! correlation between transcripts and metabolites
qRT-PCR and NanoString nCounter: !validates! expression of potential candidate genes
Foundations: !built! for future research on biosynthesis, regulation, and engineering