Melatonin, an amine hormone highly conserved during evolution, has a wide range of physiological functions in animals and plants. It is involved in plant growth, development, maturation, and aging, and also helps ameliorate various types of abiotic and biotic stresses, including salt, drought, heavy metals, and pathogens. Melatonin-related growth and defense responses of plants are complex, and involve many signaling molecules. Among these, the most important one is nitric oxide (NO), a freely diffusing amphiphilic biomolecule that can easily cross the cell membrane, produce rapid signal responses, and participate in a wide variety of physiological reactions. NO-induced S-nitrosylation is also involved in plant defense responses. NO interacts with melatonin as a long-range signaling molecule, and helps regulate plant growth and maintain oxidative homeostasis. Exposure of plants to abiotic stresses causes the increase of endogenous melatonin levels, with the consequent up-regulation of melatonin synthesis genes, and further increase of melatonin content. The application of exogenous melatonin causes an increase in endogenous NO and up-regulation of defense-related transcription factors, resulting in enhanced stress resistance. When plants are infected by pathogenic bacteria, NO acts as a downstream signal to lead to increased melatonin levels, which in turn induces the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade and associated defense responses. The application of exogenous melatonin can also promote sugar and glycerol production, leading to increased levels of salicylic acid and NO. Melatonin and NO in plants can function cooperatively to promote lateral root growth, delay aging, and ameliorate iron deficiency. Further studies are needed to clarify certain aspects of the melatonin/NO relationship in plant physiology.

Melatonin: !interacts with! NO 
NO: !induces! S-nitrosylation 
Melatonin: !regulates! Plant growth 
Exogenous Melatonin: !increases! Endogenous NO 
Melatonin: !induces! MAPK cascade 
Melatonin: !promotes! Sugar and glycerol production 
Melatonin: !delays! Aging 
Melatonin: !ameliorates! Iron deficiency