Genomic and transcriptomic studies in plants and, more in deep, in grapevine reveal that the disease-resistance RNL gene family is highly variable. RNLs (RPW8-NLRs) are a phylogenetically distinct class of nucleotide oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs) identified in plants. Two RNLs, namely, the NRG1 (N Requirement Gene 1) and the ADR1 (Activated Disease Resistance 1), have been characterized; however, little is known about the RNL evolutionary history in higher plants. To trace the diversification of RNL gene subfamily, we scanned the NLR proteins of 73 plant genomes belonging to 29 taxa, revealing a noticeable diversification across species and within the same genus or botanic family together with a conspicuous expansion in important crop species. To explore the RNL variability in Vitis vinifera and gain information with respect to their structure, evolutionary diversification of five grape genomes ('Aglianico', 'Falanghina', 'Sultanina', 'Tannat', and 'Nebbiolo') has been compared to the reference genome ('Pinot Noir'). The number of RNLs ranged from 6 ('Sultanina') to 14 ('Nebbiolo'), in contrast to the 10 'Pinot Noir' RNLs. The phylogenetic study on grapevine RNLs revealed that all collapsed into NRG1-clade, rather than four. To investigate more in depth the means of intraspecific variability of grape RNL copies, a transcriptomic profiling in response to powdery mildew (PM) infection was carried out through qRT-PCRs and public databases interrogation. The RNL expression variability identified in transcriptome data sets supports the hypothesis of a functional expansion/contraction in grapevine varieties. Although no direct correlations between grapevine PM-resistance and RNL expression was identified, our work can provide good candidates for functional studies able to elucidate the putative "helper" role of RNLs in grape immune signalling.

RNLs: !diversify across! species 
RNLs: !expand in! crop species 
RNLs: !range from! 6 to 14 copies 
RNLs: !collapse into! NRG1-clade 
RNLs: !vary in! expression 
RNLs: !provide candidates for! functional studies