['31829135', 'BACKGROUND: In the Brassicaceae, the early stages of compatible pollen-stigma  interactions are tightly controlled with early checkpoints regulating pollen  adhesion, hydration and germination, and pollen tube entry into the stigmatic  surface. However, the early signalling events in the stigma which trigger these  compatible interactions remain unknown. RESULTS: A set of stigma-expressed  pseudokinase genes, termed BRASSIKINs (BKNs), were identified and found to be  present in only core Brassicaceae genomes. In Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0, BKN1  displayed stigma-specific expression while the BKN2 gene was expressed in other  tissues as well. CRISPR deletion mutations were generated for the two tandemly  linked BKNs, and very mild hydration defects were observed for wild-type Col-0  pollen when placed on the bkn1/2 mutant stigmas. In further analyses, the  predominant transcript for the stigma-specific BKN1 was found to have a premature  stop codon in the Col-0 ecotype, but a survey of the 1001 Arabidopsis genomes  uncovered three ecotypes that encoded a full-length BKN1 protein. Furthermore,  phylogenetic analyses identified intact BKN1 orthologues in the closely related  outcrossing Arabidopsis species, A. lyrata and A. halleri. Finally, the BKN  pseudokinases were found to be plasma-membrane localized through the dual lipid  modification of myristoylation and palmitoylation, and this localization would be  consistent with a role in signaling complexes. CONCLUSION: In this study, we have  characterized the novel Brassicaceae-specific family of BKN pseudokinase genes,  and examined the function of BKN1 and BKN2 in the context of pollen-stigma  interactions in A. thaliana Col-0. Additionally, premature stop codons were  identified in the predicted stigma specific BKN1 gene in a number of the 1001 A.  thaliana ecotype genomes, and this was in contrast to the out-crossing  Arabidopsis species which carried intact copies of BKN1. Thus, understanding the  function of BKN1 in other Brassicaceae species will be a key direction for future  studies.', '2019 Dec 11', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-019-2160-9', 'ORCID:']

BKN1: !expresses in! stigma 
BKN2: !expresses in! other tissues 
BKN1/2: !causes mild hydration defects in! wild-type Col-0 pollen 
BKN1: !has premature stop codon in! Col-0 ecotype 
BKN1: !intact in! A. lyrata & A. halleri 
BKN pseudokinases: !localized to! plasma membrane