Lack of structural components results in inflorescence stem bending. Differentially expressed genes involved in lignin and hemicellulose biosynthesis are vital; genes involved in cellulose and glycan biosynthesis are also relevant. An erect inflorescence stem is essential for high-quality cut herbaceous peony flowers. To explore the factors underlying inflorescence stem bending, major cell walls contents were measured, and stem structure was observed in two herbaceous peony varieties with contrasting stem straightness traits ('Da Fugui', upright; 'Chui Touhong', bending). In addition, Illumina sequencing was performed and weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) was used to analyze the results. The results showed significant differences in lignin, hemicellulose and soluble sugar contents, sclerenchyma and xylem areas and thickening in cell walls in pith at stage S3, when bending begins. In addition, 44,182 significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were found, and these DEGs were mainly enriched in 36 pathways. Among the DEGs, hub genes involved in lignin, cellulose, and xylan biosynthesis and transcription factors that regulated these process were identified by WGCNA. These results suggested that the contents of compounds that provided cell wall rigidity were vital factors affecting inflorescence stem straightness in herbaceous peony. Genes involved in or regulating the biosynthesis of these compounds are thus important; lignin and hemicellulose are of great interest, and cellulose and glycan should not be ignored. This paper lays a foundation for developing new herbaceous peony varieties suitable for cut flowers by molecular-assisted breeding.

Lack of structural components: !results in! inflorescence stem bending
Differentially expressed genes: !involved in! lignin and hemicellulose biosynthesis
Cell walls contents: !measured to! explore factors underlying inflorescence stem bending
44,182 DEGs: !found in! 36 pathways
Hub genes: !involved in! lignin, cellulose, and xylan biosynthesis
Transcription factors: !regulate! lignin, cellulose, and xylan biosynthesis