Transcriptome landscape reveals the molecular mechanisms involved in the improvement of fruit traits by the grafting of watermelon and bottle gourd. Grafting has been used as a sustainable alternative for watermelon breeding to control soil-borne pathogens and to increase tolerance to various abiotic stresses. However, some reports have shown that grafting can negatively affect the quality of fruits. Despite several field studies on the effects of grafting on fruit quality, the regulation of this process at the molecular level has not been revealed. The aim of this study was to elucidate various molecular mechanisms involved in different tissues of heterografted watermelon and bottle gourd plants. Grafting with bottle gourd rootstock increased the size and rind thickness of watermelon fruits, whereas that with watermelon rootstock produced bottle gourd fruits with higher total soluble solid content and thinner rinds. Correspondingly, genes related to ripening, softening, cell wall strengthening, stress response and disease resistance were differentially expressed in watermelon fruits. Moreover, genes associated mainly with sugar metabolism were differentially expressed in bottle gourd fruits. RNA-seq revealed more than 400 mobile transcripts across the heterografted sets. More than half of these were validated from PlaMoM, a database for plant mobile macromolecules. In addition, some of these mobile transcripts contained a transfer RNA-like structure. Other RNA motifs were also enriched in these transcripts, most with a biological role based on GO analysis. This transcriptome study provided a comprehensive understanding of various molecular mechanisms underlying grafted tissues in watermelon.

Grafting: !increases! Size/Rind Thickness
Grafting: !increases! Total Soluble Solid Content/Thinner Rinds
Ripening: !regulated by! Genes
Softening: !regulated by! Genes
Cell Wall Strengthening: !regulated by! Genes
Stress Response: !regulated by! Genes
Disease Resistance: !regulated by! Genes
Sugar Metabolism: !regulated by! Genes
Mobile Transcripts: !validated from! PlaMoM
Transfer RNA-like Structure: !contained in! Mobile Transcripts
RNA Motifs: !enriched in! Mobile Transcripts