Previous work showed in tomato plants harbouring the Agrobacterium rhizogenes rolB gene overexpression of genes involved in chloroplast function and stress response, significant increase in non-photochemical quenching and chlorophyll a and b content, and reduced chlorophyll a/b ratio. The latter condition being typical of plant shade where far-red is dominant, suggested a role for rolB in improving photosynthesis in such condition. To gain a better insight into these results, the photosynthetic performance of transgenic and control plants was compared by means of variable fluorescence kinetics with a WATER-PAM chlorophyll fluorometer, after 6 days-exposure to white light and to a far-red-enriched light source. Photosynthetic parameters analysed were quantum yield of photosystem II photochemistry Y(II); q<sub>L</sub>, corresponding to the fraction of open PSII reaction centers in a "lake" model of photosystem II; non-photochemical quenching and Y(NO), describing, respectively, regulated and non-regulated pathways for dissipation of excess energy. Chlorophyll a and b content was also analysed by HPLC. Finally, real-time PCR was performed to quantify the expression level of some of the chloroplast-related genes already shown to be overexpressed in transgenic plants. Quantum yield of photosystem II photochemistry decreased with increasing light intensity, showing no significant differences in both plant genotypes and light regimen. q<sub>L</sub>, on the other hand, was significantly higher at low PAR intensities, in particular in FR-treated transgenic plants. Fate of remaining light energy, channelled into regulated or non-regulated dissipation pathways, was different in transgenic and control plants, indicating a higher capability for protection from photodamage in rolB plants, particularly after exposure to far-red-enriched light. Chlorophyll a/b ratio was also decreased in transgenic plants under far-red-enriched light with respect to white light. Finally, qPCR showed that the expression of genes encoding small heat shock protein, chlorophyll a/b binding protein and carbonic anhydrase was significantly induced by far-red-enriched condition. Taken together, these data suggest the involvement of rolB in photosynthesis modulation under far-red-rich light in tomato.

rolB: !enhances! Photosynthesis
rolB: !increases! Non-photochemical quenching
rolB: !increases! Chlorophyll a and b content
rolB: !decreases! Chlorophyll a/b ratio
rolB: !induces! Small heat shock protein expression
rolB: !induces! Chlorophyll a/b binding protein expression
rolB: !induces! Carbonic anhydrase expression