Pueraria candollei var. mirifica, a Thai medicinal plant used traditionally as a rejuvenating herb, is known as a rich source of phytoestrogens, including isoflavonoids and the highly estrogenic miroestrol and deoxymiroestrol. Although these active constituents in P. candollei var. mirifica have been known for some time, actual knowledge regarding their biosynthetic genes remains unknown. Miroestrol biosynthesis was reconsidered and the most plausible mechanism starting from the isoflavonoid daidzein was proposed. A de novo transcriptome analysis was conducted using combined P. candollei var. mirifica tissues of young leaves, mature leaves, tuberous cortices, and cortex-excised tubers. A total of 166,923 contigs was assembled for functional annotation using protein databases and as a library for identification of genes that are potentially involved in the biosynthesis of isoflavonoids and miroestrol. Twenty-one differentially expressed genes from four separate libraries were identified as candidates involved in these biosynthetic pathways, and their respective expressions were validated by quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Notably, isoflavonoid and miroestrol profiling generated by LC-MS/MS was positively correlated with expression levels of isoflavonoid biosynthetic genes across the four types of tissues. Moreover, we identified R2R3 MYB transcription factors that may be involved in the regulation of isoflavonoid biosynthesis in P. candollei var. mirifica. To confirm the function of a key-isoflavone biosynthetic gene, P. candollei var. mirifica isoflavone synthase identified in our library was transiently co-expressed with an Arabidopsis MYB12 transcription factor (AtMYB12) in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. Remarkably, the combined expression of these proteins led to the production of the isoflavone genistein. Our results provide compelling evidence regarding the integration of transcriptome and metabolome as a powerful tool for identifying biosynthetic genes and transcription factors possibly involved in the isoflavonoid and miroestrol biosyntheses in P. candollei var. mirifica.

Pueraria candollei var. mirifica: !produces! phytoestrogens 
miroestrol biosynthesis: !starts from! isoflavonoid daidzein 
transcriptome analysis: !identifies! genes involved in biosynthesis 
differentially expressed genes: !correlate with! isoflavonoid and miroestrol profiling 
R2R3 MYB transcription factors: !regulate! isoflavonoid biosynthesis 
P. candollei var. mirifica isoflavone synthase: !co-expressed with! Arabidopsis MYB12 transcription factor 
combined expression: !leads to! production of isoflavone genistein