Erwinia chrysanthemi (Ec) is a destructive pathogen which causes soft-rot diseases in diverse plant species including orchids. We investigated whether colonization of Oncidium roots by the endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica (Pi) restricts Ec-induced disease development in leaves, and whether this might be related to the regulation of nucleotide binding site-leucine rich repeat (NBS-LRR) Resistance (R) genes. Root colonization of Oncidium stackings by Pi restricts progression of Ec-induced disease development in the leaves. Since Pi does not inhibit Ec growth on agar plates, we tested whether NBS-LRR R gene transcripts and the levels of their potential target miRNAs in Oncidium leaves might be regulated by Pi. Using bioinformatic tools, we first identified NBS-LRR R gene sequences from Oncidium, which are predicted to be targets of miRNAs. Among them, the expression of two R genes was repressed and the accumulation of several regulatory miRNA stimulated by Ec in the leaves of Oncidium plants. This correlated with the progression of disease development, jasmonic and salicylic acid accumulation, ethylene synthesis and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> production after Ec infection of Oncidium leaves. Interestingly, root colonization by Pi restricted disease development in the leaves, and this was accompanied by higher expression levels of several defense-related R genes and lower expression level of their target miRNA. Based on these data we propose that Pi controls the levels of NBS-LRR R mRNAs and their target miRNAs in leaves. This regulatory circuit correlates with the protection of Oncidium plants against Ec infection, and molecular and biochemical investigations will demonstrate in the future whether, and if so, to what extent these two observations are related to each other.

Pi: !restricts! Ec-induced disease development
Pi: !controls! NBS-LRR R gene expression
Ec: !induces! NBS-LRR R gene repression
Ec: !stimulates! miRNA accumulation
R genes: !enhances! defense-related responses
miRNAs: !represses! NBS-LRR R gene expression