High-affinity ammonium uptake in roots mediate by AMT1-type ammonium transporters, which are tightly controlled at multiple regulatory levels for adapting various nitrogen availability. For Arabidopsis AtAMT1;1 gene, in addition to the transcriptional and post-translational controls, an organ-dependent and N-dependent post-transcriptional regulation was suggested as an additional regulatory step for fine tuning ammonium uptake, but the underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated. Here, we showed that degradation of AtAMT1;1 transcript in roots of Pro35s:AtAMT1;1-transformed atamt1;1-1 Arabidopsis plants resulted from RDR6-dependent sense transgene-induced post-transcriptional gene silencing (S-PTGS). The siRNAs for S-PTGS may derive from the aberrant RNA, of which the production was co-determined by sequence feature and excessive expression of AtAMT1;1. Switching to the expression of AtAMT1;1 driven by ProAtUBQ10 or of AtAMT1;1 mutated at two siRNA-targeted hotspots reduced AtAMT1;1-specific siRNAs and overcame S-PTGS in roots. In roots of these lines, however, the steady-state transcript levels of AtAMT1;1 still significantly decreased under conditions of N-sufficiency compared with N-deficiency, confirming a N-dependent post-transcriptional regulatory manner. A crucial role of the 207-bp 3'-end sequence of AtAMT1;1 was further demonstrated by N-dependent accumulation of chimeric-AtAMT1;1 transcript in T-DNA insertion lines and of GFP-tagged chimeric-AtAMT1;1 transcript in transgenic lines. A novel non-coding RNA (ncRNA), which was highly abundant in N-sufficient roots, may target the above-identified 3'-end region for the degrading AtAMT1;1 transcript. This degradation could be prevented by a mutation on the AtAMT1;1 transcript at a potential cleavage site (+1458). These results suggested two distinct mechanisms of regulating AtAMT1;1 mRNA turnover by ncRNA for strictly control of ammonium uptake in roots.

AtAMT1;1: !regulated by! transcriptional and post-translational controls
AtAMT1;1: !degraded by! RDR6-dependent S-PTGS
AtAMT1;1: !controlled by! ProAtUBQ10 or mutated AtAMT1;1
AtAMT1;1: !regulated by! N-dependent post-transcriptional manner
AtAMT1;1: !targeted by! 207-bp 3'-end sequence
AtAMT1;1: !degraded by! non-coding RNA
AtAMT1;1: !prevented by! mutation at +1458