Co-expression and regulatory networks yield important insights into the growth-defense tradeoffs mechanism under jasmonic acid (JA) signals in Arabidopsis. Elevated defense is commonly associated with growth inhibition. However, a comprehensive atlas of the genes associated with the plant growth-defense tradeoffs under JA signaling is lacking. To gain an insight into the dynamic architecture of growth-defense tradeoffs, a coexpression network analysis was employed on publicly available high-resolution transcriptomes of Arabidopsis treated with coronatine (COR), a mimic of jasmonoyl-l-isoleucine. The genes involved in JA-mediated growth-defense tradeoffs were systematically revealed. Promoter enrichment analysis revealed the core regulatory module in which the genes underwent rapid activation, sustained upregulation after COR treatment, and mediated the growth-defense tradeoffs. Several transcription factors (TFs), including RAP2.6L, MYB44, WRKY40, and WRKY18, were identified as instantly activated components associated with pathogen and insect resistance. JA might rapidly activate RAV1 and KAN1 to repress brassinosteroid (BR) response genes, upregulate KAN1, the C2H2 TF families ZF2, ZF3, ZAT6, and STZ/ZAT10 to repress the biosynthesis, transport, and signaling of auxin to arrest growth. Independent datasets and preserved analyses validated the reproducibility of the results. Our study provided a comprehensive snapshot of genes that respond to JA signals and provided valuable resources for functional studies on the genetic modification of breeding population that exhibit robust growth and defense simultaneously.

Co-expression and regulatory networks: !yield insights! growth-defense tradeoffs 
Elevated defense: !associated with! growth inhibition 
JA signaling: !reveals! genes involved in growth-defense tradeoffs 
Promoter enrichment analysis: !reveals! core regulatory module 
RAP2.6L, MYB44, WRKY40, WRKY18: !instantly activated! pathogen and insect resistance 
RAV1 and KAN1: !repress! BR response genes 
KAN1, ZF2, ZF3, ZAT6, STZ/ZAT10: !upregulate! auxin biosynthesis, transport, and signaling