The study carry out comprehensive transcriptome analysis of C. deltoidea and exploration of BIAs biosynthesis and accumulation based on UHPLC-MS/MS and combined sequencing platforms. Coptis deltoidea is an important medicinal plant with a long history of medicinal use, which is rich in benzylisoquinoline alkaloids (BIAs). In this study, Ultra performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-ESI-MS/MS) and combined sequencing platforms were performed for exploration of BIAs biosynthesis, accumulation and comprehensive transcriptome analysis of C. deltoidea. By metabolism profiling, the accumulation of ten BIAs was analyzed using UHPLC-MS/MS and different contents were observed in different organs. From transcriptome sequencing result, we applied single-molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing to C. deltoidea and generated a total of 75,438 full-length transcripts. We proposed the candidate biosynthetic pathway of tyrosine, precursor of BIAs, and identified 64 full length-transcripts encoding enzymes putatively involved in BIAs biosynthesis. RNA-Seq data indicated that the majority of genes exhibited relatively high expression level in roots. Transport of BIAs was also important for their accumulation. Here, 9 ABC transporters and 2 MATE transporters highly homologous to known alkaloid transporters related with BIAs transport in roots and rhizomes were identified. These findings based on the combined sequencing platforms provide valuable genetic information for C. deltoidea and the results of transcriptome combined with metabolome analysis can help us better understand BIAs biosynthesis and transport in this medicinal plant. The information will be critical for further characterization of C. deltoidea transcriptome and molecular-assisted breeding for this medicinal plant with scarce resources.

UHPLC-MS/MS: !analyzes! BIAs
SMRT sequencing: !generates! 75,438 transcripts
tyrosine: !precursor of! BIAs
64 transcripts: !encode enzymes! involved in BIAs biosynthesis
RNA-Seq data: !indicates high expression! in roots
9 ABC transporters: !involved in! BIAs transport
2 MATE transporters: !involved in! BIAs transport