Using RNA-Seq, we identified genes involved in floral development in lavenders and functionally characterized the floral repressor LaSVP. The molecular aspects of flower initiation and development have not been adequately investigated in lavender (Lavandula). In order to identify genes that control these processes, we employed RNA-Seq to obtain sequence information for transcripts originating from the vegetative shoot apical meristem (SAM) and developing inflorescence tissues of Lavandula angustifolia and Lavandula × intermedia plants, and assemble a comprehensive transcriptome of 105,294 contigs. Homology-based annotation provided gene ontology terms for the majority of transcripts, including over 100 genes homologous to those that control flower initiation and organ identity in Arabidopsis thaliana. Expression analysis revealed that most of these genes are differentially expressed during flower development. For example, LaSVP, a homolog of the floral repressor SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP), was strongly expressed in vegetative SAM compared to developing flowers, implicating its potential involvement in flowering repression in lavender. To investigate LaSVP further, we constitutively expressed the gene in transformed A. thaliana plants, evaluating its effects on flower initiation and morphology. Expression of the LaSVP in A. thaliana delayed flowering and affected flower organ identity in a dosage-dependent manner. Two of the highest expressing lines produced sepals instead of petals and were sterile as they failed to develop proper seed pods. This study provides the foundation for future investigations aimed at elucidating flower initiation and development in lavender.

LaSVP: !represses! Flowering 
LaSVP: !affects! Flower organ identity 
RNA-Seq: !identifies! Genes involved in floral development 
Homology-based annotation: !provides! Gene ontology terms 
Expression analysis: !reveals! Differential expression of genes during flower development 
A. thaliana: !evaluates! Effects of LaSVP on flower initiation and morphology