Pectin methylesterase (PME) is a hydrolytic enzyme that catalyzes the demethylesterification of homogalacturonans and controls pectin reconstruction, being essential in regulation of cell wall modification. During fruit ripening stage, PME-mediated cell wall remodeling is an important process to determine fruit firmness and softening. Strawberry fruit is a soft fruit with a short postharvest life, due to a rapid loss of firm texture. Hence, preharvest improvement of strawberry fruit rigidity is a prerequisite for extension of fruit refreshing time. Although PME has been well characterized in model plants, knowledge regarding the functionality and evolutionary property of PME gene family in strawberry remain limited. A total of 54 PME genes (FvPMEs) were identified in woodland strawberry (Fragaria vesca 'Hawaii 4'). Phylogeny and gene structure analysis divided these FvPME genes into four groups (Group 1-4). Duplicate events analysis suggested that tandem and dispersed duplications effectively contributed to the expansion of the PME family in strawberry. Through transcriptome analysis, we identified FvPME38 and FvPME39 as the most abundant-expressed PMEs at fruit ripening stages, and they were positively regulated by abscisic acid. Genetic manipulation of FvPME38 and FvPME39 by overexpression and RNAi-silencing significantly influences the fruit firmness, pectin content and cell wall structure, indicating a requirement of PME for strawberry fruit softening. Our study globally analyzed strawberry pectin methylesterases by the approaches of phylogenetics, evolutionary prediction and genetic analysis. We verified the essential role of FvPME38 and FvPME39 in regulation of strawberry fruit softening process, which provided a guide for improving strawberry fruit firmness by modifying PME level.

Pectin methylesterase (PME): !catalyzes! demethylesterification 
PME: !essential for! cell wall modification 
FvPME38 and FvPME39: !most abundant-expressed! at fruit ripening stages 
FvPME38 and FvPME39: !positively regulated by! abscisic acid 
FvPME38 and FvPME39: !influence! fruit firmness, pectin content and cell wall structure 
FvPME38 and FvPME39: !required for! strawberry fruit softening