Photosynthetic activity is affected by environmental factors and endogenous signals controlled by the source-sink relationship. We recently showed upregulated photosynthetic rate following partial defoliation under favorable environmental conditions. Here, we examined the influence of partial defoliation on the remaining leaves' function in tomato plants under nutrient deficiency. The effect of partial defoliation was more pronounced under limited mineral supply vs. favorable conditions. Reduced source-sink ratio resulted in increased stomatal conductance and transpiration rate, as well as higher photosystem II efficiency. Although chlorophyll concentration was significantly reduced under limited nutrient supply, the photosynthetic rate in the remaining leaf was similar to that measured under normal fertilization. Expression of genes involved in the phloem loading of assimilated sugars was downregulated in the remaining source leaf of unfertilized plants, 15 d after partial defoliation; in fertilized plants, these genes' expression was similar in control and partially defoliated plants. We propose that at early stage, the additional carbon assimilated in the remaining leaf is devoted to increasing source size rather than sink growth. The size increase of the remaining leaf in unfertilized plants was not sufficient to rebalance the source-sink ratio, resulting in inhibited sugar export and further carbohydrate allocation in the remaining leaf.

Photosynthetic activity: !affected by! environmental factors 
Source-sink relationship: !controlled by! endogenous signals 
Partial defoliation: !increases! photosynthetic rate 
Nutrient deficiency: !more pronounced effect of! partial defoliation 
Reduced source-sink ratio: !increases! stomatal conductance, transpiration rate, and photosystem II efficiency 
Chlorophyll concentration: !reduced under! limited nutrient supply 
Genes involved in phloem loading: !downregulated in! remaining source leaf of unfertilized plants 
Additional carbon assimilated: !devoted to! increasing source size 
Remaining leaf size increase: !not sufficient to! rebalance source-sink ratio 
Inhibited sugar export: !results in! further carbohydrate allocation in remaining leaf