Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) plays a crucial role in the utilization of heterosis and various types of CMS often have different abortion mechanisms. Therefore, it is important to understand the molecular mechanisms related to anther abortion in wheat, which remain unclear at present. In this study, five isonuclear alloplasmic male sterile lines (IAMSLs) and their maintainer were investigated. Cytological analysis indicated that the abortion type was identical in IAMSLs, typical and stainable abortion, and the key abortive period was in the binucleate stage. Most of the 1,281 core shared differentially expressed genes identified by transcriptome sequencing compared with the maintainer in the vital abortive stage were involved in the metabolism of sugars, oxidative phosphorylation, phenylpropane biosynthesis, and phosphatidylinositol signaling, and they were downregulated in the IAMSLs. Key candidate genes encoding chalcone--flavonone isomerase, pectinesterase, and UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase were screened and identified. Moreover, further verification elucidated that due to the impact of downregulated genes in these pathways, the male sterile anthers were deficient in sugar and energy, with excessive accumulations of ROS, blocked sporopollenin synthesis, and abnormal tapetum degradation. Through comparative transcriptome analysis, an intriguing core transcriptome-mediated male-sterility network was proposed and constructed for wheat and inferred that the downregulation of genes in important pathways may ultimately stunt the formation of the pollen outer wall in IAMSLs. These findings provide insights for predicting the functions of the candidate genes, and the comprehensive analysis of our results was helpful for studying the abortive interaction mechanism in CMS wheat.

Cytoplasmic male sterility: !plays a crucial role in! utilization of heterosis 
sugar metabolism: !downregulated in! IAMSLs 
oxidative phosphorylation: !downregulated in! IAMSLs 
phenylpropane biosynthesis: !downregulated in! IAMSLs 
phosphatidylinositol signaling: !downregulated in! IAMSLs 
chalcone--flavonone isomerase: !encoded by! key candidate genes 
pectinesterase: !encoded by! key candidate genes 
UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !encoded by! key candidate genes 
sugar and energy: !deficient in! male sterile anthers 
ROS: !excessive accumulations of! male sterile anthers 
sporopollenin synthesis: !blocked in! male sterile anthers 
tapetum degradation: !abnormal in! male sterile anthers