Five laccase genes are potentially involved in developmental lignification in the model C4 grass Setaria viridis and their different tissue specificities suggest subfunctionalization events. Plant laccases are copper-containing glycoproteins involved in monolignol oxidation and, therefore, their activity is essential for lignin polymerization. Although these enzymes belong to large multigene families with highly redundant members, not all of them are thought to be involved in lignin metabolism. Here, we report on the genome-wide characterization of the laccase gene family in the model C4 grass Setaria viridis and further identification of the members potentially involved in monolignol oxidation. A total of 52 genes encoding laccases (SvLAC1 to SvLAC52) were found in the genome of S. viridis, and phylogenetic analyses showed that these genes were heterogeneously distributed among the characteristic six subclades of the family and are under relaxed selective constraints. The observed expansion in the total number of genes in this species was mainly caused by tandem duplications within subclade V, which accounts for 68% of the whole family. Comparative phylogenetic analyses showed that the expansion of subclade V is specifically observed for the Paniceae tribe within the Panicoideae subfamily in grasses. Five SvLAC genes (SvLAC9, SvLAC13, SvLAC15, SvLAC50, and SvLAC52) fulfilled the criteria established to identify lignin-related candidates: (1) phylogenetic proximity to previously characterized lignin-related laccases from other species, (2) similar expression pattern to that observed for lignin biosynthetic genes in the S. viridis elongating internode, and (3) high expression in S. viridis tissues undergoing active lignification. In addition, in situ hybridization experiments not only confirmed that these selected SvLAC genes were expressed in lignifying cells, but also that their expression showed different tissue specificities, suggesting subfunctionalization events within the family. These five laccase genes are strong candidates to be involved in lignin polymerization in S. viridis and might be good targets for lignin bioengineering strategies.

SvLAC9: !localizes to! lignifying cells
SvLAC13: !localizes to! lignifying cells
SvLAC15: !localizes to! lignifying cells
SvLAC50: !localizes to! lignifying cells
SvLAC52: !localizes to! lignifying cells
laccase: !synthesizes! monolignol oxidation
laccase: !enhances! lignin polymerization