Alternative polyadenylation (APA) is a pervasive mechanism for gene regulation in eukaryotes. Stachyose is the main assimilate translocated in the cucumber phloem. Stachyose synthase (CsSTS) catalyzes the last step of stachyose biosynthesis in cucumber leaves and plays a key role in the regulation of assimilate partitioning between source and sink. In this study, three CsSTS mRNAs with the same open reading frame and the 5`untranslated region (UTR), but differing in their 3`UTRs, named CsSTS1 (short), CsSTS2 (medium), and CsSTS3 (long), were identified. Southern blot and sequence analysis of the cucumber genome confirmed that these transcripts are regulated through APA from a single gene. No significant difference of in vitro translation efficiency was found among three mRNAs. However, the relative stabilities of three transcripts varied among different tissues and different leaf development stages of cucumber. CsSTS1 expression in cucumber calli was up-regulated by the raffinose (substrate of CsSTS) and down-regulated by stachyose (product of CsSTS), respectively. In cucumber plants, all three isoforms have considerable expression in non-fruit node leaves. However, in fruit-carrying node leaves, the expression of CsSTS2 and CsSTS3 was severely inhibited and only CsSTS1 was highly expressed, indicating fruit setting has a remarkable effect on the relative expression level of three transcripts. This "fruit setting" effect could be observed until at least 36 h after the fruit was removed from the node. Our results suggest that abundant expression of CsSTS1 is beneficial for stachyose loading in source leaves, and APA is a delicate mechanism for CsSTS to regulate cucumber source-sink balance.

Alternative polyadenylation: !regulates! gene
Stachyose synthase: !catalyzes! stachyose biosynthesis
CsSTS1, CsSTS2, CsSTS3: !differ in! 3'UTRs
Raffinose: !up-regulates! CsSTS1 expression
Stachyose: !down-regulates! CsSTS1 expression
Fruit setting: !inhibits! CsSTS2 & CsSTS3 expression
APA: !delicate mechanism for! CsSTS regulation