['31921255', 'D-Enantiomers of proteinogenic amino acids (D-AAs) are found ubiquitously, but  the knowledge about their metabolism and functions in plants is scarce. A long  forgotten phenomenon in this regard is the D-AA-stimulated ethylene production in  plants. As a starting point to investigate this effect, the Arabidopsis accession  Landsberg erecta (Ler) got into focus as it was found defective in metabolizing  D-AAs. Combining genetics and molecular biology of T-DNA insertion lines and  natural variants together with biochemical and physiological approaches, we could  identify AtDAT1 as a major D-AA transaminase in Arabidopsis. Atdat1  loss-of-function mutants and Arabidopsis accessions with defective AtDAT1 alleles  were unable to produce the metabolites of D-Met, D-Ala, D-Glu, and L-Met. This  result corroborates the biochemical characterization, which showed highest  activity of AtDAT1 using D-Met as a substrate. Germination of seedlings in light  and dark led to enhanced growth inhibition of atdat1 mutants on D-Met. Ethylene  measurements revealed an increased D-AA stimulated ethylene production in these  mutants. According to initial working models of this phenomenon, D-Met is  preferentially malonylated instead of the ethylene precursor  1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC). This decrease of ACC degradation  should then lead to the increase of ethylene production. We could observe a  reciprocal relation of malonylated methionine and ACC upon D-Met application and  significantly more malonyl-methionine in atdat1 mutants. Unexpectedly, the  malonyl-ACC levels did not differ between mutants and wild type. With AtDAT1, the  first central enzyme of plant D-AA metabolism was characterized biochemically and  physiologically. The specific effects of D-Met on ACC metabolism, ethylene  production, and plant development of dat1 mutants unraveled the impact of AtDAT1  on these processes; however, they are not in full accordance to previous working  models. Instead, our results imply the influence of additional factors or  processes on D-AA-stimulated ethylene production, which await to be uncovered.', '2019', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2019.01609', 'Kolukisaoglu']

AtDAT1: !metabolizes! D-AAs 
AtDAT1: !affects! ethylene production 
AtDAT1: !influences! ACC metabolism 
AtDAT1: !regulates! plant development 
D-Met: !stimulates! ethylene production 
D-Met: !increases! malonyl-methionine 
ACC: !decreases! upon D-Met application