The benefits of the arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis between plants and fungi are modulated by the functional characteristics of both partners. However, it is unknown to what extent functionally distinct groups of plants naturally associate with different AM fungi. We reanalysed 14 high-throughput sequencing data sets describing AM fungal communities associating with plant individuals (2427) belonging to 297 species. We examined how root-associating AM fungal communities varied between plants with different growth forms, photosynthetic pathways, CSR (competitor, stress-tolerator, ruderal) strategies, mycorrhizal statuses and N-fixing statuses. AM fungal community composition differed in relation to all studied plant functional groups. Grasses, C<sub>4</sub> and nonruderal plants were characterised by high AM fungal alpha diversity, while C<sub>4</sub> , ruderal and obligately mycorrhizal plants were characterised by high beta diversity. The phylogenetic diversity of AM fungi, a potential surrogate for functional diversity, was higher among forbs than other plant growth forms. Putatively ruderal (previously cultured) AM fungi were disproportionately associated with forbs and ruderal plants. There was phylogenetic correlation among AM fungi in the degree of association with different plant growth forms and photosynthetic pathways. Associated AM fungal communities constitute an important component of plant ecological strategies. Functionally different plants associate with distinct AM fungal communities, linking mycorrhizal associations with functional diversity in ecosystems.

Grasses: !associate with! high AM fungal alpha diversity
C<sub>4</sub>: !associate with! high AM fungal alpha and beta diversity
Nonruderal plants: !associate with! high AM fungal alpha diversity
C<sub>4</sub>, ruderal, obligately mycorrhizal plants: !associate with! high AM fungal beta diversity
Forbs: !characterized by! high phylogenetic diversity of AM fungi
Putatively ruderal AM fungi: !disproportionately associated with! forbs and ruderal plants
AM fungi: !phylogenetically correlated in degree of association with! different plant growth forms and photosynthetic pathways