A survey of developed fruit gene-specific datasets and the implementation of a novel cis-element analysis tool indicate specific transcription factors as novel regulatory actors under HT response and CI protection. Heat treatment (HT) prior to cold storage (CS) has been successfully applied to ameliorate fruit chilling injury (CI) disorders. Molecular studies have identified several HT-driven benefits and putative CI-protective molecules and mechanisms. However, bioinformatic tools and analyses able to integrate fruit-specific information are necessary to begin functional studies and breeding projects. In this work, a HT-responsive gene dataset (HTds) and four fruit expression datasets (FEds), containing gene-specific information from several species and postharvest conditions, were developed and characterized. FEds provided information about HT-responsive genes, not only validating their sensitivity to HT in different systems but also revealing most of them as CS-responsive. A special focus was given to peach heat treatment-sensitive transcriptional regulation by the development of a novel Perl motif analysis software (cisAnalyzer) and a curated plant cis-elements dataset (PASPds). cisAnalyzer is able to assess sequence motifs presence, localization, enrichment and discovery on biological sequences. Its implementation for the enrichment analysis of PASPds motifs on the promoters of HTds genes rendered particular cis-elements that indicate certain transcription factor (TF) families as responsible of fruit HT-sensitive transcription regulation. Phylogenetic and postharvest expression data of these TFs showed a functional diversity of TF families, with members able to fulfil roles under HT, CS and/or both treatments. All integrated datasets and cisAnalyzer tool were deposited in FruitGeneDB (https://www.cefobi-conicet.gov.ar/FruitGeneDB/search1.php), a new available database with a great potential for fruit gene functional studies, including the markers of HT and CS responses whose study will contribute to unravel HT-driven CI-protection and select tolerant cultivars.

HT: !affects! TF families
TF families: !enhance! HT response
TF families: !protect! CI
cisAnalyzer: !discovers! motifs
motifs: !localize to! promoters
FEds: !validate! HT-responsive genes
HTds: !reveal! CS-responsive genes