Iron (Fe) deficiency is prevalent in plants grown in neutral or alkaline soil. Plants have evolved sophisticated mechanisms that regulate Fe homeostasis, ensuring survival. In Arabidopsis, FER-LIKE IRON DEFICIENCY-INDUCED TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR (FIT) is a crucial regulator of Fe-deficiency response. FIT is activated indirectly by basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) IVc transcription factors (TFs) under Fe deficiency; however, it remains unclear which protein(s) act as the linker to mediate the activation of FIT by bHLH IVc TFs. In this study, we characterize the functions of bHLH121 and demonstrate that it directly associates with the FIT promoter. We found that loss-of-function mutations of bHLH121 cause severe Fe-deficiency symptoms, reduced Fe accumulation, and disrupted expression of genes associated with Fe homeostasis. Genetic analysis showed that FIT is epistatic to bHLH121 and FIT overexpression partially rescues the bhlh121 mutant. Further investigations revealed that bHLH IVc TFs interact with and promote nuclear accumulation of bHLH121. We demonstrated that bHLH121 has DNA-binding activity and can bind the promoters of the FIT and bHLH Ib genes, but we did not find that it has either direct transcriptional activation or repression activity toward these genes. Meanwhile, we found that bHLH121 functions downstream of and is a direct target of bHLH IVc TFs, and its expression is induced by Fe deficiency in a bHLH IVc-dependent manner. Taken together, these results establish that bHLH121 functions together with bHLH IVc TFs to positively regulate the expression of FIT and thus plays a pivotal role in maintaining Fe homeostasis in Arabidopsis.

bHLH IVc TFs: !interact with and promote nuclear accumulation of! bHLH121
bHLH121: !binds the promoters of! FIT and bHLH Ib genes
bHLH121: !functions downstream of and is a direct target of! bHLH IVc TFs
bHLH121: !is induced by! Fe deficiency in a bHLH IVc-dependent manner
FIT: !is epistatic to! bHLH121
FIT: !is activated indirectly by! bHLH IVc transcription factors