['31975462', 'Singlet oxygen ((1) O(2) ) is a by-product of photosynthesis that triggers a  signalling pathway leading to stress acclimation or to cell death. By analyzing  gene expressions in a (1) O(2) -overproducing Arabidopsis mutant (ch1) under  different light regimes, we show here that the (1) O(2) signalling pathway  involves the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mediated unfolded protein response (UPR).  ch1 plants in low light exhibited a moderate activation of UPR genes, in  particular bZIP60, and low concentrations of the UPR-inducer tunicamycin enhanced  tolerance to photooxidative stress, together suggesting a role for UPR in plant  acclimation to low (1) O(2) levels. Exposure of ch1 to high light stress  ultimately leading to cell death resulted in a marked upregulation of the two UPR  branches (bZIP60/IRE1 and bZIP28/bZIP17). Accordingly, mutational suppression of  bZIP60 and bZIP28 increased plant phototolerance, and a strong UPR activation by  high tunicamycin concentrations promoted high light-induced cell death.  Conversely, light acclimation of ch1 to (1) O(2) stress put a limitation in the  high light-induced expression of UPR genes, except for the gene encoding the BIP3  chaperone, which was selectively upregulated. BIP3 deletion enhanced Arabidopsis  photosensitivity while plants treated with a chemical chaperone exhibited  enhanced phototolerance. In conclusion, (1) O(2) induces the ER-mediated UPR  response that fulfils a dual role in high light stress: a moderate UPR, with  selective induction of BIP3, is part of the acclimatory response to (1) O(2) ,  and a strong activation of the whole UPR is associated with cell death.', '2020 Jun', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.14700', 'ORCID:']

Singlet oxygen: !triggers! signalling pathway 
signalling pathway: !involves! UPR 
UPR: !induces! bZIP60 
tunicamycin: !enhances! tolerance to photooxidative stress 
high light stress: !upregulates! UPR branches 
bZIP60/IRE1 and bZIP28/bZIP17: !mutational suppression of! increases phototolerance 
high tunicamycin concentrations: !promotes! cell death 
light acclimation: !puts limitation on! high light-induced expression of UPR genes 
BIP3 chaperone: !selectively upregulated! 
BIP3 deletion: !enhances! photosensitivity 
chemical chaperone: !exhibits! enhanced phototolerance