Symbiosis with ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungi is an advantageous partnership for trees in nutrient-limited environments. Ectomycorrhizal fungi colonize the roots of their hosts and improve their access to nutrients, usually nitrogen (N) and, in exchange, trees deliver a significant portion of their photosynthetic carbon (C) to the fungi. This nutrient exchange affects key soil processes and nutrient cycling, as well as plant health, and is therefore central to forest ecosystem functioning. Due to their ecological importance, there is a need to more accurately understand ECM fungal mediated C and N movement within forest ecosystems such that we can better model and predict their role in soil processes both now and under future climate scenarios. There are a number of hurdles that we must overcome, however, before this is achievable such as understanding how the evolutionary history of ECM fungi and their inter- and intra- species variability affect their function. Further, there is currently no generally accepted universal mechanism that appears to govern the flux of nutrients between fungal and plant partners. Here, we consider the current state of knowledge on N acquisition and transport by ECM fungi and how C and N exchange may be related or affected by environmental conditions such as N availability. We emphasize the role that modern genomic analysis, molecular biology techniques and more comprehensive and standardized experimental designs may have in bringing cohesion to the numerous ecological studies in this area and assist us in better understanding this important symbiosis. These approaches will help to build unified models of nutrient exchange and develop diagnostic tools to study these fungi at various scales and environments.

Ectomycorrhizal fungi: !symbiosis with! trees 
trees: !deliver! photosynthetic carbon 
fungi: !improve! access to nutrients 
nutrient exchange: !affects! soil processes 
evolutionary history: !affects! function 
genomic analysis: !assists in! understanding symbiosis 
molecular biology techniques: !develop! diagnostic tools