Many Gram-negative bacteria use N-acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs) to communicate each other and to coordinate their collective behaviors. Recently, accumulating evidence shows that host plants are able to sense and respond to bacterial AHLs. Once primed, plants are in an altered state that enables plant cells to more quickly and/or strongly respond to subsequent pathogen infection or abiotic stress. In this study, we report that pretreatment with N-3-oxo-octanoyl-homoserine lactone (3OC8-HSL) confers resistance against the pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (PstDC3000) in Arabidopsis. Pretreatment with 3OC8-HSL and subsequent pathogen invasion triggered an augmented burst of hydrogen peroxide, salicylic acid accumulation, and fortified expression of the pathogenesis-related genes PR1 and PR5. Upon PstDC3000 challenge, plants treated with 3OC8-HSL showed increased activities of defense-related enzymes including peroxidase, catalase, phenylalanine ammonialyase, and superoxide dismutase. In addition, the 3OC8-HSL-primed resistance to PstDC3000 in wild-type plants was impaired in plants expressing the bacterial NahG gene and in the npr1 mutant. Moreover, the expression levels of isochorismate synthases (ICS1), a critical salicylic acid biosynthesis enzyme, and two regulators of its expression, SARD1 and CBP60g, were potentiated by 3OC8-HSL pretreatment followed by pathogen inoculation. Our data indicate that 3OC8-HSL primes the Arabidopsis defense response upon hemibiotrophic bacterial infection and that 3OC8-HSL-primed resistance is dependent on the SA signaling pathway. These findings may help establish a novel strategy for the control of plant disease.

3OC8-HSL: !primes! Arabidopsis defense response 
3OC8-HSL: !confers resistance! PstDC3000 
3OC8-HSL: !potentiates! ICS1 expression 
3OC8-HSL: !potentiates! SARD1 expression 
3OC8-HSL: !potentiates! CBP60g expression 
NahG gene: !impairs! 3OC8-HSL-primed resistance 
npr1 mutant: !impairs! 3OC8-HSL-primed resistance