Dendrobium catenatum, as a precious Chinese herbal medicine, is an epiphytic orchid plant, which grows on the trunks and cliffs and often faces up to diverse environmental stresses. SET DOMAIN GROUP (SDG) proteins act as histone lysine methyltransferases, which are involved in pleiotropic developmental events and stress responses through modifying chromatin structure and regulating gene transcription, but their roles in D. catenatum are unknown. In this study, we identified 44 SDG proteins from D. catenatum genome. Subsequently, comprehensive analyses related to gene structure, protein domain organization, and phylogenetic relationship were performed to evaluate these D. catenatum SDG (DcSDG) proteins, along with the well-investigated homologs from the model plants Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa as well as the newly characterized 42 SDG proteins from a closely related orchid plant Phalaenopsis equestris. We showed DcSDG proteins can be grouped into eight distinct classes (I~VII and M), mostly consistent with the previous description. Based on the catalytic substrates of the reported SDG members mainly in Arabidopsis, Class I (E(z)-Like) is predicted to account for the deposition of H3K27me2/3, Class II (Ash-like) for H3K36me, Class III (Trx/ATX-like) for H3K4me2/3, Class M (ATXR3/7) for H3K4me, Class IV (Su (var)-like) for H3K27me1, Class V (Suv-like) for H3K9me, as well as class VI (S-ET) and class VII (RBCMT) for methylation of both histone and non-histone proteins. RNA-seq derived expression profiling showed that DcSDG proteins usually displayed wide but distinguished expressions in different tissues and organs. Finally, environmental stresses examination showed the expressions of DcASHR3, DcSUVR3, DcATXR4, DcATXR5b, and DcSDG49 are closely associated with drought-recovery treatment, the expression of DcSUVH5a, DcATXR5a and DcSUVR14a are significantly influenced by low temperature, and even 61% DcSDG genes are in response to heat shock. This study systematically identifies and classifies SDG genes in orchid plant D. catenatum, indicates their functional divergence during the evolution, and discovers their broad roles in the developmental programs and stress responses. These results provide constructive clues for further functional investigation and epigenetic mechanism dissection of SET-containing proteins in orchids.

DcSDG: !modifies! chromatin structure
DcSDG: !regulates! gene transcription
DcSDG: !deposits! H3K27me2/3
DcSDG: !deposits! H3K36me
DcSDG: !deposits! H3K4me2/3
DcSDG: !deposits! H3K4me
DcSDG: !deposits! H3K27me1
DcSDG: !deposits! H3K9me
DcSDG: !methylates! histone proteins
DcSDG: !methylates! non-histone proteins
DcSDG: !influenced by! environmental stresses