Taxus stem barks can be used for extraction of paclitaxel. However, the composition of taxoids across the whole stem and the stem tissue-specificity of paclitaxel biosynthesis-related enzymes remain largely unknown. We used cultivated Taxus media trees for analyses of the chemical composition and protein of major stem tissues by an integrated metabolomic and proteomic approach, and the role of TmMYB3 in paclitaxel biosynthesis was investigated. The metabolomic landscape analysis showed differences in stem tissue-specific accumulation of metabolites. Phytochemical analysis revealed that there is high accumulation of paclitaxel in the phloem. Ten key enzymes involved in paclitaxel biosynthesis were identified, most of which are predominantly produced in the phloem. The full-length sequence of TmMYB3 and partial promoter sequences of five paclitaxel biosynthesis-related genes were isolated. Several MYB recognition elements were found in the promoters of TBT, DBTNBT and TS. Further in vitro and in vivo investigations indicated that TmMYB3 is involved in paclitaxel biosynthesis by activating the expression of TBT and TS. Differences in the taxoid composition of different stem tissues suggest that the whole stem of T. media has potential for biotechnological applications. Phloem-specific TmMYB3 plays a role in the transcriptional regulation of paclitaxel biosynthesis, and may explain the phloem-specific accumulation of paclitaxel.

Taxus stem barks: !contain! paclitaxel
Taxus media trees: !used for! analyses
Metabolomic landscape analysis: !showed! differences in stem tissue-specific accumulation of metabolites
Phytochemical analysis: !revealed! high accumulation of paclitaxel in phloem
Ten key enzymes: !involved in! paclitaxel biosynthesis
TmMYB3: !isolated! full-length sequence
Promoters of five paclitaxel biosynthesis-related genes: !contained! MYB recognition elements
TmMYB3: !activates! expression of TBT and TS
Whole stem of T. media: !has potential for! biotechnological applications
TmMYB3: !plays role in! transcriptional regulation of paclitaxel biosynthesis