Seven divergence hotspots as plastid markers for DNA barcoding was selected, and the phylogeny of 13 Lagerstroemia species based on the cp genome data was reconstructed within Myrtales. The Lagerstroemia species used in this study originated in China and have high economic and ecological value. The shared interspecific morphological characteristics and intraspecific morphological variation resulting from hybridization among Lagerstroemia taxa have made resolving their classification problems and phylogenetic relationships difficult. Systematic comparative genomic analysis has been shown to resolve phylogenetic relationships. We sequenced and annotated 6 Lagerstroemia cp genomes (Lagerstroemia excelsa, Lagerstroemia limii, Lagerstroemia siamica, Lagerstroemia tomentosa, Lagerstroemia venusta, and Lagerstroemia calyculata) for the first time and combined them with previously published genomes for Lagerstroemia species. Bioinformatics was used to analyse the 13 cp genomes in terms of gene structure and organization, codon usage, contraction and expansion of inverted repeat regions, repeat structure, divergence hotspots, species pairwise Ka/Ks ratios and phylogenetic relationships. The length varied between 152,049 bp in Lagerstroemia subcostata and 152,521 bp in L. venusta. We selected seven divergence hotspots in the cp genomes that had the potential to act as plastid markers to distinguish Lagerstroemia species. The phylogenetic relationships within Myrtales inferred from the cp genomes of 13 Lagerstroemia species and 27 other Myrtales species were highly supported, which illustrated several novel relationships within Myrtales. Taken together, our results provide comprehensive chloroplast genomic resources, which can be used further for species identification and molecular breeding of Lagerstroemia species.

Lagerstroemia: !has! high economic and ecological value
Lagerstroemia: !has! intraspecific morphological variation
Lagerstroemia: !has! classification problems
Systematic comparative genomic analysis: !resolves! phylogenetic relationships
Bioinformatics: !analyzes! 13 cp genomes
cp genomes: !vary in! length
Seven divergence hotspots: !selected as! plastid markers
27 Myrtales species: !combined with! 13 Lagerstroemia species
Phylogenetic relationships: !inferred from! cp genomes