Grapevine is an economically important crop for which yield and berry quality is strongly affected by climate change. Large variations in drought tolerance exist across Vitis species. Some of these species are used as rootstock to enhance abiotic and biotic stress tolerance. In this study, we investigated the physiological and transcriptomic responses to water deficit of four different genotypes that differ in drought tolerance: Ramsey (Vitis champinii), Riparia Gloire (Vitis riparia), Cabernet Sauvignon (Vitis vinifera), and SC2 (Vitis vinifera x Vitis girdiana). Ramsey was particularly more drought tolerant than the other three genotypes. Ramsey maintained a higher stomatal conductance and photosynthesis at equivalent levels of moderate water deficit. We identified specific and common transcriptomic responses shared among the four different Vitis species using RNA sequencing analysis. A weighted gene co-expression analysis identified a water deficit core gene set with the ABA biosynthesis and signaling genes, NCED3, RD29B and ABI1 as potential hub genes. The transcript abundance of many abscisic acid metabolism and signaling genes was strongly increased by water deficit along with genes associated with lipid metabolism, galactinol synthases and MIP family proteins. This response occurred at smaller water deficits in Ramsey and with higher transcript abundance than the other genotypes. A number of aquaporin genes displayed differential and unique responses to water deficit in Ramsey leaves. Genes involved in cysteine biosynthesis and metabolism were constitutively higher in the roots of Ramsey; thus, linking the gene expression of a known factor that influences ABA biosynthesis to this genotype's increased NCED3 transcript abundance. The drought tolerant Ramsey maintained higher photosynthesis at equivalent water deficit than the three other grapevine genotypes. Ramsey was more responsive to water deficit; its transcriptome responded at smaller water deficits, whereas the other genotypes did not respond until more severe water deficits were reached. There was a common core gene network responding to water deficit for all genotypes that included ABA metabolism and signaling. The gene clusters and sub-networks identified in this work represent interesting gene lists to explore and to better understand drought tolerance molecular mechanisms.

Ramsey: !maintains! higher stomatal conductance
Ramsey: !responds to! smaller water deficits
ABA biosynthesis/signaling genes: !identified as! potential hub genes
Lipid metabolism genes: !increased by! water deficit
Aquaporin genes: !displayed differential responses to! water deficit
Cysteine biosynthesis/metabolism genes: !constitutively higher in! Ramsey roots
Common core gene network: !responding to! water deficit