Rhizotaxis is established under changing environmental conditions via periodic priming of lateral root (LR) initiation at the root tips and adaptive LR formation along the primary root (PR). In contrast to the adaptable LR formation in response to nutrient availability, there is little information on root development during interactions with beneficial microbes. The Arabidopsis root system is characteristically modified upon colonization by the root endophytic fungus Serendipita indica, accompanied by a marked stimulation of LR formation and the inhibition of PR growth. This root system modification has been attributed to endophyte-derived indole-3-acetic acid (IAA). However, it has yet to be clearly explained how fungal IAA affects the intrinsic LR formation process. In this study, we show that diffusible compounds (chemical signals) other than IAA are present in the coculture medium of Arabidopsis and S. indica and induce auxin-responsive DR5::GUS expression in specific sections within the pericycle layer. The DR5::GUS expression was independent of polar auxin transport and the major IAA biosynthetic pathways, implicating unidentified mechanisms responsible for the auxin response and LR formation. Detailed metabolite analysis revealed the presence of multiple compounds that induce local auxin responses and LR formation. We found that benzoic acid (BA) cooperatively acted with exogenous IAA to generate a local auxin response in the pericycle layer, suggesting that BA is one of the chemical signals involved in adaptable LR formation. Identification and characterization of the chemical signals will contribute to a greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying adaptable root development and to unconventional technologies for sustainable agriculture.

Root: !modified by! Endophyte
Endophyte: !produces! IAA
IAA: !induces! Auxin-responsive DR5::GUS expression
DR5::GUS expression: !independent of! Polar auxin transport
Metabolite analysis: !reveals presence of! Multiple compounds
Multiple compounds: !induce! Local auxin responses and LR formation
Benzoic acid: !cooperatively acts with! Exogenous IAA