The process through induction, proliferation and regeneration of protocorm-like bodies (PLBs) is one of the most advantageous methods for mass propagation of orchids which applied to the world floricultural market. In addition, this method has been used as a tool to identify genes of interest associated with the production of PLBs, and also in breeding techniques that use biotechnology to produce new cultivars, such as to obtain transgenic plants. Most of the molecular studies developed have used model plants as species of <i>Phalaenopsis</i>, and interestingly, despite similarities to somatic embryogenesis, some molecular differences do not yet allow to characterize that PLB induction is in fact a type of somatic embryogenesis. Despite the importance of species for conservation and collection purposes, the flower market is supported by hybrid cultivars, usually polyploid, which makes more detailed molecular evaluations difficult. Studies on the effect of plant growth regulators on induction, proliferation, and regeneration of PLBs are the most numerous. However, studies of other factors and new technologies affecting PLB production such as the use of temporary immersion bioreactors and the use of lighting-emitting diodes have emerged as new tools for advancing the technique with increasing PLB production efficiency. In addition, recent studies on <i>Phalaenopsis equestris</i> genome sequencing have enabled more detailed molecular studies and the molecular characterization of plantlets obtained from this technique currently allow the technique to be evaluated in a more comprehensive way regarding its real applications and main limitations aiming at mass propagation, such as somaclonal variation.

Process: !induced by! Plant Growth Regulators 
Process: !enhanced by! Temporary Immersion Bioreactors 
Process: !improved by! Lighting-emitting Diodes 
Process: !evaluated by! Genome Sequencing 
Process: !characterized by! Molecular Studies 
Process: !limited by! Somaclonal Variation