Plant growth and development relies on the accurate positioning of the cell plate between dividing cells during cytokinesis. The cell plate is synthetized by a specialized structure called the phragmoplast, which contains bipolar microtubules that polymerize to form a framework with the plus ends at or near the division site. This allows the transport of Golgi-derived vesicles toward the plus ends to form and expand the cell plate. Actin filaments play important roles in cell plate expansion and guidance in plant cytokinesis at the late phase, but whether they are involved at the early phase is unknown. To investigate this further, we disrupted the actin filaments in cell cycle-synchronized tobacco BY-2 cells with latrunculin B (LatB), an actin polymerization inhibitor. We observed the cells under a transmission electron microscope or a spinning-disk confocal laser scanning microscope. We found that disruption of actin filaments by LatB caused the membrane vesicles at the equatorial plane of the cell plate to be dispersed rather than form clusters as they did in the untreated cells. The midzone constriction of phragmoplast microtubules also was perturbed in LatB-treated cells. The live cell imaging and kymograph analysis showed that disruption of actin filaments also changed the accumulation timing of NACK1 kinesin, which plays a crucial role in cell plate expansion. This suggests that there are two functionally different types of microtubules in the phragmoplast. Together, our results show that actin filaments regulate phragmoplast microtubules at the initial phase of plant cytokinesis.

Plant growth: !relies on! accurate positioning of cell plate
Cell plate: !synthetized by! phragmoplast
Phragmoplast: !contains! bipolar microtubules
Golgi-derived vesicles: !transported to! plus ends
Actin filaments: !play important roles in! cell plate expansion and guidance
Latrunculin B: !disrupts! actin filaments
Membrane vesicles: !dispersed rather than form clusters! when actin filaments disrupted
Phragmoplast microtubules: !perturbed! when actin filaments disrupted
NACK1 kinesin: !accumulation timing changed! when actin filaments disrupted
Actin filaments: !regulate! phragmoplast microtubules