Genome-wide identification, together with gene expression patterns and promoter region analysis of FYVE and PHOX proteins in Physcomitrella patens, emphasized their importance in regulating mainly developmental processes in P. patens. Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PtdIns3P) is a signaling phospholipid, which regulates several aspects of plant growth and development, as well as responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. The mechanistic insights underlying PtdIns3P mode of action, specifically through effector proteins have been partially explored in plants, with main focus on Arabidopsis thaliana. In this study, we searched for genes coding for PtdIns3P-binding proteins such as FYVE and PHOX domain-containing sequences from different photosynthetic organisms to gather evolutionary insights on these phosphoinositide binding domains, followed by an in silico characterization of the FYVE and PHOX gene families in the moss Physcomitrella patens. Phylogenetic analysis showed that PpFYVE proteins can be grouped in 7 subclasses, with an additional subclass whose FYVE domain was lost during evolution to higher plants. On the other hand, PpPHOX proteins are classified into 5 subclasses. Expression analyses based on RNAseq data together with the analysis of cis-acting regulatory elements and transcription factor (TF) binding sites in promoter regions suggest the importance of these proteins in regulating stress responses but mainly developmental processes in P. patens. The results provide valuable information and robust candidate genes for future functional analysis aiming to further explore the role of this signaling pathway mainly during growth and development of tip growing cells and during the transition from 2 to 3D growth. These studies would identify ancestral regulatory players undertaken during plant evolution.

Genome-wide identification: !emphasized importance of! FYVE and PHOX proteins
PtdIns3P: !regulates! plant growth and development
FYVE and PHOX gene families: !searched for in! Physcomitrella patens
Phylogenetic analysis: !grouped PpFYVE proteins into! 7 subclasses
Expression analyses: !suggest importance of! these proteins in regulating stress responses and developmental processes
Future functional analysis: !aims to explore role of! this signaling pathway