Flesh lignification is a specific chilling response that causes deterioration in the quality of stored red-fleshed loquat fruit (Eribotrya japonica) and is one aspect of wider chilling injury. APETALA2/ETHLENE RESPONSIVE FACTOR (AP2/ERF) transcription factors are important regulators of plant low-temperature responses and lignin biosynthesis. In this study, the expression and action of 27 AP2/ERF genes from the red-fleshed loquat cultivar 'Luoyangqing' were investigated in order to identify transcription factors regulating low-temperature-induced lignification. EjERF27, EjERF30, EjERF36, and EjERF39 were significantly induced by storage at 0 °C but inhibited by a low-temperature conditioning treatment (pre-storage at 5 °C for 6 days before storage at 0 °C, which reduces low-temperature-induced lignification), and their transcript levels positively correlated with flesh lignification. A dual-luciferase assay indicated that EjERF39 could transactivate the promoter of the lignin biosynthetic gene Ej4CL1, and an electrophoretic mobility shift assay confirmed that EjERF39 recognizes the DRE element in the promoter region of Ej4CL1. Furthermore, the combination of EjERF39 and the previously characterized EjMYB8 synergistically transactivated the Ej4CL1 promoter, and both transcription factors showed expression patterns correlated with lignification in postharvest treatments and red-fleshed 'Luoyangqing' and white-fleshed 'Ninghaibai' cultivars with different lignification responses. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation and luciferase complementation imaging assays confirmed direct protein-protein interaction between EjERF39 and EjMYB8. These data indicate that EjERF39 is a novel cold-responsive transcriptional activator of Ej4CL1 that forms a synergistic activator complex with EjMYB8 and contributes to loquat fruit lignification at low temperatures.

EjERF27: !induces! Flesh lignification
EjERF30: !induces! Flesh lignification
EjERF36: !induces! Flesh lignification
EjERF39: !induces! Flesh lignification
EjERF39: !transactivates! Ej4CL1
EjERF39: !interacts with! EjMYB8
EjMYB8: !interacts with! EjERF39
EjERF39: !synergistically transactivates! Ej4CL1