Neo-tetraploid rice, which is a new germplasm developed from autotetraploid rice, has a powerful biological and yield potential and could be used for commercial utilization. The length of panicle, as a part of rice panicle architecture, contributes greatly to high yield. However, little information about long panicle associated with heterosis or hybrid vigor is available in neo-tetraploid rice. In the present study, we developed a neo-tetraploid rice line, Huaduo 8 (H8), with long panicles and harboring wide-compatibility genes for pollen and embryo sac fertility. All the hybrids generated by H8 produced significant high-parent yield heterosis and displayed long panicles similar to H8. RNA-seq analysis detected a total of 4013, 7050, 6787 and 6195 differentially expressed genes uniquely belonging to F<sub>1</sub> and specifically (DEGFu-sp) associated with leaf, sheath, main panicle axis and spikelet in the two hybrids, respectively. Of these DEGFu-sp, 279 and 89 genes were involved in kinase and synthase, and 714 cloned genes, such as GW8, OsGA20ox1, Ghd8, GW6a, and LP1, were identified and validated by qRT-PCR. A total of 2925 known QTLs intervals, with an average of 1~100 genes per interval, were detected in both hybrids. Of these, 109 yield-related QTLs were associated with seven important traits in rice. Moreover, 1393 non-additive DEGs, including 766 up-regulated and 627 down-regulated, were detected in both hybrids. Importantly, eight up-regulated genes associated with panicle were detected in young panicles of the two hybrids compared to their parents by qRT-PCR. Re-sequencing analysis depicted that LP (a gene controlling long panicle) sequence of H8 was different from many other neo-tetraploid rice and most of the diploid and autotetraploid lines. The qRT-PCR results showed that LP was up-regulated in the hybrid compared to its parents at very young stage of panicle development. These results suggested that H8 could overcome the intersubspecific autotetraploid hybrid rice sterility caused by embryo sac and pollen sterility loci. Notably, long panicles of H8 showed dominance phenomenon and played an important role in yield heterosis, which is a complex molecular mechanism. The neo-tetraploid rice is a useful germplasm to attain high yield of polyploid rice.

Neo-tetraploid rice: !harbors! wide-compatibility genes 
RNA-seq analysis: !detected! DEGFu-sp 
QTLs intervals: !contained! yield-related QTLs 
Hybrids: !produced! significant high-parent yield heterosis 
Hybrids: !detected! non-additive DEGs 
LP: !up-regulated in! hybrid 
H8: !overcame! intersubspecific autotetraploid hybrid rice sterility 
Long panicles: !showed! dominance phenomenon 
Long panicles: !played important role in! yield heterosis