<i>Botrytis cinerea</i> is an important necrotroph in vineyards. Primary infections are mostly initiated by airborne conidia from overwintered sources around bloom, then the fungus remains quiescent from bloom till maturity and egresses at ripeness. We previously described in detail the process of flower infection and quiescence initiation. Here, we complete the characterization studying the cross-talk between the plant and the fungus during pathogen quiescence and egression by an integrated transcriptomic and metabolic analysis of the host and the pathogen. Flowers from fruiting cuttings of the cv. Pinot Noir were inoculated with a GFP-labeled strain of <i>B. cinerea</i> at full cap-off stage, and molecular analyses were carried out at 4 weeks post inoculation (wpi, fungal quiescent state) and at 12 wpi (fungal pre-egression and egression states). The expressed fungal transcriptome highlighted that the fungus remodels its cell wall to evade plant chitinases besides undergoing basal metabolic activities. Berries responded by differentially regulating genes encoding for different PR proteins and genes involved in monolignol, flavonoid, and stilbenoid biosynthesis pathways. At 12 wpi, the transcriptome of <i>B. cinerea</i> in the pre-egressed samples showed that virulence-related genes were expressed, suggesting infection process was initiated. The egressed <i>B. cinerea</i> expressed almost all virulence and growth related genes that enabled the pathogen to colonize the berries. In response to egression, ripe berries reprogrammed different defense responses, though futile. Examples are activation of membrane localized kinases, stilbene synthases, and other PR proteins related to SA and JA-mediated responses. Our results indicated that hard-green berries defense program was capable to hamper <i>B. cinerea</i> growth. However, ripening associated fruit cell wall self-disassembly together with high humidity created the opportunity for the fungus to egress and cause bunch rot.

Fungus: !remodels cell wall! Plant
Fungus: !expresses virulence-related genes! Plant
Plant: !regulates PR proteins! Fungus
Plant: !regulates monolignol biosynthesis! Fungus
Plant: !regulates flavonoid biosynthesis! Fungus
Plant: !regulates stilbenoid biosynthesis! Fungus
Plant: !activates membrane localized kinases! Fungus
Plant: !activates stilbene synthases! Fungus
Plant: !activates PR proteins! Fungus
Plant: !disassembles cell wall! Fungus