Bud dormancy is indispensable for the survival of perennial plants in cold winters. Abscisic acid (ABA) has essential functions influencing the endo-dormancy status. Dormancy-associated MADS-box/SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE-like genes function downstream of the ABA signalling pathway to regulate bud dormancy. However, the regulation of DAM/SVP expression remains largely uncharacterized. In this study, we confirmed that endo-dormancy maintenance and PpyDAM3 expression are controlled by the ABA content in pear (Pyrus pyrifolia) buds. The expression of pear ABRE-BINDING FACTOR3 (PpyABF3) was positively correlated with PpyDAM3 expression. Furthermore, PpyABF3 directly bound to the second ABRE in the PpyDAM3 promoter to activate its expression. Interestingly, both PpyABF3 and PpyDAM3 repressed the cell division and growth of transgenic pear calli. Another ABA-induced ABF protein, PpyABF2, physically interacted with PpyABF3 and disrupted the activation of the PpyDAM3 promoter by PpyABF3, indicating DAM expression was precisely controlled. Additionally, our results suggested that the differences in the PpyDAM3 promoter in two pear cultivars might be responsible for the diversity in the chilling requirements. In summary, our data clarify the finely tuned regulatory mechanism underlying the effect of ABA on DAM gene expression and provide new insights into ABA-related bud dormancy regulation.

ABA: !influences! bud dormancy
MADS-box/SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE-like genes: !function downstream of! ABA signalling pathway
ABA content: !controls! endo-dormancy maintenance and PpyDAM3 expression
PpyABF3: !positively correlates with! PpyDAM3 expression
PpyABF3: !directly binds to! second ABRE in PpyDAM3 promoter
PpyABF3: !activates! PpyDAM3 expression
PpyABF3: !represses! cell division and growth of transgenic pear calli
PpyABF2: !physically interacts with! PpyABF3
PpyABF2: !disrupts! activation of PpyDAM3 promoter by PpyABF3
PpyDAM3 promoter: !responsible for! diversity in chilling requirements