Gossypol is a specific secondary metabolite in Gossypium species. It not only plays a critical role in development and self-protection of cotton plants, but also can be used as important anti-cancer and male contraceptive compound. However, due to the toxicity of gossypol for human beings and monogastric animals, the consumption of cottonseeds was limited. To date, little is known about the gossypol metabolism in cotton plants. In this study, we found that cotyledon was the primary source of gossypol at the seed germination stage. But thereafter, it was mainly originated from developing roots. Grafting between glanded and glandless cotton as well as sunflower rootstocks and cotton scion revealed that gossypol was mainly synthesized in the root systems of cotton plants. And both glanded and glandless cotton roots had the ability of gossypol biosynthesis. But the pigment glands, the main storage of gossypol, had indirect effects on gossypol biosynthesis. In vitro culture of root and rootless seedling confirmed the strong gossypol biosynthesis ability in root system and the relatively weak gossypol biosynthesis ability in other organs of the seedling. Expression profiling of the key genes involved in the gossypol biosynthetic pathway also supported the root as the major organ of gossypol biosynthesis. Our study provide evidence that the cotton root system is the major source of gossypol in both glanded and glandless cottons, while other organs have a relatively weak ability to synthesize gossypol. Gossypol biosynthesis is not directed related to the expression of pigment glands, but the presence of pigment glands is essential for gossypol accumulation. These findings can not only clarify the complex regulation network of gossypol metabolism, but it could also accelerate the crop breeding process with enhanced commercial values.

Gossypol: !synthesized in! root systems 
root systems: !main source of! gossypol 
gossypol: !accumulated in! pigment glands 
pigment glands: !essential for! gossypol accumulation 
cotyledon: !primary source of! gossypol 
grafting: !revealed! gossypol biosynthesis 
in vitro culture: !confirmed! gossypol biosynthesis 
expression profiling: !supported! root as major organ