Genebanks provide access to diverse materials for crop improvement. To utilize and evaluate them effectively, core collections, such as the World Rice Core Collection (WRC) in the Genebank at the National Agriculture and Food Research Organization, have been developed. Because the WRC consists of 69 accessions with a high degree of genetic diversity, it has been used for >300 projects. To allow deeper investigation of existing WRC data and to further promote research using Genebank rice accessions, we performed whole-genome resequencing of these 69 accessions, examining their sequence variation by mapping against the Oryza sativa ssp. japonica Nipponbare genome. We obtained a total of 2,805,329 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 357,639 insertion-deletions. Based on the principal component analysis and population structure analysis of these data, the WRC can be classified into three major groups. We applied TASUKE, a multiple genome browser to visualize the different WRC genome sequences, and classified haplotype groups of genes affecting seed characteristics and heading date. TASUKE thus provides access to WRC genotypes as a tool for reverse genetics. We examined the suitability of the compact WRC population for genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Heading date, affected by a large number of quantitative trait loci (QTLs), was not associated with known genes, but several seed-related phenotypes were associated with known genes. Thus, for QTLs of strong effect, the compact WRC performed well in GWAS. This information enables us to understand genetic diversity in 37,000 rice accessions maintained in the Genebank and to find genes associated with different phenotypes. The sequence data have been deposited in DNA Data Bank of Japan Sequence Read Archive (DRA) (Supplementary Table S1).

Genebank: !provides access to! diverse materials
WRC: !consists of! 69 accessions
SNPs: !obtained from! WRC
Principal component analysis: !classifies! WRC into 3 major groups
TASUKE: !visualizes! different WRC genome sequences
GWAS: !examines! suitability of compact WRC population
QTLs: !associated with! known genes
37,000 rice accessions: !maintained in! Genebank