This study provides broad insight into the chloroplast genomes of the subfamily Monsteroideae. The identified polymorphic regions may be suitable for designing unique and robust molecular markers for phylogenetic inference. Monsteroideae is the third largest subfamily (comprises 369 species) and one of the early diverging lineages of the monocot plant family Araceae. The phylogeny of this important subfamily is not well resolved at the species level due to scarcity of genomic resources and suitable molecular markers. Here, we report annotated chloroplast genome sequences of four Monsteroideae species: Spathiphyllum patulinervum, Stenospermation multiovulatum, Monstera adansonii, and Rhaphidophora amplissima. The quadripartite chloroplast genomes (size range 163,335-164,751막p) consist of a pair of inverted repeats (25,270-25,931막p), separating a small single copy region (21,448-22,346막p) from a large single copy region (89,714-91,841막p). The genomes contain 114 unique genes, including four rRNA genes, 80 protein-coding genes, and 30 tRNA genes. Gene features, amino acid frequencies, codon usage, GC contents, oligonucleotide repeats, and inverted repeats dynamics exhibit similarities among the four genomes. Higher rate of synonymous substitutions was observed as compared to non-synonymous substitutions in 76 protein-coding genes. Positive selection was observed in seven protein-coding genes, including psbK, ndhK, ndhD, rbcL, accD, rps8, and ycf2. Our included species of Araceae showed the monophyly in Monsteroideae and other subfamilies. We report 30 suitable polymorphic regions. The polymorphic regions identified here might be suitable for designing unique and robust markers for inferring the phylogeny and phylogeography among closely related species within the genus Spathiphyllum and among distantly related species within the subfamily Monsteroideae. The chloroplast genomes presented here are a valuable contribution towards understanding the molecular evolutionary dynamics in the family Araceae.

Gene: !affects! Evolutionary Dynamics 
Gene: !synthesizes! Protein-coding Genes 
Gene: !represses! Non-synonymous Substitutions 
Gene: !enhances! Synonymous Substitutions 
Gene: !interacts with! Oligonucleotide Repeats 
Gene: !localizes to! Chloroplast Genomes