Quercetin (QCT) is a natural polyphenolic compound enriched in human food, mainly in vegetables, fruits and berries. QCT and its main derivatives, such as rhamnetin, rutin, hyperoside, etc., have been documented to possess many beneficial effects in the human body including their positive effects in the cardiovascular system. However, clinical implications of QCT and its derivatives are still rare. In the current paper we provide a complex picture of the most recent knowledge on the effects of QCT and its derivatives in different types of cardiac injury, mainly in ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury of the heart, but also in other pathologies such as anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity or oxidative stress-induced cardiac injury, documented in in vitro and ex vivo, as well as in in vivo experimental models of cardiac injury. Moreover, we focus on cardiac effects of QCT in presence of metabolic comorbidities in addition to cardiovascular disease (CVD). Finally, we provide a short summary of clinical studies focused on cardiac effects of QCT. In general, it seems that QCT and its metabolites exert strong cardioprotective effects in a wide range of experimental models of cardiac injury, likely via their antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and molecular pathways-modulating properties; however, ageing and presence of lifestyle-related comorbidities may confound their beneficial effects in heart disease. On the other hand, due to very limited number of clinical trials focused on cardiac effects of QCT and its derivatives, clinical data are inconclusive. Thus, additional well-designed human studies including a high enough number of patients testing different concentrations of QCT are needed to reveal real therapeutic potential of QCT in CVD. Finally, several negative or controversial effects of QCT in the heart have been reported, and this should be also taken into consideration in QCT-based approaches aimed to treat CVD in humans.

QCT: !exerts! Cardioprotective effects 
QCT: !modulates! Molecular pathways 
Ageing: !confounds! Beneficial effects 
Lifestyle-related comorbidities: !confounds! Beneficial effects 
Clinical trials: !limited! Number 
QCT: !reveals! Therapeutic potential 
QCT: !reports! Negative/controversial effects