In the past few years, many studies have reported that the transcription factor Nuclear Factor Y (NF-Y) gene family plays important roles in embryonic development, photosynthesis, flowering time regulation and stress response, in various plants. Although the NF-Y gene family has been systematically studied in many species, little is known about NF-Y genes in Populus. In this study, the NF-Y gene family in the Populus genome was identified and its structural characteristics were described. Fifty-two NF-Y genes were authenticated in the Populus trichocarpa genome and categorized into three subfamilies (NF-YA/B/C) by phylogenetic analysis. Chromosomal localization of these genes revealed that they were distributed randomly across 17 of the 19 chromosomes. Segmental duplication played a vital role in the amplification of Populus NF-Y gene family. Moreover, microsynteny analysis indicated that, among Populus trichocarpa, Arabidopsis thaliana, Vitis vinifera and Carica papaya, NF-Y duplicated regions were more conserved between Populus trichocarpa and Vitis vinifera. Redundant stress-related cis-elements were also found in the promoters of most 13 NF-YA genes and their expression levels varied widely following drought, salt, ABA and cold treatments. Subcellular localization experiments in tobacco showed that PtNF-YA3 was localized in nucleus and cytomembrane, while PtNF-YA4 was only in the nucleus in tobacco. According to the transcriptional activity experiments, neither of them had transcriptional activity in yeast. In summary, a comprehensive analysis of the Populus NF-Y gene family was performed to establish a theoretical basis for further functional studies on this family.

NF-Y: !plays important roles in! embryonic development, photosynthesis, flowering time regulation and stress response
NF-Y: !amplified by! segmental duplication
NF-Y: !conserved between! Populus trichocarpa and Vitis vinifera
NF-Y: !contains! redundant stress-related cis-elements
PtNF-YA3: !localized in! nucleus and cytomembrane
PtNF-YA4: !localized in! nucleus
PtNF-YA3/4: !lack! transcriptional activity in yeast