['32132131', 'Several pathways conferring environmental flowering responses in Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) converge on developmental processes that mediate the  floral transition in the shoot apical meristem. Many characterized mutations  disrupt these environmental responses, but downstream developmental processes  have been more refractory to mutagenesis. Here, we constructed a quintuple mutant  impaired in several environmental pathways and showed that it possesses severely  reduced flowering responses to changes in photoperiod and ambient temperature.  RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of the quintuple mutant showed that the  expression of genes encoding gibberellin biosynthesis enzymes and transcription  factors involved in the age pathway correlates with flowering. Mutagenesis of the  quintuple mutant generated two late-flowering mutants, quintuple ems1 (qem1) and  qem2 The mutated genes were identified by isogenic mapping and transgenic  complementation. The qem1 mutant is an allele of the gibberellin 20-oxidase gene  ga20ox2, confirming the importance of gibberellin for flowering in the absence of  environmental responses. By contrast, qem2 is impaired in CHROMATIN REMODELING4  (CHR4), which has not been genetically implicated in floral induction. Using  co-immunoprecipitation, RNA-seq, and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing, we  show that CHR4 interacts with transcription factors involved in floral meristem  identity and affects the expression of key floral regulators. Therefore, CHR4  mediates the response to endogenous flowering pathways in the inflorescence  meristem to promote floral identity.', '2020 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.19.00992', 'ORCID:']

Pathways: !converge on! developmental processes
Mutations: !disrupt! environmental responses
Quintuple mutant: !impaired in! environmental pathways
RNA-seq: !shows! expression of genes 
Mutagenesis: !generates! late-flowering mutants
Ga20ox2: !confirms! importance of gibberellin
CHR4: !interacts with! transcription factors
CHR4: !affects! expression of key floral regulators
CHR4: !promotes! floral identity