['32130643', 'DEEPER ROOTING 1 (DRO1) contributes to the downward gravitropic growth trajectory  of roots upstream of lateral auxin transport in monocots and dicots. Loss of DRO1  function leads to horizontally oriented lateral roots and altered gravitropic set  point angle, while loss of all three DRO family members results in upward,  vertical root growth. Here, we attempt to dissect the roles of AtDRO1 by  analyzing expression, protein localization, auxin gradient formation, and auxin  responsiveness in the atdro1 mutant. Current evidence suggests AtDRO1 is  predominantly a membrane-localized protein. Here we show that VENUS-tagged AtDRO1  driven by the native AtDRO1 promoter complemented an atdro1 Arabidopsis mutant  and the protein was localized in root tips and detectable in nuclei. atdro1  primary and lateral roots showed impairment in establishing an auxin gradient  upon gravistimulation as visualized with DII-VENUS, a sensor for auxin signaling  and proxy for relative auxin distribution. Additionally, PIN3 domain localization  was not significantly altered upon gravistimulation in atdro1 primary and lateral  roots. RNA-sequencing revealed differential expression of known root  development-related genes in atdro1 mutants. atdro1 lateral roots were able to  respond to exogenous auxin and AtDRO1 gene expression levels in root tips were  unaffected by the addition of auxin. Collectively, the data suggest that nuclear  localization may be important for AtDRO1 function and suggests a more nuanced  role for DRO1 in regulating auxin-mediated changes in lateral branch angle. KEY  MESSAGE: DEEPER ROOTING 1 (DRO1) when expressed from its native promoter is  predominately localized in Arabidopsis root tips, detectable in nuclei, and  impacts auxin gradient formation.', '2020 May', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/s11103-020-00984-2', 'ORCID:']

AtDRO1: !localizes to! root tips 
AtDRO1: !detectable in! nuclei 
atdro1: !impairs! auxin gradient formation 
PIN3 domain: !not altered by! gravistimulation 
atdro1: !differentially expresses! root development-related genes 
atdro1: !responds to! exogenous auxin 
AtDRO1 gene expression: !unaffected by! auxin addition