Shoot orientation is important for plant architecture formation, and zigzag-shaped shoots are a special trait found in many plants. Zigzag-shaped shoots have been selected and thoroughly studied in Arabidopsis; however, the regulatory mechanism underlying zigzag-shaped shoot development in other plants, especially woody plants, is largely unknown. In this study, tea plants with zigzag-shaped shoots, namely, Qiqu (QQ) and Lianyuanqiqu (LYQQ), were investigated and compared with the erect-shoot tea plant Meizhan (MZ) in an attempt to reveal the regulation of zigzag-shaped shoot formation. Tissue section observation showed that the cell arrangement and shape of zigzag-shaped stems were aberrant compared with those of normal shoots. Moreover, a total of 2175 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified from the zigzag-shaped shoots of the tea plants QQ and LYQQ compared to the shoots of MZ using transcriptome sequencing, and the DEGs involved in the "Plant-pathogen interaction", "Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis", "Flavonoid biosynthesis" and "Linoleic acid metabolism" pathways were significantly enriched. Additionally, the DEGs associated with cell expansion, vesicular trafficking, phytohormones, and transcription factors were identified and analysed. Metabolomic analysis showed that 13 metabolites overlapped and were significantly changed in the shoots of QQ and LYQQ compared to MZ. Our results suggest that zigzag-shaped shoot formation might be associated with the gravitropism response and polar auxin transport in tea plants. This study provides a valuable foundation for further understanding the regulation of plant architecture formation and for the cultivation and application of horticultural plants in the future.

Gene: !affects! Plant-pathogen interaction
Gene: !affects! Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis
Gene: !affects! Flavonoid biosynthesis
Gene: !affects! Linoleic acid metabolism
Gene: !affects! Cell expansion
Gene: !affects! Vesicular trafficking
Gene: !affects! Phytohormones
Gene: !affects! Transcription factors
Gene: !enhances! Gravitropism response
Gene: !enhances! Polar auxin transport