Both drought and heat stress are serious global problems, leading to agricultural production loss. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in plant species responding to individual drought and heat stress. However, the miRNAs and mRNAs in association with combined drought and heat in crops like tomato remains unclear. We studied the crosstalk of miRNAs and their target genes in tomato plants grown under simultaneous drought and heat stress that frequently happen in field conditions. In total, 335 known miRNAs representing 55 miRNA families and 430 potential novel miRNAs were identified in Solanum lycopersicum L. using small RNA deep sequencing. Through expression analysis, miRNAs in association with drought, heat and the combination of these were investigated. In total, 61, 74 and 37 miRNAs were differentially regulated for combination (of both stresses) vs control, combination vs drought and combination vs heat, respectively. Target genes with different expression levels were found using degradome sequencing, which were mainly involved in transcription factor activity, sequence-specific DNA binding, transcription, regulation of transcription, nucleus, DNA binding etc. The quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) results confirmed the accuracy of sequencing. Our study serves as valuable knowledge on how crop adapted to combined drought and heat stress by regulating miRNAs and mRNAs, which provide information for crop improvement to deal with future climate changes.

miRNA: !regulates! mRNA 
miRNA: !involved in! transcription factor activity 
miRNA: !associated with! drought 
miRNA: !associated with! heat 
miRNA: !differentially regulated for! combination (of both stresses) vs control 
miRNA: !differentially regulated for! combination vs drought 
miRNA: !differentially regulated for! combination vs heat 
mRNA: !involved in! transcription factor activity 
mRNA: !involved in! sequence-specific DNA binding 
mRNA: !involved in! transcription 
mRNA: !involved in! regulation of transcription 
mRNA: !localizes to! nucleus 
mRNA: !binds to! DNA