The extension of commercial life and the reduction of postharvest losses of perishable fruits is mainly based on storage at low temperatures alone or in combination with modified atmospheres (MAs) and controlled atmospheres (CAs), directed primarily at reducing their overall metabolism thus delaying ripening and senescence. Fruits react to postharvest conditions with desirable changes if appropriate protocols are applied, but otherwise can develop negative and unacceptable traits due to the onset of physiological disorders. Extended cold storage periods and/or inappropriate temperatures can result in development of chilling injuries (CIs). The etiology, incidence, and severity of such symptoms vary even within cultivars of the same species, indicating the genotype significance. Carbohydrates and amino acids have protective/regulating roles in CI development. MA/CA storage protocols involve storage under hypoxic conditions and high carbon dioxide concentrations that can maximize quality over extended storage periods but are also affected by the cultivar, exposure time, and storage temperatures. Pyruvate metabolism is highly reactive to changes in oxygen concentration and is greatly affected by the shift from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism. Ethylene-induced changes in fruits can also have deleterious effects under cold storage and MA/CA conditions, affecting susceptibility to chilling and carbon dioxide injuries. The availability of the inhibitor of ethylene perception 1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP) has not only resulted in development of a new technology but has also been used to increase understanding of the role of ethylene in ripening of both non-climacteric and climacteric fruits. Temperature, MA/CA, and 1-MCP alter fruit physiology and biochemistry, resulting in compositional changes in carbon- and nitrogen-related metabolisms and compounds. Successful application of these storage technologies to fruits must consider their effects on the metabolism of carbohydrates, organic acids, amino acids and lipids.

Gene: !affects! Chilling Injury 
Gene: !localizes to! Pyruvate Metabolism 
Gene: !interacts with! Ethylene 
Gene: !enhances! Quality 
Gene: !represses! Ripening 
Gene: !synthesizes! Carbon- and Nitrogen-related Compounds