UVB radiation can rapidly induce gene regulation leading to cumulative changes for plant physiology and morphology. We hypothesized that a transgenerational effect of chronic exposure to solar short UV modulates the offspring's responses to UVB and blue light, and that the transgenerational effect is genotype dependent. We established a factorial experiment combining two Vicia faba L. accessions, two parental UV treatments (full sunlight and exclusion of short UV, 290-350 nm), and four offspring light treatments from the factorial combination of UVB and blue light. The accessions were Aurora from southern Sweden, and ILB938 from Andean region of Colombia and Ecuador. The transgenerational effect influenced morphological responses to blue light differently in the two accessions. In Aurora, when UVB was absent, blue light increased shoot dry mass only in plants whose parents were protected from short UV. In ILB938, blue light increased leaf area and shoot dry mass more in plants whose parents were exposed to short UV than those that were not. Moreover, when the offspring was exposed to UVB, the transgenerational effect decreased in ILB938 and disappeared in Aurora. For flavonoids, the transgenerational effect was detected only in Aurora: parental exposure to short UV was associated with a greater induction of total quercetin in response to UVB. Transcript abundance was higher in Aurora than in ILB938 for both CHALCONE SYNTHASE (99-fold) and DON-GLUCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1 (19-fold). The results supported both hypotheses. Solar short UV had transgenerational effects on progeny responses to blue and UVB radiation, and they differed between the accessions. These transgenerational effects could be adaptive by acclimation of slow and cumulative morphological change, and by early build-up of UV protection through flavonoid accumulation on UVB exposure. The differences between the two accessions aligned with their adaptation to contrasting UV environments.

UVB radiation: !induces! gene regulation
Vicia faba L.: !differs in! transgenerational effect
Aurora: !responds to! blue light
ILB938: !responds to! blue light
CHALCONE SYNTHASE: !synthesizes! flavonoids
DON-GLUCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1: !synthesizes! flavonoids
UVB: !enhances! flavonoid accumulation