Wood is a complex tissue that fulfills three major functions in trees: water conduction, mechanical support and nutrient storage. In Angiosperm trees, vessels, fibers and parenchyma rays are respectively assigned to these functions. Cell wall composition and structure strongly varies according to cell type, developmental stages and environmental conditions. This complexity can therefore hinder the study of the molecular mechanisms of wood formation, underlying the construction of its properties. However, this can be circumvented thanks to the development of cell-specific approaches and microphenotyping. Here, we present a non-destructive microphenotyping method based on attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transformed infrared (ATR-FTIR) microspectroscopy. We applied this technique to three types of poplar wood: normal wood of staked trees (NW), tension and opposite wood of artificially tilted trees (TW, OW). TW is produced by angiosperm trees in response to mechanical strains and is characterized by the presence of G fibers, exhibiting a thick gelatinous extra-layer, named G-layer, located in place of the usual S2 and/or S3 layers. By contrast, OW located on the opposite side of the trunk is totally deprived of fibers with G-layers. We developed a workflow for hyperspectral image analysis with both automatic pixel clustering according to cell wall types and identification of differentially absorbed wavenumbers (DAWNs). As pixel clustering failed to assign pixels to ray S-layers with sufficient efficiency, the IR profiling and identification of DAWNs were restricted to fiber and vessel cell walls. As reported elsewhere, this workflow identified cellulose as the main component of the G-layers, while the amount in acetylated xylans and lignins were shown to be reduced. These results validate ATR-FTIR technique for <i>in situ</i> characterization of G layers. In addition, this study brought new information about IR profiling of S-layers in TW, OW and NW. While OW and NW exhibited similar profiles, TW fibers S-layers combined characteristics of TW G-layers and of regular fiber S-layers. Unexpectedly, vessel S-layers of the three kinds of wood showed significant differences in IR profiling. In conclusion, ATR-FTIR microspectroscopy offers new possibilities for studying cell wall composition at the cell level.

Wood: !fulfills! Three Major Functions 
Cell Wall: !varies according to! Cell Type, Developmental Stages & Environmental Conditions 
ATR-FTIR Microspectroscopy: !offers new possibilities for! Studying Cell Wall Composition 
NW: !exhibits! Similar Profiles 
TW Fibers S-Layers: !combines characteristics of! TW G-Layers & Regular Fiber S-Layers 
OW & NW: !exhibited! Similar Profiles 
Vessel S-Layers: !showed significant differences in! IR Profiling