There is a need to integrate conceptual framework based on the current understanding of salt stress responses with different approaches for manipulating and improving salt tolerance in crop plants. Soil salinity exerts significant constraints on global crop production, posing a serious challenge for plant breeders and biotechnologists. The classical transgenic approach for enhancing salinity tolerance in plants revolves by boosting endogenous defence mechanisms, often via a single-gene approach, and usually involves the enhanced synthesis of compatible osmolytes, antioxidants, polyamines, maintenance of hormone homeostasis, modification of transporters and/or regulatory proteins, including transcription factors and alternative splicing events. Occasionally, genetic manipulation of regulatory proteins or phytohormone levels confers salinity tolerance, but all these may cause undesired reduction in plant growth and/or yields. In this review, we present and evaluate novel and cutting-edge approaches for engineering salt tolerance in crop plants. First, we cover recent findings regarding the importance of regulatory proteins and transporters, and how they can be used to enhance salt tolerance in crop plants. We also evaluate the importance of halobiomes as a reservoir of genes that can be used for engineering salt tolerance in glycophytic crops. Additionally, the role of microRNAs as critical post-transcriptional regulators in plant adaptive responses to salt stress is reviewed and their use for engineering salt-tolerant crop plants is critically assessed. The potentials of alternative splicing mechanisms and targeted gene-editing technologies in understanding plant salt stress responses and developing salt-tolerant crop plants are also discussed.

Gene: !enhances! Synthesis of compatible osmolytes 
Gene: !modifies! Transporters and regulatory proteins 
Gene: !regulates! Phytohormone levels 
Gene: !harbors! Halobiomes 
Gene: !regulates! MicroRNAs 
Gene: !involves! Alternative splicing mechanisms 
Gene: !edits! Targeted genes