Xyloglucan is a major hemicellulose in plant cell walls and exists in two distinct types, XXXG and XXGG. While the XXXG-type xyloglucan from dicot species only contains O-acetyl groups on side-chain galactose (Gal) residues, the XXGG-type xyloglucan from Poaceae (grasses) and Solanaceae bears O-acetyl groups on backbone glucosyl (Glc) residues. Although O-acetyltransferases responsible for xyloglucan Gal acetylation have been characterized, the biochemical mechanism underlying xyloglucan backbone acetylation remains to be elucidated. In this study, we showed that recombinant proteins of a group of DUF231 members from rice and tomato were capable of transferring acetyl groups onto O-6 of Glc residues in cello-oligomer acceptors, indicating that they are xyloglucan backbone 6-O-acetyltransferases (XyBATs). We further demonstrated that XyBAT-acetylated cellohexaose oligomers could be readily xylosylated by AtXXT1 (Arabidopsis xyloglucan xylosyltransferase 1) to generate acetylated, xylosylated cello-oligomers, whereas AtXXT1-xylosylated cellohexaose oligomers were much less effectively acetylated by XyBATs. Heterologous expression of a rice XyBAT in Arabidopsis led to a severe reduction in cell expansion and plant growth and a drastic alteration in xyloglucan xylosylation pattern with the formation of acetylated XXGG-type units, including XGG, XGGG, XXGG, XXGG,XXGGG and XXGGG (G denotes acetylated Glc). In addition, recombinant proteins of two Arabidopsis XyBAT homologs also exhibited O-acetyltransferase activity toward cellohexaose, suggesting their possible role in mediating xyloglucan backbone acetylation in vivo. Our findings provide new insights into the biochemical mechanism underlying xyloglucan backbone acetylation and indicate the importance of maintaining the regular xyloglucan xylosylation pattern in cell wall function.

XyBAT: !acetylates! Glc residues 
XyBAT: !xylosylated by! AtXXT1 
AtXXT1: !xylosylates! cellohexaose oligomers 
XyBAT: !represses! cell expansion 
XyBAT: !alters! xyloglucan xylosylation pattern