The double fertilization of the female gametophyte initiates embryogenesis and endosperm development in seeds <i>via</i> the activation of genes involved in cell differentiation, organ patterning, and growth. A subset of genes expressed in endosperm exhibit imprinted expression, and the correct balance of gene expression between parental alleles is critical for proper endosperm and seed development. We use a transcriptional time series analysis to identify genes that are associated with key shifts in seed development, including genes associated with secondary cell wall synthesis, mitotic cell cycle, chromatin organization, auxin synthesis, fatty acid metabolism, and seed maturation. We relate these genes to morphological changes in <i>Mimulus</i> seeds. We also identify four endosperm-expressed transcripts that display imprinted (paternal) expression bias. The imprinted status of these four genes is conserved in other flowering plants, suggesting that they are functionally important in endosperm development. Our study explores gene regulatory dynamics in a species with <i>ab initio</i> cellular endosperm development, broadening the taxonomic focus of the literature on gene expression in seeds. Moreover, it is the first to validate genes with imprinted endosperm expression in <i>Mimulus guttatus</i>, and will inform future studies on the genetic causes of seed failure in this model system.

Cell differentiation: !initiates! embryogenesis 
Organ patterning: !initiates! endosperm development 
Secondary cell wall synthesis: !associated with! key shifts in seed development 
Mitotic cell cycle: !associated with! key shifts in seed development 
Chromatin organization: !associated with! key shifts in seed development 
Auxin synthesis: !associated with! key shifts in seed development 
Fatty acid metabolism: !associated with! key shifts in seed development 
Seed maturation: !associated with! key shifts in seed development 
Imprinted expression: !critical for! proper endosperm and seed development 
Four genes: !display! imprinted (paternal) expression bias