Pathogen-/microbe-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs/MAMPs) initiate complex defense responses by reorganizing the biomolecular dynamics of the host cellular machinery. The extracellular matrix (ECM) acts as a physical scaffold that prevents recognition and entry of phytopathogens, while guard cells perceive and integrate signals metabolically. Although chitosan is a known MAMP implicated in plant defense, the precise mechanism of chitosan-triggered immunity (CTI) remains unknown. Here, we show how chitosan imparts immunity against fungal disease. Morpho-histological examination revealed stomatal closure accompanied by reductions in stomatal conductance and transpiration rate as early responses in chitosan-treated seedlings upon vascular fusariosis. Electron microscopy and Raman spectroscopy showed ECM fortification leading to oligosaccharide signaling, as documented by increased galactose, pectin and associated secondary metabolites. Multiomics approach using quantitative ECM proteomics and metabolomics identified 325 chitosan-triggered immune-responsive proteins (CTIRPs), notably novel ECM structural proteins, LYM2 and receptor-like kinases, and 65 chitosan-triggered immune-responsive metabolites (CTIRMs), including sugars, sugar alcohols, fatty alcohols, organic and amino acids. Identified proteins and metabolites are linked to reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, stomatal movement, root nodule development and root architecture coupled with oligosaccharide signaling that leads to Fusarium resistance. The cumulative data demonstrate that ROS, NO and eATP govern CTI, in addition to induction of PR proteins, CAZymes and PAL activities, besides accumulation of phenolic compounds downstream of CTI. The immune-related correlation network identified functional hubs in the CTI pathway. Altogether, these shifts led to the discovery of chitosan-responsive networks that cause significant ECM and guard cell remodeling, and translate ECM cues into cell fate decisions during fusariosis.

Chitosan: !triggers! Immunity
ECM: !fortifies! Oligosaccharide signaling
CTIRPs: !induce! ROS production
CTIRMs: !accumulate! Sugars, sugar alcohols, fatty alcohols, organic and amino acids
ROS/NO/eATP: !govern! CTI
PR proteins/CAZymes/PAL activities: !induce! Phenolic compounds
Functional hubs: !identify! CTI pathway