The broad host range necrotrophic fungus Sclerotinia sclerotiorum is a devastating pathogen of many oil and vegetable crops. Plant genes conferring complete resistance against S. sclerotiorum have not been reported. Instead, plant populations challenged by S. sclerotiorum exhibit a continuum of partial resistance designated as quantitative disease resistance (QDR). Because of their complex interplay and their small phenotypic effect, the functional characterization of QDR genes remains limited. How broad host range necrotrophic fungi manipulate plant programmed cell death is for instance largely unknown. Here, we designed a time-resolved automated disease phenotyping pipeline enabling high-throughput disease lesion measurement with high resolution, low footprint at low cost. We could accurately recover contrasted disease responses in several pathosystems using this system. We used our phenotyping pipeline to assess the kinetics of disease symptoms caused by seven S. sclerotiorum isolates on six A. thaliana natural accessions with unprecedented resolution. Large effect polymorphisms common to the most resistant A. thaliana accessions identified highly divergent alleles of the nucleotide-binding site leucine-rich repeat gene LAZ5 in the resistant accessions Rubezhnoe and Lip-0. We show that impaired LAZ5 expression in laz5.1 mutant lines and in A. thaliana Rub natural accession correlate with enhanced QDR to S. sclerotiorum. These findings illustrate the value of time-resolved image-based phenotyping for unravelling the genetic bases of complex traits such as QDR. Our results suggest that S. sclerotiorum manipulates plant sphingolipid pathways guarded by LAZ5 to trigger programmed cell death and cause disease.

S. sclerotiorum: !manipulates! plant programmed cell death 
LAZ5: !guards! sphingolipid pathways 
LAZ5: !impairs expression of! QDR to S. sclerotiorum 
A. thaliana accessions: !exhibit! partial resistance to S. sclerotiorum 
A. thaliana Rub: !correlates with! impaired LAZ5 expression 
Time-resolved image-based phenotyping: !unravels! genetic bases of complex traits