The non-animal peroxidases belong to a superfamily of oxidoreductases that reduce hydrogen peroxide and oxidize numerous substrates. Since their initial characterization in 1992, a number of studies have provided an understanding of the origin and evolution of this protein family. Here, we report a comprehensive evolutionary analysis of non-animal peroxidases using integrated in silico and biochemical approaches. Thanks to the availability of numerous genomic sequences from more than 2500 species belonging to 14 kingdoms together with expert and comprehensive annotation of peroxidase sequences that have been centralized in a dedicated database, we have been able to use phylogenetic reconstructions to increase our understanding of the evolutionary processes underlying the diversification of non-animal peroxidases. We analysed the distribution of all non-animal peroxidases in more than 200 eukaryotic organisms in silico. First, we show that the presence or absence of non-animal peroxidases correlates with the presence or absence of certain organelles or with specific biological processes. Examination of almost 2000 organisms determined that ascorbate peroxidases (APxs) and cytochrome c peroxidases (CcPs) are present in those containing chloroplasts and mitochondria, respectively. Plants, which contain both organelles, are an exception and contain only APxs without CcP. Class II peroxidases (CII Prxs) are only found in fungi with wood-decay and plant-degradation abilities. Class III peroxidases (CIII Prxs) are only found in streptophyte algae and land plants, and have been subjected to large family expansion. Biochemical activities of APx, CcP, and CIII Prx assessed using protein extracts from 30 different eukaryotic organisms support the distribution of the sequences resulting from our in silico analysis. The biochemical results confirmed both the presence and classification of the non-animal peroxidase encoding sequences.

Organelle: !contains! APxs
Organelle: !contains! CcPs
Organelle: !exception to! Plants
Process: !correlates with! Presence/Absence of Peroxidases
Fungi: !contains! CII Prxs
Streptophyte Algae/Land Plants: !contains! CIII Prxs
CIII Prx: !subject to! Family Expansion
APx/CcP/CIII Prx: !biochemically assessed in! 30 Eukaryotic Organisms