Soil salinity is a major source of abiotic plant stress, adversely affecting plant growth, development and productivity. Although the physiological and molecular mechanisms that underlie plant responses to salt stress are becoming increasingly understood, epigenetic modifications, such as histone methylations and their potential regulation of the transcription of masked genes at the genome level in response to salt stress, remain largely unclear. Castor bean, an important nonedible oil crop, has evolved the capacity to grow under salt stress. Here, based on high-throughput RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data, we systematically investigated changes in genomic transcription and histone methylation using typical histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and histone H3 tri-methylated lysine 27 (H3K27me3) markers in castor bean leaves subjected to salt stress. The results showed that gain or loss of histone methylation was closely associated with activated or repressed gene expression, though variations in both transcriptome and histone methylation modifications were relatively narrow in response to salt stress. Diverse salt responsive genes and switched histone methylation sites were identified in this study. In particular, we found for the first time that the transcription of the key salt-response regulator RADIALIS-LIKE SANT (RSM1), a MYB-related transcription factor involved in ABA(abscisic acid)-mediated salt stress signaling, was potentially regulated by bivalent H3K4me3-H3K27me3 modifications. Combining phenotypic variations with transcriptional and epigenetic changes, we provide a comprehensive profile for understanding histone modification, genomic transcription and their associations in response to salt stress in plants.

H3K4me3: !regulates! RSM1
H3K27me3: !regulates! RSM1
Salt Stress: !induces! H3K4me3
Salt Stress: !induces! H3K27me3
RSM1: !mediates! ABA-mediated salt stress signaling
H3K4me3: !associated with! activated gene expression
H3K27me3: !associated with! repressed gene expression