Despite the ecological relevance of diatoms, many aspects of their photosynthetic machinery remain poorly understood. Diatoms differ from the green lineage of oxygenic organisms by their photosynthetic pigments and light-harvesting complex (Lhc) proteins, the latter of which are also called fucoxanthin-chlorophyll proteins (FCP). These are composed of three groups of proteins: Lhcf as the main group, Lhcr that are PSI associated, and Lhcx that are involved in photoprotection. The FCP complexes are assembled in trimers and higher oligomers. Several studies have investigated the biochemical properties of purified FCP complexes, but limited knowledge is available about their interaction with the photosystem cores. In this study, isolation of stable supercomplexes from the centric diatom <i>Thalassiosira pseudonana</i> was achieved. To preserve in vivo structure, the separation of thylakoid complexes was performed by native PAGE and sucrose density centrifugation. Different subpopulations of PSI and PSII supercomplexes were isolated and their subunits identified. Analysis of Lhc antenna composition identified Lhc(s) specific for either PSI (Lhcr 1, 3, 4, 7, 10-14, and Lhcf10) or PSII (Lhcf 1-7, 11, and Lhcr2). Lhcx6_1 was reproducibly found in PSII supercomplexes, whereas its association with PSI was unclear. No evidence was found for the interaction between photosystems and higher oligomeric FCPs, comprising Lhcf8 as the main component. Although the subunit composition of the PSII supercomplexes in comparison with that of the trimeric FCP complexes indicated a close mutual association, the higher oligomeric pool is only weakly associated with the photosystems, albeit its abundance in the thylakoid membrane.

Lhcf: !assembles in! trimers
Lhcr: !associated with! PSI
Lhcx: !involved in! photoprotection
Lhc(s): !specific for! PSI/PSII
Lhcx6_1: !found in! PSII supercomplexes
Lhcf8: !main component of! higher oligomeric FCPs
PSI/PSII: !interact with! Lhc(s)
PSII supercomplexes: !closely associated with! trimeric FCP complexes
higher oligomeric pool: !weakly associated with! photosystems