Soybean developing seed is susceptible to high temperature and humidity (HTH) stress in the field, resulting in vigor reduction. Actually, the HTH in the field during soybean seed growth and development would also stress the whole plant, especially on leaf and pod, which in turn affect seed growth and development as well as vigor formation through nutrient supply and protection. In the present study, using a pair of pre-harvest seed deterioration-sensitive and -resistant cultivars Ningzhen No. 1 and Xiangdou No. 3, the comprehensive effects of HTH stress on seed vigor formation during physiological maturity were investigated by analyzing cotyledon, embryo, leaf, and pod at the levels of protein, ultrastructure, and physiology and biochemistry. There were 247, 179, and 517 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) identified in cotyledon, embryo, and leaf of cv. Xiangdou No. 3 under HTH stress, while 235, 366, and 479 DAPs were identified in cotyledon, embryo, and leaf of cv. Ningzhen No. 1. Moreover, 120, 144, and 438 DAPs between the two cultivars were identified in cotyledon, embryo, and leaf under HTH stress, respectively. Moreover, 120, 144, and 438 DAPs between the two cultivars were identified in cotyledon, embryo, and leaf under HTH stress, respectively. Most of the DAPs identified were found to be involved in major metabolic pathways and cellular processes, including signal transduction, tricarboxylic acid cycle, fatty acid metabolism, photosynthesis, protein processing, folding and assembly, protein biosynthesis or degradation, plant-pathogen interaction, starch and sucrose metabolism, and oxidative stress response. The HTH stress had less negative effects on metabolic pathways, cell ultrastructure, and physiology and biochemistry in the four organs of Xiangdou No. 3 than in those of Ningzhen No. 1, leading to produce higher vigor seeds in the former. High seed vigor formation is enhanced by increasing protein biosynthesis and nutrient storage in cotyledon, stronger stability and viability in embryo, more powerful photosynthetic capacity and nutrient supply in leaf, and stronger protection in pod under HTH stress. These results provide comprehensive characteristics of leaf, pod and seed (cotyledon and embryo) under HTH stress, and some of them can be used as selection index in high seed vigor breeding program in soybean.

HTH stress: !affects! seed vigor formation 
protein: !synthesizes! nutrient storage 
embryo: !maintains! stability and viability 
leaf: !enhances! photosynthetic capacity 
pod: !protects! seed vigor formation