The discovery of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), and the subsequent elucidation of their functional roles, was largely delayed due to the misidentification of non-protein-coding parts of DNA as "junk DNA," which forced ncRNAs into the shadows of their protein-coding counterparts. However, over the past decade, insight into the important regulatory roles of ncRNAs has led to rapid progress in their identification and characterization. Of the different types of ncRNAs, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), has attracted considerable attention due to their mRNA-like structures and gene regulatory functions in plant stress responses. While RNA sequencing has been commonly used for mining lncRNAs, a lack of widespread conservation at the sequence level in addition to relatively low and highly tissue-specific expression patterns challenges high-throughput <i>in silico</i> identification approaches. The complex folding characteristics of lncRNA molecules also complicate target predictions, as the knowledge about the interaction interfaces between lncRNAs and potential targets is insufficient. Progress in characterizing lncRNAs and their targets from different species may hold the key to efficient identification of this class of ncRNAs from transcriptomic and potentially genomic resources. In wheat and barley, two of the most important crops, the knowledge about lncRNAs is very limited. However, recently published high-quality genomes of these crops are considered as promising resources for the identification of not only lncRNAs, but any class of molecules. Considering the increasing demand for food, these resources should be used efficiently to discover molecular mechanisms lying behind development and a/biotic stress responses. As our understanding of lncRNAs expands, interactions among ncRNA classes, as well as interactions with the coding sequences, will likely define novel functional networks that may be modulated for crop improvement.

ncRNA: !misidentified as! "junk DNA"
ncRNA: !regulates! gene
lncRNA: !challenges! high-throughput identification
lncRNA: !complicates! target predictions
lncRNA: !interacts with! potential targets
genome: !promises! lncRNA identification
genome: !used for! molecular mechanisms discovery
ncRNA: !interacts with! coding sequences