['32240168', 'Stomata are specialized pores in the epidermis of the aerial parts of a plant,  where stomatal guard cells close and open to regulate gas exchange with the  atmosphere and restrict excessive water vapor from the plant. The production and  patterning of the stomatal lineage cells in higher plants are influenced by the  activities of the widely-used mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling  components. The phenotype caused by the loss-of-function mutations suggested  pivotal roles of the canonical MAPK pathway in the suppression of stomatal  formation and regulation of stomatal patterning in Arabidopsis, whilst the cell  type-specific manipulation of individual MAPK components revealed the existence  of a positive impact on stomatal production. Among a large number of putative  MAPK substrates in plants, the nuclear transcription factors SPEECHLESS (SPCH)  and SCREAM (SCRM) are targets of MAPK 3 and 6 (MPK3/6) in the inhibition of  stomatal formation. The polarity protein BREAKING OF ASYMMETRY IN THE STOMATAL  LINEAGE (BASL) is phosphorylated by MPK3/6 for localization and function in  driving divisional asymmetries. Here, by functionally characterizing three MAPK  SUBSTRATES IN THE STOMATAL LINEAGE (MASS) proteins, we establish that they are  plasma membrane-associated, positive regulators of stomatal production. MPK6 can  phosphorylate the MASS proteins in vitro and mutating the putative substrate  sites interferes the subcellular partition and function of MASS in planta. Our  fine-scale domain analyses identify critical subdomains of MASS2 required for  specific subcellular localization and biological function, respectively.  Furthermore, our data indicate that the MASS proteins may directly interact with  the MAPKK Kinase YODA (YDA) at the plasma membrane. Thus, the deeply conserved  MASS proteins are tightly connected with MAPK signaling in Arabidopsis to  fine-tune stomatal production and patterning, providing a functional divergence  of the YDA-MPK3/6 cascade in the regulation of plant developmental processes.', '2020 Apr', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1008706', 'ORCID:']

MPK3/6: !phosphorylates! SPCH 
MPK3/6: !phosphorylates! SCRM 
MPK3/6: !phosphorylates! BASL 
MPK6: !phosphorylates! MASS proteins 
MASS proteins: !interact with! YDA 
YDA: !activates! MPK3/6