Lysine acetylation is one of the most important post-translational modifications and is involved in multiple cellular processes in plants. There is evidence that acetylation may play an important role in light-induced de-etiolation, a key developmental switch from skotomorphogenesis to photomorphogenesis. During this transition, establishment of photosynthesis is of great significance. However, studies on acetylome dynamics during de-etiolation are limited. Here, we performed the first global lysine acetylome analysis for Zea mays seedlings undergoing de-etiolation, using nano liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry, and identified 814 lysine-acetylated sites on 462 proteins. Bioinformatics analysis of this acetylome showed that most of the lysine-acetylated proteins are predicted to be located in the cytoplasm, nucleus, chloroplast, and mitochondria. In addition, we detected ten lysine acetylation motifs and found that the accumulation of 482 lysine-acetylated peptides corresponding to 289 proteins changed significantly during de-etiolation. These proteins include transcription factors, histones, and proteins involved in chlorophyll synthesis, photosynthesis light reaction, carbon assimilation, glycolysis, the TCA cycle, amino acid metabolism, lipid metabolism, and nucleotide metabolism. Our study provides an in-depth dataset that extends our knowledge of in vivo acetylome dynamics during de-etiolation in monocots. This dataset promotes our understanding of the functional consequences of lysine acetylation in diverse cellular metabolic regulatory processes, and will be a useful toolkit for further investigations of the lysine acetylome and de-etiolation in plants.

Lysine acetylation: !affects! Cellular processes 
Transcription factors: !are acetylated! During de-etiolation 
Histones: !are acetylated! During de-etiolation 
Chlorophyll synthesis: !is regulated by! Lysine acetylation 
Photosynthesis light reaction: !is regulated by! Lysine acetylation 
Carbon assimilation: !is regulated by! Lysine acetylation 
Glycolysis: !is regulated by! Lysine acetylation 
TCA cycle: !is regulated by! Lysine acetylation 
Amino acid metabolism: !is regulated by! Lysine acetylation 
Lipid metabolism: !is regulated by! Lysine acetylation 
Nucleotide metabolism: !is regulated by! Lysine acetylation