Volatile components in fresh leaves are involved in the regulation of many stress responses, such as insect damage, fungal infection and high temperature. However, the potential function of volatile components in hyperosmotic response is largely unknown. Here, we found that 7-day hyperosmotic treatment specifically led to the accumulation of (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol, (E)-2-hexenal and methyl salicylate. Transcriptome and qRT-PCR analyses suggested the activation of linolenic acid degradation and methyl salicylate processes. Importantly, exogenous (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol pretreatment dramatically enhanced the hyperosmotic stress tolerance of tea plants and decreased stomatal conductance, whereas (E)-2-hexenal and methyl salicylate pretreatments did not exhibit such a function. qRT-PCR analysis revealed that exogenous ABA induced the expressions of related enzyme genes, and (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol could up-regulate the expressions of many DREB and RD genes. Moreover, exogenous (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol tremendously induced the expressions of specific LOX and ADH genes within 24 h. Taken together, hyperosmotic stress induced (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol accumulation in tea plant via the activation of most LOX, HPL and ADH genes, while (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol could dramatically enhance the hyperosmotic stress tolerance via the decrease of stomatal conductance and MDA, accumulation of ABA and proline, activation of DREB and RD gene expressions, and probably positive feedback regulation of LOXs and ADHs. KEY MESSAGE: Hyperosmotic stress induced (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol accumulation in Camellia sinensis via the up-regulation of most LOX, HPL and ADH genes, while (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol could dramatically enhance the hyperosmotic stress tolerance via the decrease of stomatal conductance, accumulation of proline, activation of DREB and RD gene expressions, and probably positive feedback regulation of LOXs and ADHs.

Hyperosmotic stress: !induces! (Z)-3-hexen-1-ol
(Z)-3-hexen-1-ol: !enhances! hyperosmotic stress tolerance
hyperosmotic stress: !activates! LOX, HPL and ADH genes
(Z)-3-hexen-1-ol: !decreases! stomatal conductance
(Z)-3-hexen-1-ol: !accumulates! ABA and proline
(Z)-3-hexen-1-ol: !activates! DREB and RD gene expressions
(Z)-3-hexen-1-ol: !regulates! LOXs and ADHs