['32245810', 'In eukaryotic photosynthetic organisms, the conversion of solar into chemical  energy occurs in thylakoid membranes in the chloroplast. How thylakoid membranes  are formed and maintained is poorly understood. However, previous observations of  vesicles adjacent to the stromal side of the inner envelope membrane of the  chloroplast suggest a possible role of membrane transport via vesicle trafficking  from the inner envelope to the thylakoids. Here we show that the model plant  Arabidopsis thaliana has a chloroplast-localized Sec14-like protein (CPSFL1) that  is necessary for photoautotrophic growth and vesicle formation at the inner  envelope membrane of the chloroplast. The cpsfl1 mutants are seedling lethal,  show a defect in thylakoid structure, and lack chloroplast vesicles. Sec14 domain  proteins are found only in eukaryotes and have been well characterized in yeast,  where they regulate vesicle budding at the trans-Golgi network. Like the yeast  Sec14p, CPSFL1 binds phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs) and phosphatidic acid  (PA) and acts as a phosphatidylinositol transfer protein in vitro, and expression  of Arabidopsis CPSFL1 can complement the yeast sec14 mutation. CPSFL1 can  transfer PIP into PA-rich membrane bilayers in vitro, suggesting that CPSFL1  potentially facilitates vesicle formation by trafficking PA and/or PIP, known  regulators of membrane trafficking between organellar subcompartments. These  results underscore the role of vesicles in thylakoid biogenesis and/or  maintenance. CPSFL1 appears to be an example of a eukaryotic cytosolic protein  that has been coopted for a function in the chloroplast, an organelle derived  from endosymbiosis of a cyanobacterium.', '2020 Apr 21', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.1916946117', 'ORCID:']

CPSFL1: !localizes to! chloroplast 
CPSFL1: !necessary for! photoautotrophic growth 
CPSFL1: !binds! PIPs and PA 
CPSFL1: !facilitates! vesicle formation 
CPSFL1: !transfers! PIP into PA-rich membrane bilayers 
CPSFL1: !regulates! membrane trafficking between organellar subcompartments