['32246506', 'Acyl lipids are important constituents of the plant cell. Depending on the cell  type, requirements in acyl lipids vary greatly, implying a tight regulation of  fatty acid and lipid metabolism. The discovery of the WRINKLED1 (WRI1)  transcription factors, members of the AP2-EREBP (APETALA2-ethylene-responsive  element binding protein) family, has emphasized the importance of transcriptional  regulation for adapting the rate of acyl chain production to cell requirements.  Here, we describe the identification of another activator of the fatty acid  biosynthetic pathway, the Arabidopsis MYB92 transcription factor. This MYB  and all the members of the subgroups S10 and S24 of MYB transcription factors can  directly activate the promoter of BCCP2 that encodes a component of the fatty  acid biosynthetic pathway. Two adjacent MYB cis-regulatory elements are essential  for the binding and activation of the BCCP2 promoter by MYB92. Overexpression of  MYB92 or WRI1 in Nicotiana benthamiana induces the expression of fatty acid  biosynthetic genes but results in the accumulation of different types of acyl  lipids. In the presence of WRI1, triacylglycerol biosynthetic enzymes coded by  constitutively expressed genes efficiently channel the excess fatty acids toward  reserve lipid accumulation. By contrast, MYB92 activates both fatty acid and  suberin biosynthetic genes; hence, the remarkable increase in suberin monomers  measured in leaves expressing MYB92. These results provide additional insight  into the molecular mechanisms that control the biosynthesis of an important cell  wall-associated acylglycerol polymer playing critical roles in plants.', '2020 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.14759', 'ORCID:']

WRI1: !activates! fatty acid biosynthetic pathway 
MYB92: !activates! BCCP2 promoter 
MYB92: !binds to! two adjacent MYB cis-regulatory elements 
MYB92/WRI1: !induces expression of! fatty acid biosynthetic genes 
WRI1: !channels excess fatty acids towards! reserve lipid accumulation 
MYB92: !activates! suberin biosynthetic genes 
MYB92: !increases! suberin monomers