Mutations in SURFEIT1 (SURF1) genes affect cytochrome c oxidase (COX) levels in different prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. In this work, we report that Arabidopsis thaliana has two genes that potentially encode SURF1 proteins, as a result of a duplication that took place in Brassicaceae. Both genes encode mitochondrial proteins and mutation in AtSURF1a causes embryonic lethality. Mutation in AtSURF1b, instead, causes defects in hypocotyl elongation under growth-stimulating conditions, such as low light intensity, increased ambient temperature and incubation with glucose. Mutants in AtSURF1b show reduced expression of the auxin reporter DR5:GUS and increased levels of the gibberellin reporter GFP-RGA, suggesting that auxin and gibberellin homeostasis are affected. In agreement, growth defects caused by AtSURF1b mutation can be overcome by treatment with indole-3-acetic acid and gibberellin A<sub>3</sub> , and also by increasing expression of the auxin biosynthesis gene YUC8 or the transcription factor PIF4, which shows lower abundance in AtSURF1b-deficient plants. Mutants in AtSURF1b display lower COX levels, higher alternative oxidase and superoxide levels, and increased expression of genes that respond to mitochondrial dysfunction. Decreased hypocotyl growth and DR5:GUS expression can be reversed by treatment with reduced glutathione, suggesting that redox changes, probably related to mitochondrial dysfunction, are responsible for the effect of AtSURF1b deficiency on hormone responses. The results indicate that changes in AtSURF1b affect mitochondrial function and the production of reactive oxygen species, which, in turn, impinges on a growth regulatory circuit that involves auxin, gibberellins and the transcription factor PIF4.

Mutations in SURFEIT1 (SURF1) genes: !affect! cytochrome c oxidase (COX) levels 
AtSURF1a mutation: !causes! embryonic lethality 
AtSURF1b mutation: !causes! defects in hypocotyl elongation 
AtSURF1b mutation: !reduces! expression of auxin reporter DR5:GUS 
AtSURF1b mutation: !increases! levels of gibberellin reporter GFP-RGA 
AtSURF1b mutation: !affects! auxin and gibberellin homeostasis 
AtSURF1b mutation: !lowers! COX levels 
AtSURF1b mutation: !increases! alternative oxidase and superoxide levels 
AtSURF1b mutation: !increases! expression of genes that respond to mitochondrial dysfunction 
AtSURF1b deficiency: !impinges on! growth regulatory circuit involving auxin, gibberellins and transcription factor PIF4 
AtSURF1b deficiency: !causes! redox changes