Flower longevity plays an important role in pollen dispersal and reproductive success in plants. In dichogamous plants, the duration of anthesis as well as the time allocated to male and female functions can vary in response to intrinsic factors (e.g., flowering time and resource allocation) and pollination context along a growth season. However, the fitness consequences of phenological dynamics have rarely been examined. This study aims to unravel the potential causes driving variation in flower longevity, duration of sex phases, and phenotypic sex during a flowering season of strongly protandrous Aconitum gymnandrum, and particularly reproductive consequences of the phenological pattern. Population floral sex ratio shifted from completely male at the beginning to completely female at the end of the season, as is common in other protandrous plants. Phenological dynamics of the floral sex ratio and the duration of sex phases caused a shift from femaleness to maleness in the mean phenotypic sex over the whole season. Floral longevity was negatively correlated with flower size and positively affected by temperature. Early flowers within inflorescences rather than early-flowering individuals emphasized the duration of female over male phase. Owing to the dominance of male-phase flowers, early flowering for individual flowers and plants, or female-biased sex resulted in higher pollen deposition per flower and seed set. At the flower level, flower longevity positively affected female reproductive success, while the effect of flower size was negative. By contrast, plant-level female reproductive success was negatively affected by flower longevity but positively correlated to flower size. The major result of this study lies in elucidating the relationship between variation in phenological sex expression and floral longevity and their fitness consequences of protandrous A. gymnandrum. The contrasting results on female fitness for individual flowers and plants contribute to our current understanding of the adaptive significance of floral longevity.

flower longevity: !affects! female reproductive success 
temperature: !enhances! flower longevity 
flower size: !represses! flower longevity 
early flowers: !emphasizes! duration of female phase 
pollen deposition: !increases! with early flowering 
seed set: !increases! with early flowering 
flower size: !decreases! female reproductive success 
flower longevity: !increases! female reproductive success