Fruit ripening is governed by a complex regulatory network. Reversible histone methylation and demethylation regulate chromatin structure and gene expression. However, little is known about the involvement of histone demethylases in regulating fruit ripening. Here, we found that the tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) SlJMJ6 encodes a histone lysine demethylase that specifically demethylates H3K27 methylation. Overexpression of SlJMJ6 accelerates tomato fruit ripening, which is associated with the upregulated expression of a large number of ripening-related genes. Integrated analysis of RNA-seq and chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing identified 32 genes directly targeted by SlJMJ6 and transcriptionally upregulated with decreased H3K27m3 in SlJMJ6-overexpressed fruit. Numerous SlJMJ6-regulated genes are involved in transcription regulation, ethylene biosynthesis, cell wall degradation and hormone signaling. Eleven ripening-related genes including RIPENING INHIBITOR (RIN), 1-aminocyclopropane 1-carboxylate synthase-4 (ACS4), 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase 1 (ACO1), pectate lyase (PL) and beta-galactosidase 4 (TBG4), and a DNA demethylase DML2, were confirmed to be regulated directly by SlJMJ6 through removing H3K27me3. Our results demonstrate that SlJMJ6 is a ripening-prompting H3K27me3 demethylase that activates the expression of the ripening-related genes by modulating H3K27me3, thereby facilitating tomato fruit ripening. Our work also reveals a novel link between histone demethylation and DNA demethylation in regulating fruit ripening. To our knowledge, this is the first report of the involvement of a histone lysine demethylase in the regulation of fruit ripening.

SlJMJ6: !demethylates! H3K27 methylation
SlJMJ6: !accelerates! tomato fruit ripening
SlJMJ6: !upregulates! ripening-related genes
SlJMJ6: !regulates! transcription regulation
SlJMJ6: !regulates! ethylene biosynthesis
SlJMJ6: !regulates! cell wall degradation
SlJMJ6: !regulates! hormone signaling
SlJMJ6: !regulates! RIPENING INHIBITOR (RIN)
SlJMJ6: !regulates! 1-aminocyclopropane 1-carboxylate synthase-4 (ACS4)
SlJMJ6: !regulates! 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase 1 (ACO1)
SlJMJ6: !regulates! pectate lyase (PL)
SlJMJ6: !regulates! beta-galactosidase 4 (TBG4)
SlJMJ6: !regulates! DNA demethylase DML2
SlJMJ6: !prompts! fruit