Axillary bud is an important agronomic and economic trait in cut chrysanthemum. Bud outgrowth is an intricate process controlled by complex molecular regulatory networks, physio-chemical integrators and environmental stimuli. Temperature is one of the key regulators of bud's fate. However, little is known about the temperature-mediated control of axillary bud at molecular levels in chrysanthemum. A comprehensive study was designed to study the bud outgrowth at normal and elevated temperature in cut chrysanthemum. Leaf morphology, histology, physiological parameters were studied to correlate the leaf activity with bud morphology, sucrose and hormonal regulation and the molecular controllers. Temperature caused differential bud outgrowth along bud positions. Photosynthetic leaf area, physiological indicators and sucrose utilization were changed considerable due to high temperature. Comparative transcriptome analysis identified a significant proportion of bud position-specific genes.Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) showed that axillary bud control can be delineated by modules of coexpressed genes; especially, MEtan3, MEgreen2 and MEantiquewhite presented group of genes specific to bud length. A comparative analysis between different bud positions in two temperatures revealed the morpho-physiological traits associated with specific modules. Moreover, the transcriptional regulatory networks were configured to identify key determinants of bud outgrowth. Cell division, organogenesis, accumulation of storage compounds and metabolic changes were prominent during the bud emergence. RNA-seq data coupled with morpho-physiological integrators from three bud positions at two temperature regimes brings a robust source to understand bud outgrowth status influenced by high temperature in cut chrysanthemum. Our results provide helpful information for elucidating the regulatory mechanism of temperature on axillary bud growth in chrysanthemum.

Temperature: !influences! Bud Outgrowth 
Leaf Morphology: !correlates with! Bud Morphology 
Sucrose: !regulates! Hormonal Regulation 
Molecular Controllers: !control! Axillary Bud 
Photosynthetic Leaf Area: !changes due to! High Temperature 
Transcriptome Analysis: !identifies! Bud Position-Specific Genes 
WGCNA: !shows! Modules of Coexpressed Genes 
Comparative Analysis: !reveals! Morpho-Physiological Traits 
Transcriptional Regulatory Networks: !configure! Key Determinants of Bud Outgrowth 
Cell Division: !prominent during! Bud Emergence 
RNA-seq Data: !coupled with! Morpho-Physiological Integrators