Desiccation tolerance is a developmental program enabling seed survival in a dry state and is common in seeds categorized as orthodox. We focused on NAD and its phosphorylated form (NADP) because their continual switching between reduced (NAD(P)H) and oxidized (NAD(P)+) forms is involved in the modulation of redox signaling and the determination of the reducing power and further antioxidant responses. Norway maple and sycamore seeds representing the orthodox and recalcitrant categories, respectively, were used as models in a comparison of responses to water loss. The process of desiccation up to 10% water content (WC) was monitored in Norway maple seeds, while dehydration up to 30% WC was monitored in desiccation-sensitive sycamore seeds. Norway maple and sycamore seeds, particularly their embryonic axes, exhibited a distinct redox status during dehydration and desiccation. High NADPH levels, NAD+ accumulation, low and stable NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+ ratios expressed as reducing power and high NADPH-dependent enzyme activity were reported in Norway maple seeds and were considered attributes of orthodox-type seeds. The contrasting results of sycamore seeds contributed to their low antioxidant capacity and high sensitivity to desiccation. NADPH deficiency, low NADPH-dependent enzyme activity and lack of NAD+ accumulation were primary features of sycamore seeds, with implications for their NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+ ratios and reducing power and with effects on many seed traits. Thus, we propose that the distinct levels of pyridine nucleotides and their redox status contribute to orthodox and recalcitrant phenotype differentiation in seeds by affecting cellular redox signaling, metabolism and the antioxidant system.

NADPH: !enhances! Desiccation tolerance 
NADPH: !contributes to! Orthodox phenotype 
NAD+: !accumulates in! Norway maple seeds 
NAD+: !lacks accumulation in! Sycamore seeds 
NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+ ratio: !determines! Reducing power 
NADPH-dependent enzyme activity: !high in! Norway maple seeds 
NADPH-dependent enzyme activity: !low in! Sycamore seeds