Transcription factors (TFs) are essential for plant growth and development. Several legumes (e.g. soybean) are rich sources of protein and oil and have great economic importance. Here we report a phylogenomic analysis of TF families in legumes and their potential association with important traits (e.g. nitrogen fixation). We used TF DNA-binding domains to systematically screen the genomes of 15 leguminous and five non-leguminous species. Transcription factor orthologous groups (OGs) were used to estimate OG sizes in ancestral nodes using a gene birth-death model, which allowed the identification of lineage-specific expansions. The OG analysis and rate of synonymous substitutions show that major TF expansions are strongly associated with whole-genome duplication (WGD) events in the legume (approximately 58 million years ago) and Glycine (approximately 13 million years ago) lineages, which account for a large fraction of the Phaseolus vulgaris and Glycine max TF repertoires. Of the 3407 G. max TFs, 1808 and 676 have homeologs within single syntenic regions in Phaseolus vulgaris and Vitis vinifera, respectively. We found a trend for TFs expanded in legumes to be preferentially transcribed in roots and nodules, supporting their recruitment early in the evolution of nodulation in the legume clade. Some families also showed count differences between G. max and the wild soybean Glycine soja, including genes located within important quantitative trait loci. Our findings strongly support the roles of two WGDs in shaping the TF repertoires in the legume and Glycine lineages, and these are probably related to important aspects of legume and soybean biology.

Transcription factors (TFs): !associated with! important traits 
TF DNA-binding domains: !used to screen! genomes 
OGs: !estimated using! gene birth-death model 
WGD events: !account for! large fraction of TF repertoires 
G. max TFs: !have homeologs in! Phaseolus vulgaris and Vitis vinifera 
TFs expanded in legumes: !preferentially transcribed in! roots and nodules 
Families: !showed count differences between! G. max and Glycine soja 
WGDs: !shaped! TF repertoires in legume and Glycine lineages