Endocytosis is an essential process for the internalization of plasma membrane proteins, lipids and extracellular molecules into the cells. The mechanisms underlying endocytosis in plant cells involve several endosomal organelles whose origins and specific role needs still to be clarified. In this study we compare the internalization events of a GFP-tagged polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein of <i>Phaseolus vulgaris</i> (PGIP2-GFP) to that of a GFP-tagged subunit of cellulose synthase complex of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> (secGFP-CesA6). Through the use of endocytic traffic chemical inhibitors (tyrphostin A23, salicylic acid, wortmannin, concanamycin A, Sortin 2, Endosidin 5 and BFA) it was evidenced that the two protein fusions were endocytosed through distinct endosomes with different mechanisms. PGIP2-GFP endocytosis is specifically sensitive to tyrphostin A23, salicylic acid and Sortin 2; furthermore, SYP51, a tSNARE with interfering effect on late steps of vacuolar traffic, affects its arrival in the central vacuole. SecGFP-CesA6, specifically sensitive to Endosidin 5, likely reaches the plasma membrane passing through the <i>trans</i> Golgi network (TGN), since the BFA treatment leads to the formation of BFA bodies, compatible with the aggregation of TGNs. BFA treatments determine the accumulation and tethering of the intracellular compartments labeled by both proteins, but PGIP2-GFP aggregated compartments overlap with those labeled by the endocytic dye FM4-64 while secGFP-CesA6 fills different compartments. Furthermore, secGFP-CesA6 co-localization with RFP-NIP1.1, marker of the direct ER-to-Vacuole traffic, in small compartments separated from ER suggests that secGFP-CesA6 is sorted through TGNs in which the direct contribution from the ER plays an important role. All together the data indicate the existence of a heterogeneous population of Golgi-independent TGNs.

PGIP2-GFP: !endocytosed through! distinct endosomes 
secGFP-CesA6: !endocytosed through! TGNs 
PGIP2-GFP: !sensitive to! tyrphostin A23, salicylic acid and Sortin 2 
secGFP-CesA6: !sensitive to! Endosidin 5 
BFA: !affects! PGIP2-GFP and secGFP-CesA6 
secGFP-CesA6: !co-localizes with! RFP-NIP1.1