Canker disease caused by Neoscytalidium dimidiatum is a devastating disease resulting in a major loss to the pitaya industry. However, resistance proteins in plants play crucial roles to against pathogen infection. Among resistance proteins, the leucine-rich repeat (LRR) protein is a major family that plays crucial roles in plant growth, development, and biotic and abiotic stress responses, especially in disease defense. In the present study, a transcriptomics analysis identified a total of 272 LRR genes, 233 of which had coding sequences (CDSs), in the plant pitaya (Hylocereus polyrhizus) in response to fungal Neoscytalidium dimidiatum infection. These genes were divided into various subgroups based on specific domains and phylogenetic analysis. Molecular characterization, functional annotation of proteins, and an expression analysis of the LRR genes were conducted. Additionally, four LRR genes (CL445.Contig4_All, Unigene28_All, CL28.Contig2_All, and Unigene2712_All, which were selected because they had the four longest CDSs were further assessed using quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) at different fungal infection stages in different pitaya species (Hylocereus polyrhizus and Hylocereus undatus), in different pitaya tissues, and after treatment with salicylic acid (SA), methyl jasmonate (MeJA), and abscisic acid (ABA) hormones. The associated protein functions and roles in signaling pathways were identified. This study provides a comprehensive overview of the HpLRR family genes at transcriptional level in pitaya in response to N. dimidiatum infection, it will be helpful to understand the molecular mechanism of pitaya canker disease, and lay a strong foundation for further research.

LRR protein: !plays crucial roles in! plant growth, development, and biotic and abiotic stress responses
LRR gene: !identified in! pitaya (Hylocereus polyrhizus)
LRR gene: !divided into! various subgroups
LRR gene: !characterized by! molecular characterization, functional annotation of proteins, and expression analysis
LRR gene: !further assessed using! qRT-PCR
LRR gene: !associated with! protein functions and roles in signaling pathways