['32291031', 'Phytaspases are plant cell death-related proteases of the subtilisin-like  protease family that possess an unusual aspartate cleavage specificity. Although  phytaspase activity is widespread in plants, phytaspase of Arabidopsis thaliana  (L.) Heynh. has escaped detection and identification thus far. Here, we show that  a single gene (At4 g10540) out of 56 A. thaliana subtilisin-like protease genes  encodes a phytaspase. The recombinant phytaspase was overproduced in Nicotiana  benthamiana Domin leaves, isolated, and its substrate specificity and properties  were characterised. At pH 5.5, at physiological mildly acidic reaction  conditions, the Arabidopsis phytaspase was shown to be strictly Asp-specific. The  strongly preferred cleavage motifs of the enzyme out of a panel of synthetic  peptide substrates were YVAD and IETD, while the VEID-based substrate preferred  by the tobacco and rice phytaspases was almost completely resistant to  hydrolysis. At neutral pH, however, the Arabidopsis phytaspase could hydrolyse  peptide substrates after two additional amino acid residues, His and Phe, in  addition to Asp. This observation may indicate that the repertoire of Arabidopsis  phytaspase targets could possibly be regulated by the conditions of the cellular  environment. Similar to tobacco and rice phytaspases, the Arabidopsis enzyme was  shown to accumulate in the apoplast of epidermal leaf cells. However, in stomatal  cells Arabidopsis phytaspase was observed inside the cells, possibly  co-localising with vacuole. Our study thus demonstrates that the Arabidopsis  phytaspase possesses both important similarities with and distinctions from the  already known phytaspases, and is likely to be the most divergent member of the  phytaspase family.', '2018 Jan', 'Funct Plant Biol', '10.1071/FP16321', 'Vartapetian']

At4 g10540: !encodes! phytaspase 
phytaspase: !accumulates in! apoplast 
phytaspase: !localizes to! vacuole 
phytaspase: !cleaves! YVAD, IETD 
phytaspase: !cleaves! His, Phe (at neutral pH) 
environment: !regulates! phytaspase targets