['32306898', 'BACKGROUND: Chloroplasts are essential organelles of plant cells for not only  being the energy factory but also making plant cells adaptable to different  environmental stimuli. The nuclear genome encodes most of the chloroplast  proteins, among which a large percentage of membrane proteins have yet to be  functionally characterized. RESULTS: We report here functional characterization  of two nuclear-encoded chloroplast proteins, Chloroplast protein for Growth and  Fertility (CGF1) and CGF2. CGF1 and CGF2 are expressed in diverse tissues and  developmental stages. Proteins they encode are associated with chloroplasts  through a N-terminal chloroplast-targeting signal in green tissues but also  located at plastids in roots and seeds. Mutants of CGF1 and CGF2 generated by  CRISPR/Cas9 exhibited vegetative defects, including reduced leaf size, dwarfism,  and abnormal cell death. CGF1 and CGF2 redundantly mediate female gametogenesis,  likely by securing local energy supply. Indeed, mutations of both genes impaired  chloroplast integrity whereas exogenous sucrose rescued the growth defects of the  CGF double mutant. CONCLUSION: This study reports that two nuclear-encoded  chloroplast proteins, Chloroplast protein for Growth and Fertility (CGF1) and  CGF2, play important roles in vegetative growth, in female gametogenesis, and in  embryogenesis likely by mediating chloroplast integrity and development.', '2020 Apr 19', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-020-02393-5', 'Li']

CGF1: !affects! Vegetative growth
CGF2: !affects! Vegetative growth
CGF1: !affects! Female gametogenesis
CGF2: !affects! Female gametogenesis
CGF1: !affects! Embryogenesis
CGF2: !affects! Embryogenesis
CGF1: !localizes to! Chloroplasts
CGF2: !localizes to! Chloroplasts
CGF1: !interacts with! CGF2
CGF2: !interacts with! CGF1
CGF1: !enhances! Chloroplast integrity
CGF2: !enhances! Chloroplast integrity
CGF1: !represses! Growth defects
CGF2: !represses! Growth defects
CGF1: !synthesizes! N-terminal chloroplast-targeting signal