Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) is a specialized mode of photosynthesis that offers the potential to engineer improved water-use efficiency (WUE) and drought resilience in C<sub>3</sub> plants while sustaining productivity in the hotter and drier climates that are predicted for much of the world. CAM species show an inverted pattern of stomatal opening and closing across the diel cycle, which conserves water and provides a means of maintaining growth in hot, water-limited environments. Recent genome sequencing of the constitutive model CAM species Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi provides a platform for elucidating the ensemble of proteins that link photosynthetic metabolism with stomatal movement, and that protect CAM plants from harsh environmental conditions. We describe a large-scale proteomics analysis to characterize and compare proteins, as well as diel changes in their abundance in guard cell-enriched epidermis and mesophyll cells from leaves of K. fedtschenkoi. Proteins implicated in processes that encompass respiration, the transport of water and CO<sub>2</sub> , stomatal regulation, and CAM biochemistry are highlighted and discussed. Diel rescheduling of guard cell starch turnover in K. fedtschenkoi compared with that observed in Arabidopsis is reported and tissue-specific localization in the epidermis and mesophyll of isozymes implicated in starch and malate turnover are discussed in line with the contrasting roles for these metabolites within the CAM mesophyll and stomatal complex. These data reveal the proteins and the biological processes enriched in each layer and provide key information for studies aiming to adapt plants to hot and dry environments by modifying leaf physiology for improved plant sustainability.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Process: !enhances! WUE 
Gene: !localizes to! Epidermis 
Gene: !localizes to! Mesophyll 
Gene: !interacts with! Stomatal Regulation 
Gene: !interacts with! Photosynthetic Metabolism 
Gene: !represses! Harsh Environmental Conditions 
Gene: !synthesizes! CO2 Transport