['32317363', 'The interaction of C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDES (CEPs) with CEP RECEPTOR1  (CEPR1) controls root growth and development, as well as nitrate uptake, but has  no known role in determining yield. We used physiological, microscopic,  molecular, and grafting approaches to demonstrate a reproductive tissue-specific  role for CEPR1 in controlling yield and seed size. Independent Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana) cepr1 null mutants showed disproportionately large  reductions in yield and seed size relative to their decreased vegetative growth.  These yield defects correlated with compromised reproductive development  predominantly in female tissues, as well as chlorosis, and the accumulation of  anthocyanins in cepr1 reproductive tissues. The thinning of competing  reproductive organs to improve source-to-sink ratios in cepr1, along with  reciprocal bolt-grafting experiments, demonstrated that CEPR1 acts locally in the  reproductive bolt to control yield and seed size. CEPR1 is expressed throughout  the vasculature of reproductive organs, including in the chalazal seed coat, but  not in other seed tissues. This expression pattern implies that CEPR1 controls  yield and seed size from the maternal tissue. The complementation of cepr1  mutants with transgenic CEPR1 rescued the yield and other phenotypes.  Transcriptional analyses of cepr1 bolts showed alterations in the expression  levels of several genes of the CEP-CEPR1 and nitrogen homeostasis pathways. This  transcriptional profile was consistent with cepr1 bolts being nitrogen deficient  and with a reproductive tissue-specific function for CEP-CEPR1 signaling. The  results reveal a local role for CEPR1 in the maternal reproductive tissue in  determining seed size and yield, likely via the control of nitrogen delivery to  the reproductive sinks.', '2020 Jun', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.20.00172', 'ORCID:']

CEPs: !interact with! CEPR1 
CEPR1: !controls! root growth and development 
CEPR1: !controls! nitrate uptake 
CEPR1: !controls! yield and seed size 
CEPR1: !causes! chlorosis 
CEPR1: !accumulates! anthocyanins 
CEPR1: !acts locally in! reproductive bolt 
CEPR1: !expressed in! vasculature of reproductive organs 
CEPR1: !controls! nitrogen delivery to reproductive sinks 
CEPR1: !alters expression of! CEP-CEPR1 and nitrogen homeostasis pathways