The secretory cavity is a typical structure in Citrus fruit and is formed by schizolysigeny. Previous reports have indicated that programmed cell death (PCD) is involved in the degradation of secretory cavity cells in the fruit, and that the spatio-temporal location of calcium is closely related to nuclear DNA degradation in this process; however, the molecular mechanisms underlying this Ca2+ regulation remain largely unknown. Here, we identified CgCaN that encodes a Ca2+-dependent DNase in the fruit of Citrus grandis 'Tomentosa', the function of which was studied using calcium ion localization, DNase activity assays, in situ hybridization, and protein immunolocalization. The results suggested that the full-length cDNA of CgCaN contains an ORF of 1011 bp that encodes a protein 336 amino acids in length with a SNase-like functional domain. CgCaN digests dsDNA at neutral pH in a Ca2+-dependent manner. In situ hybridization signals of CgCaN were particularly distributed in the secretory cavity cells. Ca2+ and Ca2+-dependent DNases were mainly observed in the condensed chromatin and in the nucleolus. In addition, spatio-temporal expression patterns of CgCaN and its protein coincided with the time-points that corresponded to chromatin degradation and nuclear rupture during the PCD in the development of the fruit secretory cavity. Taken together, our results suggest that Ca2+-dependent DNases play direct roles in nuclear DNA degradation during the PCD of secretory cavity cells during Citrus fruit development. Given the consistency of the expression patterns of genes regulated by calmodulin (CaM) and calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPK) and the dynamics of calcium accumulation, we speculate that CaM and CDPK proteins might be involved in Ca2+ transport from the extracellular walls through the cytoplasm and into the nucleus to activate CgCaN for DNA degradation.

CgCaN: !encodes! Ca2+-dependent DNase 
CgCaN: !digests! dsDNA 
CgCaN: !localizes to! secretory cavity cells 
Ca2+: !localizes to! condensed chromatin and nucleolus 
CgCaN: !coincides with! chromatin degradation and nuclear rupture 
CaM/CDPK: !transport! Ca2+ from extracellular walls to nucleus