Curd architecture is one of the most important characters determining the curd morphology of cauliflower. However, the genetic mechanism dissection of this complex trait at molecular level is lacking. Genes/QTLs responsible for the morphological differences between present-day loose-curd and compact-curd cauliflower haven't been well revealed. Herein, by using a common compact-curd parent and two loose-curd parents, we developed two double haploid (DH) populations including 122 and 79 lines, respectively. For each population, we decomposed the curd architecture concept into four parameters (basal diameter, stalk length, stalk angle and curd solidity), and collected corresponding phenotypic data for each parameter across two environments. The Kosambi function and composite interval mapping algorithm were conducted to construct the linkage map and analyze the QTLs associated with curd architecture parameters. A total of 20 QTLs were detected with the minimum likelihood of odd (LOD) values ranging from 2.61 to 8.38 and the percentage of the phenotypic variance explained by each QTL (PVE) varying between 7.69 and 25.10%. Of these, two QTLs controlling stalk length (qSL.C6-1, qSL.C6-2) and two QTLs controlling curd solidity (qCS.C6-1 and qCS.C6-2) were steadily expressed in both environments. Further, qSL.C6-1, qSL.C6-2, qCS.C6-1 and qCS.C6-4 fell into the same chromosomal region of the reference genome, indicating that these loci are involved in pleiotropic effects or are tightly linked. The current study identified a series of QTLs associated with curd architecture parameters, which might contribute essentially to the formation of present-day loose-curd cauliflower that is widely cultivated in China. These results may pave the way for intensive deciphering the molecular mechanisms of curd development and for marker-assisted selection of curd morphology in cauliflower breeding.

Gene: !affects! Curd architecture 
Gene: !localizes to! Reference genome 
Gene: !interacts with! Pleiotropic effects 
Gene: !enhances! Stalk length 
Gene: !represses! Curd solidity 
Gene: !synthesizes! Present-day loose-curd cauliflower