Jasmonates play an important role in plant stress and defence responses and are also involved in the regulation of anthocyanin synthesis in response to sucrose availability. Here we explore the signalling interactions between sucrose and jasmonates in response to cold stress in Arabidopsis. Sucrose and cold treatments increased anthocyanin content additively. Comprehensive profiling of phytohormone contents demonstrated that jasmonates, salicylic acid and abscisic acid contents increased in response to sucrose treatment in plants grown on agar, but remained considerably lower than in plants grown in compost. The gibberellin GA<sub>3</sub> accumulated in response to sucrose treatment but only at warm temperature. The role of jasmonate signalling was explored using the jasmonate response mutants jar1-1 and coi1-16. While the jar1-1 mutant lacked jasmonate-isoleucine and jasmonate-leucine, it accumulated 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid at low temperature on agar medium. Altered patterns of abscisic acid accumulation and higher sugar contents were found in the coi1-16 mutant when grown in compost. Both mutants were able to accumulate anthocyanin and to cold acclimate, but the jar-1-1 mutant showed a larger initial drop in whole-rosette photosystem II efficiency upon transfer to low temperature. Hormone contents are determined by interactions between temperature and sucrose supply. Some of these effects may be caused indirectly through senescence initiation in response to sucrose availability. During cold stress, the adjustments of hormone contents may compensate for impaired jasmonate signalling, enabling cold acclimation and anthocyanin accumulation in Arabidopsis jasmonate response mutants, e.g. through antagonistic interactions between gibberellin and jasmonate signalling.

Sucrose: !increases! Anthocyanin
Sucrose: !increases! Jasmonates
Cold: !increases! Anthocyanin
Cold: !increases! Abscisic Acid
Jar1-1 Mutant: !lacks! Jasmonate-Isoleucine
Jar1-1 Mutant: !accumulates! 12-oxo-phytodienoic Acid
Coi1-16 Mutant: !alters! Abscisic Acid
Gibberellin: !antagonizes! Jasmonate Signalling
Senescence: !initiates! in Response to Sucrose