All land plants (embryophytes) share a common ancestor that likely evolved from a filamentous freshwater alga. Elucidating the transition from algae to embryophytes - and the eventual conquering of Earth's surface - is one of the most fundamental questions in plant evolutionary biology. Here, we investigated one of the organismal properties that might have enabled this transition: resistance to drastic temperature shifts. We explored the effect of heat stress in Mougeotia and Spirogyra, two representatives of Zygnematophyceae - the closest known algal sister lineage to land plants. Heat stress induced pronounced phenotypic alterations in their plastids, and high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy-based profiling of 565 transitions for the analysis of main central metabolites revealed significant shifts in 43 compounds. We also analyzed the global differential gene expression responses triggered by heat, generating 92.8 Gbp of sequence data and assembling a combined set of 8905 well-expressed genes. Each organism had its own distinct gene expression profile; less than one-half of their shared genes showed concordant gene expression trends. We nevertheless detected common signature responses to heat such as elevated transcript levels for molecular chaperones, thylakoid components, and - corroborating our metabolomic data - amino acid metabolism. We also uncovered the heat-stress responsiveness of genes for phosphorelay-based signal transduction that links environmental cues, calcium signatures and plastid biology. Our data allow us to infer the molecular heat stress response that the earliest land plants might have used when facing the rapidly shifting temperature conditions of the terrestrial habitat.

Heat stress: !induces! Phenotypic alterations 
Heat stress: !triggers! Differential gene expression 
Molecular chaperones: !elevate transcript levels of! Thylakoid components 
Amino acid metabolism: !elevates transcript levels of! Molecular chaperones 
Phosphorelay-based signal transduction: !links! Environmental cues, calcium signatures and plastid biology