['32333782', 'Growth of etiolated Arabidopsis hypocotyls is biphasic. During the first phase,  cells elongate slowly and synchronously. At 48 h after imbibition, cells at the  hypocotyl base accelerate their growth. Subsequently, this rapid elongation  propagates through the hypocotyl from base to top. It is largely unclear what  regulates the switch from slow to fast elongation. Reverse genetics-based  screening for hypocotyl phenotypes identified three independent mutant lines of  At1g70990, a short extensin (EXT) family protein that we named EXT33, with  shorter etiolated hypocotyls during the slow elongation phase. However, at 72 h  after imbibition, these dark-grown mutant hypocotyls start to elongate faster  than the wild type (WT). As a result, fully mature 8-day-old dark-grown  hypocotyls were significantly longer than WTs. Mutant roots showed no growth  phenotype. In line with these results, analysis of native promoter-driven  transcriptional fusion lines revealed that, in dark-grown hypocotyls, expression  occurred in the epidermis and cortex and that it was strongest in the growing  part. Confocal and spinning disk microscopy on C-terminal protein-GFP fusion  lines localized the EXT33-protein to the ER and cell wall. Fourier-transform  infrared microspectroscopy identified subtle changes in cell wall composition  between WT and the mutant, reflecting altered cell wall biomechanics measured by  constant load extensometry. Our results indicate that the EXT33 short EXT family  protein is required during the first phase of dark-grown hypocotyl elongation and  that it regulates the moment and extent of the growth acceleration by modulating  cell wall extensibility.', '2020 Jun 1', 'Plant Cell Physiol', '10.1093/pcp/pcaa049', 'Vissenberg']

EXT33: !regulates! Growth of etiolated Arabidopsis hypocotyls 
EXT33: !localizes to! ER and cell wall 
EXT33: !modulates! Cell wall extensibility 
EXT33: !synthesizes! Short EXT family protein 
EXT33: !enhances! Rapid elongation propagation 
EXT33: !represses! Slow elongation phase