['32332089', 'Ovule formation is essential for realizing crop yield because it determines seed  number. The underlying molecular mechanism, however, remains elusive. Here, we  show that cell wall invertase (CWIN) functions as a positive regulator of ovule  initiation in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). In situ hybridization revealed  that CWIN2 and CWIN4 were expressed at the placenta region where ovule primordia  initiated. Specific silencing of CWIN2 and CWIN4 using targeted artificial  microRNA driven by an ovule-specific SEEDSTICK promoter (pSTK) resulted in a  substantial reduction of CWIN transcript and activity, which blocked ovule  initiation and aggravated ovule abortion. There was no induction of carbon (C)  starvation genes in the transgenic lines, and supplementing newly forming floral  buds with extra C failed to recover the ovule phenotype. This indicates that  suppression of CWIN did not lead to C starvation. A group of hexose transporters  was downregulated in the transgenic plants. Among them, two representative ones  were spatially coexpressed with CWIN2 and CWIN4, suggesting a coupling between  CWIN and hexose transporters for ovule initiation. RNA-sequencing analysis  identified differentially expressed genes encoding putative extracellular  receptor-like kinases, MADS-box transcription factors, including STK, and early  auxin response genes in response to CWIN-silencing. Our data demonstrate the  essential role of CWIN in ovule initiation, which is most likely to occur through  sugar signaling instead of C nutrient contribution. We propose that CWIN-mediated  sugar signaling may be perceived by, and transmitted through, hexose transporters  or receptor-like kinases to regulate ovule formation by modulating downstream  auxin signaling and MADS-box transcription factors.', '2020 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.20.00400', 'ORCID:']

CWIN: !regulates! ovule initiation 
CWIN: !coexpressed with! hexose transporters 
hexose transporters: !transmit! CWIN-mediated sugar signaling 
sugar signaling: !perceived by! receptor-like kinases 
receptor-like kinases: !modulate! downstream auxin signaling 
downstream auxin signaling: !regulates! MADS-box transcription factors