Current control of tomato golden mosaic disease, caused in Brazil predominantly by tomato severe rugose virus (ToSRV), is dependent on both, planting resistant/tolerant hybrids and intensive insecticide sprays (two to three per week) for controlling <i>Bemisia tabaci</i>, the vector of ToSRV. Resistant hybrids only confer moderate resistance to infection by ToSRV and some tolerance to the disease. Insecticide sprays, although widely used, have failed in most tomato production areas in Brazil, as they are unable to reduce primary spread, i.e., infection caused by the influx of viruliferous whiteflies coming from external sources of inoculum. Severe epidemics are recurrently observed in some tomato fields in several Brazilian regions, which prompted us to postulate the existence in the agroecosystem, in some places and time, of amplifier hosts that provide the necessary force of infection for epidemics to occur, even in the absence of secondary spread in the target crop. Amplifier hosts are ideally asymptomatic, occur in high density near the target crop, and support growth of both virus and vector. Soybean and common bean are potential amplifier hosts for begomovirus in tomato crops. Our results support the hypothesis that soybean plants may play an important role as an amplifier host of ToSRV for tomato crops in the field, although this does not seem to be a frequent phenomenon. Successful amplification will depend on several factors, including the soybean cultivar, the soybean stage of development at the moment of infection, the ToSRV isolate, and the perfect synchrony between the beginning of a soybean field and the end of a ToSRV-infected crop, and, later, between the senescence of the ToSRV-infected soybean plants and the new tomato crop. The concept of amplifier hosts has been widely used in ecology of zoonoses but, to our knowledge, has never been used in botanical epidemiology.

Bemisia tabaci: !vectors! ToSRV 
hybrids: !confer! resistance/tolerance 
insecticide sprays: !unable to reduce! primary spread 
soybean/common bean: !potential amplifier hosts! for begomovirus 
soybean cultivar: !influences! successful amplification 
ToSRV isolate: !influences! successful amplification 
synchrony: !necessary for! successful amplification