['32354877', 'Previous studies have clearly demonstrated that the putative phytohormone  melatonin functions directly in many aspects of plant growth and development. In  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), the role of melatonin in seed oil and  anthocyanin accumulation, and corresponding underlying mechanisms, remain  unclear. Here, we found that serotonin N-acetyltransferase1 (SNAT1) and caffeic  acid O-methyltransferase (COMT) genes were ubiquitously and highly expressed and  essential for melatonin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis developing seeds. We  demonstrated that blocking endogenous melatonin biosynthesis by knocking out  SNAT1 and/or COMT significantly increased oil and anthocyanin content of mature  seeds. In contrast, enhancement of melatonin signaling by exogenous application  of melatonin led to a significant decrease in levels of seed oil and  anthocyanins. Further gene expression analysis through RNA sequencing and  reverse-transcription quantitative PCR demonstrated that the expression of a  series of important genes involved in fatty acid and anthocyanin accumulation was  significantly altered in snat1-1 comt-1 developing seeds during seed maturation.  We also discovered that SNAT1 and COMT significantly regulated the accumulation  of both mucilage and proanthocyanidins in mature seeds. These results not only  help us understand the function of melatonin and provide valuable insights into  the complicated regulatory network controlling oil and anthocyanin accumulation  in seeds, but also divulge promising gene targets for improvement of both oil and  flavonoids in seeds of oil-producing crops and plants.', '2020 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.20.00117', 'ORCID:']

SNAT1: !synthesizes! melatonin 
COMT: !synthesizes! melatonin 
melatonin: !enhances! oil and anthocyanin content 
SNAT1: !represses! oil and anthocyanin content 
COMT: !represses! oil and anthocyanin content 
SNAT1: !regulates! mucilage and proanthocyanidins 
COMT: !regulates! mucilage and proanthocyanidins