Sodium butyrate applied to Petunia hybrida seeds under a long-day photoperiod has a negative impact (reduced seedling length, decreased production of photosynthetic pigments, and accumulation of DNA damage) on early seedling development, whereas its administration under dark/light conditions (complete dark conditions for 5 days followed by exposure to long-day photoperiod for 5 days) bypasses some of the adverse effects. Genotoxic stress impairs plant development. To circumvent DNA damage, plants activate DNA repair pathways in concert with chromatin dynamics. These are essential during seed germination and seedling establishment, and may be influenced by photoperiod variations. To assess this interplay, an experimental design was developed in Petunia hybrida, a relevant horticultural crop and model species. Seeds were treated with different doses of sodium butyrate (NaB, 1 mM and 5 mM) as a stress agent applied under different light/dark conditions throughout a time period of 10 days. Phenotypic (germination percentage and speed, seedling length, and photosynthetic pigments) and molecular (DNA damage and gene expression profiles) analyses were performed to monitor the response to the imposed conditions. Seed germination was not affected by the treatments. Seedling development was hampered by increasing NaB concentrations applied under a long-day photoperiod (L) as reflected by the decreased seedling length accompanied by increased DNA damage. When seedlings were grown under dark conditions for 5 days and then exposed to long-day photoperiod for the remaining 5 days (D/L), the damaging effects of NaB were circumvented. NaB exposure under L conditions resulted in enhanced expression of HAT/HDAC (HISTONE ACETYLTRANSFERASES/HISTONE DEACTEYLASES) genes along with repression of genes involved in DNA repair. Differently, under D/L conditions, the expression of DNA repair genes was increased by NaB treatment and this was associated with lower levels of DNA damage. The observed DNA damage and gene expression profiles suggest the involvement of chromatin modification- and DNA repair-associated pathways in response to NaB and dark/light exposure during seedling development.

Sodium butyrate: !impacts! Seedling development
NaB: !enhances! HAT/HDAC gene expression
NaB: !represses! DNA repair genes
Dark/Light conditions: !bypasses! Adverse effects of NaB
NaB: !increases! DNA damage under L conditions
NaB: !decreases! DNA damage under D/L conditions
DNA repair genes: !increased by! NaB treatment under D/L conditions