In recent years, research has increasingly focused on the key role of post-transcriptional regulation of messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) function and turnover. As a result of the complexity and dynamic nature of mRNPs, the full composition of a single mRNP complex remains unrevealed and mRNPs are poorly described in plants. Here we identify canonical Sm proteins as part of the cytoplasmic mRNP complex, indicating their function in the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in plants. Sm proteins comprise an evolutionarily ancient family of small RNA-binding proteins involved in pre-mRNA splicing. The latest research indicates that Sm could also impact on mRNA at subsequent stages of its life cycle. In this work we show that in the microsporocyte cytoplasm of Larix decidua, the European larch, Sm proteins accumulate within distinct cytoplasmic bodies, also containing polyadenylated RNA. To date, several types of cytoplasmic bodies involved in the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression have been described, mainly in animal cells. Their role and molecular composition in plants remain less well established, however. A total of 222 mRNA transcripts have been identified as cytoplasmic partners for Sm proteins. The specific colocalization of these mRNAs with Sm proteins within cytoplasmic bodies has been confirmed via microscopic analysis. The results from this work support the hypothesis, that evolutionarily conserved Sm proteins have been adapted to perform a whole repertoire of functions related to the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in Eukaryota. This adaptation presumably enabled them to coordinate the interdependent processes of splicing element assembly, mRNA maturation and processing, and mRNA translation regulation, and its degradation.

Gene: !affects! Post-transcriptional regulation
Gene: !localizes to! Cytoplasmic bodies
Gene: !interacts with! Sm proteins
Gene: !enhances! mRNA splicing
Gene: !represses! mRNA translation
Gene: !synthesizes! Polyadenylated RNA