Molybdenum (Mo), which is an essential microelement for plant growth, plays important roles in multiple metabolic and physiological processes, including responses to drought and cold stress in wheat. Lipids also have crucial roles in plant adaptions to abiotic stresses. The aim of this study was to use glycerolipidomic and transcriptomic analyses to determine the changes in lipids induced by Mo that are associated with Mo-enhanced drought tolerance in wheat. Mo treatments increased the transcript levels of genes involved in fatty acid and glycerolipid biosynthesis and desaturation, but suppressed the expression of genes involved in oxylipin production. Wheat plants supplemented with Mo displayed higher contents of monogalactosyldiacyglycerol (MGDG), digalactosyldoacylglycerol (DGDG), phosphatidylglycerol (PG), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), and phosphatidylcholine (PC) with increased levels of unsaturation. The levels of MGDG, DGDG, PG, and PC increased under PEG-simulated drought (PSD), and the magnitude of the responses varied in the presence and absence of Mo. Mo increased the accumulation of the most abundant glycerolipid species of C36:6, C34:4, and C34:3 by increasing the expression of genes related to desaturation under PSD, and this contributed to maintaining the fluidity of membranes. In addition, Mo attenuated the decreases in the ratios of DGDG/MGDG and PC/PE that were observed under PSD. These changes in lipids in Mo-treated wheat would contribute to maintaining the integrity of membranes and to protecting the photosynthetic apparatus, thus acting together to enhance drought tolerance.

Mo: !enhances! Drought tolerance
Mo: !increases! Transcript levels of genes involved in fatty acid and glycerolipid biosynthesis and desaturation
Mo: !suppresses! Expression of genes involved in oxylipin production
Mo: !increases! Contents of MGDG, DGDG, PG, PE, and PC
Mo: !increases! Accumulation of C36:6, C34:4, and C34:3
Mo: !maintains! Fluidity of membranes
Mo: !attenuates! Decreases in DGDG/MGDG and PC/PE ratios