Peel degreening is an important aspect of fruit ripening in many citrus fruit, and previous studies have shown that it can be advanced by ethylene treatment or by low-temperature storage. However, the important regulators and pathways involved in natural peel degreening remain largely unknown. To determine how natural peel degreening is regulated in lemon fruit (Citrus limon), we studied transcriptome and physiochemical changes in the flavedo in response to ethylene treatment and low temperatures. Treatment with ethylene induced rapid peel degreening, which was strongly inhibited by the ethylene antagonist, 1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP). Compared with 25 ºC, moderately low storage temperatures of 5-20 °C also triggered peel degreening. Surprisingly, repeated 1-MCP treatments failed to inhibit the peel degreening induced by low temperature. Transcriptome analysis revealed that low temperature and ethylene independently regulated genes associated with chlorophyll degradation, carotenoid metabolism, photosystem proteins, phytohormone biosynthesis and signalling, and transcription factors. Peel degreening of fruit on trees occurred in association with drops in ambient temperature, and it coincided with the differential expression of low temperature-regulated genes. In contrast, genes that were uniquely regulated by ethylene showed no significant expression changes during on-tree peel degreening. Based on these findings, we hypothesize that low temperature plays a prominent role in regulating natural peel degreening independently of ethylene in citrus fruit.

ethylene: !induces! peel degreening 
1-MCP: !inhibits! ethylene-induced peel degreening 
low temperature: !induces! peel degreening 
low temperature: !inhibits! 1-MCP-induced inhibition of ethylene-induced peel degreening 
chlorophyll degradation: !regulated by! low temperature 
carotenoid metabolism: !regulated by! low temperature 
photosystem proteins: !regulated by! low temperature 
phytohormone biosynthesis and signalling: !regulated by! low temperature 
transcription factors: !regulated by! low temperature 
low temperature: !associated with! on-tree peel degreening 
ethylene: !not associated with! on-tree peel degreening