Drought represents a major threat to crop growth and yields. Strigolactones (SLs) contribute to regulating shoot branching by targeting the SUPPRESSOR OF MORE AXILLARY GROWTH2 (MAX2)-LIKE6 (SMXL6), SMXL7 and SMXL8 for degradation in a MAX2-dependent manner in Arabidopsis. Although SLs are implicated in plant drought response, the functions of the SMXL6, 7 and 8 in the SL-regulated plant response to drought stress have remained unclear. Here, we performed transcriptomic, physiological and biochemical analyses of smxl6, 7, 8 and max2 plants to understand the basis for SMXL6/7/8-regulated drought response. We found that three D53 (DWARF53)-Like SMXL members, SMXL6, 7 and 8, are involved in drought response as the smxl6smxl7smxl8 triple mutants showed markedly enhanced drought tolerance compared to wild type (WT). The smxl6smxl7smxl8 plants exhibited decreased leaf stomatal index, cuticular permeability and water loss, and increased anthocyanin biosynthesis during dehydration. Moreover, smxl6smxl7smxl8 were hypersensitive to ABA-induced stomatal closure and ABA responsiveness during and after germination. In addition, RNA-sequencing analysis of the leaves of the D53-like smxl mutants, SL-response max2 mutant and WT plants under normal and dehydration conditions revealed an SMXL6/7/8-mediated network controlling plant adaptation to drought stress via many stress- and/or ABA-responsive and SL-related genes. These data further provide evidence for crosstalk between ABA- and SL-dependent signaling pathways in regulating plant responses to drought. Our results demonstrate that SMXL6, 7 and 8 are vital components of SL signaling and are negatively involved in drought responses, suggesting that genetic manipulation of SMXL6/7/8-dependent SL signaling may provide novel ways to improve drought resistance.

SMXL6: !regulates! Drought Response
SMXL7: !regulates! Drought Response
SMXL8: !regulates! Drought Response
SMXL6/7/8: !controls! Plant Adaptation to Drought Stress
SMXL6/7/8: !mediates! ABA- and SL-dependent Signaling Pathways
SMXL6/7/8: !negatively involved in! Drought Responses