Flowering is a crucial stage during plant development. Plants may respond to unfavorable conditions by accelerating reproductive processes like flowering. In a recent study, we showed that PRECOCIOUS1 (POCO1) is a mitochondrial pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) protein involved in flowering time and abscisic acid (ABA) signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana. Here, we use RNA-seq data to investigate global gene expression alteration in the poco1 mutant. RNA-seq analysis was performed during different developmental stages for wild-type and poco1 plants. The most profound differences in gene expression were found when wild-type and poco1 plants of the same developmental stage were compared. Coverage analysis confirmed the T-DNA insertion in POCO1, which was concomitant with truncated transcripts. Many biological processes were found to be enriched. Several flowering-related genes such as FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT), which may be involved in the early-flowering phenotype of poco1, were differentially regulated. Numerous ABA-associated genes, including the core components of ABA signaling such as ABA receptors, protein phosphatases, protein kinases, and ABA-responsive element (ABRE) binding proteins (AREBs)/ABRE-binding factors (ABFs) as well as important genes for stomatal function, were mostly down-regulated in poco1. Drought and oxidative stress-related genes, including ABA-induced stress genes, were differentially regulated. RNA-seq analysis also uncovered differentially regulated genes encoding various classes of transcription factors and genes involved in cellular signaling. Furthermore, the expression of stress-associated nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins (NGEMPs) was found to be altered in poco1. Redox-related genes were affected, suggesting that the redox state in poco1 might be altered. The identification of various enriched biological processes indicates that complex regulatory mechanisms underlie poco1 development. Differentially regulated genes associated with flowering may contribute to the early-flowering phenotype of poco1. Our data suggest the involvement of POCO1 in the early ABA signaling process. The down-regulation of many ABA-related genes suggests an association of poco1 mutation with the ABA signaling deficiency. This condition further affects the expression of many stress-related, especially drought-associated genes in poco1, consistent with the drought sensitivity of poco1. poco1 mutation also affects the expression of genes associated with the cellular regulation, redox, and mitochondrial perturbation.

POCO1: !affects! Flowering time 
POCO1: !regulates! ABA signaling 
FT: !localizes to! Wild-type plants 
ABA receptors: !interact with! Protein phosphatases 
ABRE binding proteins: !enhance! Stomatal function 
Drought-related genes: !repressed in! poco1 mutant 
Transcription factors: !synthesize! Cellular signaling