Camellia sinensis 'Huangjinju' is an albino tea variety developed recently in China. Young leaves of 'Huangjinju' demonstrate bright yellow when cultivated under natural sunlight, but regreens under reduced light intensity. To elucidate the physiological and molecular mechanisms of this light-sensitive albinism, we compared leaf pigmentation, metabolites, cellular ultrastructure and transcriptome between plants cultured under natural sunlight and shade. Shading treatment doubled the chlorophyll concentration and regreened albino leaves; carotenoid also increased by 30%. Electron microscopy analyses showed that chloroplast not only increased in number but also in size with a complete set of components. In addition, regreened leaves also had a significantly higher concentration of polyphenols and catechins than albino leaves. At transcriptomic level, a total of 507 genes were differentially expressed in response to light condition changes. The most enriched pathways include light harvest protein complex, response to stimuli, oxidation-reduction process, generation of precursor metabolites and energy response. The integrated strategy in this study allows a mechanistic understanding of leaf albinism in light-sensitive tea plants and suggested the regulation of gene networks involved in pigmentation and protein processing. Results from this study provide valuable information to this area and can benefit the domestication and artificial breeding to develop new albino tea varieties.

Light: !affects! Pigmentation 
Shading: !increases! Chlorophyll 
Shading: !increases! Carotenoid 
Chloroplast: !increases in! Number 
Chloroplast: !increases in! Size 
Polyphenols: !increase in! Regreened Leaves 
Catechins: !increase in! Regreened Leaves 
Light: !regulates! 507 Genes 
Light: !influences! Light Harvest Protein Complex 
Light: !influences! Response to Stimuli 
Light: !influences! Oxidation-Reduction Process 
Light: !influences! Generation of Precursor Metabolites 
Light: !influences! Energy Response