Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinases (MAPKKKs) are significant components in the MAPK signal pathway and play essential roles in regulating plants against drought stress. To explore MAPKKK gene family functioning in cotton response and resistance to drought stress, we conducted a systematic analysis of GhMAPKKKs. In this study, 157 nonredundant GhMAPKKKs (including 87 RAFs, 46 MEKKs and 24 ZIKs) were identified in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum). These GhMAPKKK genes are unevenly distributed on 26 chromosomes, and segmental duplication is the major way for the enlargement of MAPKKK family. Furthermore, members within the same subfamily share a similar gene structure and motif composition. A lot of cis-elements relevant to plant growth and response to stresses are distributed in promoter regions of GhMAPKKKs. Additionally, these GhMAPKKKs show differential expression patterns in cotton tissues. The transcription levels of most genes were markedly altered in cotton under heat, cold and PEG treatments, while the expressions of some GhMAPKKKs were induced in cotton under drought stress. Among these drought-induced genes, we selected GhRAF4 and GhMEKK12 for further functional characterization by virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) method. The experimental results indicated that the gene-silenced cotton displayed decreased tolerance to drought stress. Malondialdehyde (MDA) content was higher, but proline accumulation, relative leaf water content and activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and peroxidase (POD) were lower in the gene-silenced cotton, compared with those in the controls, under drought stress. Collectively, a systematic survey of gene structure, chromosomal location, motif composition and evolutionary relationship of MAPKKKs were performed in upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum). The following expression and functional study showed that some of them take important parts in cotton drought tolerance. Thus, the data presented here may provide a foundation for further investigating the roles of GhMAPKKKs in cotton response and resistance to drought stress.

GhMAPKKKs: !unevenly distributed on! 26 chromosomes
GhMAPKKKs: !share similar gene structure and motif composition! within same subfamily
GhMAPKKKs: !show differential expression patterns in! cotton tissues
GhRAF4: !induced in! cotton under drought stress
GhMEKK12: !selected for further functional characterization by VIGS method
GhRAF4/GhMEKK12: !decrease tolerance to! drought stress
GhRAF4/GhMEKK12: !increase MDA content and decrease proline accumulation, relative leaf water content and activities of SOD and POD! under drought stress