Symbiotic rhizobia-legume interactions are energy-demanding processes, and the carbon supply from host cells that is critically required for nodulation and nitrogen fixation is not fully understood. Investigation of the lipidomic and carbohydrate profiles with the transcriptome of developing nodules revealed highly activated glycolysis, fatty acid (FA), 2-monoacylglycerol (2-MAG), and membrane lipid biosynthesis and transport during nodule development. RNA-sequence profiling of metabolic genes in roots and developing nodules highlighted the enhanced expression of genes involved in the biosynthesis and transport of FAs, membrane lipids, and 2-MAG in rhizobia-soybean symbioses via the RAML-WRI-FatM-GPAT-STRL pathway, which is similar to that in legume-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi symbiosis. The essential roles of the metabolic pathway during soybean nodulation were further supported by analysis of transgenic hairy roots overexpressing soybean GmWRI1b-OE and GmLEC2a-OE. GmLEC2a-OE hairy roots produced fewer nodules, in contrast to GmWRI1b-OE hairy roots. GmLEC2a-OE hairy roots displayed different or even opposite expression patterns of the genes involved in glycolysis and the synthesis of FAs, 2-MAG, TAG, and membrane lipids compared to GmWRI1b-OE hairy roots. Glycolysis, FA and membrane lipid biosynthesis were repressed in GmLEC2a-OE but increased in GmWRI1b-OE hairy roots, which may account for the reduced nodulation in GmLEC2a-OE hairy roots but increased nodulation in GmWRI1b-OE hairy roots. These data show that active FA, 2-MAG and membrane lipid biosynthesis are essential for nodulation and rhizobia-soybean symbioses. These data shed light on essential and complex lipid metabolism for soybean nodulation and nodule development, laying the foundation for the future detailed investigation of soybean nodulation.

GmWRI1b-OE: !enhances! nodulation
GmLEC2a-OE: !represses! nodulation
Glycolysis: !enhances! GmWRI1b-OE
Glycolysis: !represses! GmLEC2a-OE
FAs: !enhances! GmWRI1b-OE
FAs: !represses! GmLEC2a-OE
2-MAG: !enhances! GmWRI1b-OE
2-MAG: !represses! GmLEC2a-OE
Membrane lipids: !enhances! GmWRI1b-OE
Membrane lipids: !represses! GmLEC2a-OE