Pearl millet is a widely cultivated grain and forage crop in areas frequented with hot and dry weather, and high temperature. Being cultivated in arid and semi-arid regions, the crop often encounters intermittent water stress either at early stages of development or flowering stage or both. However, its asynchronous tillering behavior and fast growth rate helps recovering from drought stress at vegetative stages while there is no such reprieve under terminal stress (flowering through grain filling). At present, the molecular basis of terminal drought tolerance of certain pearl millet genotypes remains elusive. In this study, a comparative transcriptome analysis has been performed at both vegetative and flowering stages of a terminal drought tolerant genotype, PRLT2/89-33, subjected to drought stress. The gene expression profiling analysis showed that PRLT2/89-33 has an inherent ability to sense drought at both developmental stages. Gene Ontology (GO) and MapMan pathway analyses underlined that flavanoid pathway, lignin biosynthesis, phenyl propanoid pathway, pigment biosynthesis, and other secondary metabolite pathways were enriched in control and drought stressed PRLT2/89-33 at flowering stage than at the vegetative stage. To our knowledge, this is the first report of comparative transcriptome analysis under drought stress at two different developmental stages which can facilitate fastidious discovery of drought tolerant genes leading to improved yield in pearl millet and other related crops.

Pearl millet: !exhibits! Asynchronous tillering behavior 
Pearl millet: !experiences! Intermittent water stress 
PRLT2/89-33: !possesses! Inherent ability to sense drought 
Flavanoid pathway: !enriched in! Control and drought stressed PRLT2/89-33 
Lignin biosynthesis: !enriched in! Control and drought stressed PRLT2/89-33 
Phenyl propanoid pathway: !enriched in! Control and drought stressed PRLT2/89-33 
Pigment biosynthesis: !enriched in! Control and drought stressed PRLT2/89-33 
Secondary metabolite pathways: !enriched in! Control and drought stressed PRLT2/89-33