Like fungi and some prokaryotes, plants use a thiazole synthase (THI4) to make the thiazole precursor of thiamin. Fungal THI4s are suicide enzymes that destroy an essential active-site Cys residue to obtain the sulfur atom needed for thiazole formation. In contrast, certain prokaryotic THI4s have no active-site Cys, use sulfide as sulfur donor, and are truly catalytic. The presence of a conserved active-site Cys in plant THI4s and other indirect evidence implies that they are suicidal. To confirm this, we complemented the Arabidopsistz-1 mutant, which lacks THI4 activity, with a His-tagged Arabidopsis THI4 construct. LC-MS analysis of tryptic peptides of the THI4 extracted from leaves showed that the active-site Cys was predominantly in desulfurated form, consistent with THI4 having a suicide mechanism in planta. Unexpectedly, transcriptome data mining and deep proteome profiling showed that barley, wheat, and oat have both a widely expressed canonical THI4 with an active-site Cys, and a THI4-like paralog (non-Cys THI4) that has no active-site Cys and is the major type of THI4 in developing grains. Transcriptomic evidence also indicated that barley, wheat, and oat grains synthesize thiamin de novo, implying that their non-Cys THI4s synthesize thiazole. Structure modeling supported this inference, as did demonstration that non-Cys THI4s have significant capacity to complement thiazole auxotrophy in Escherichia coli. There is thus a prima facie case that non-Cys cereal THI4s, like their prokaryotic counterparts, are catalytic thiazole synthases. Bioenergetic calculations show that, relative to suicide THI4s, such enzymes could save substantial energy during the grain-filling period.

THI4: !synthesizes! thiazole 
fungal THI4s: !destroy! active-site Cys 
prokaryotic THI4s: !use! sulfide 
plant THI4s: !have! conserved active-site Cys 
barley, wheat, oat: !have! canonical THI4 & THI4-like paralog 
non-Cys THI4s: !synthesize! thiazole 
non-Cys THI4s: !complement! thiazole auxotrophy 
suicide THI4s: !save! energy