The axillary bud is an important index of cotton plant-type traits, and the molecular mechanism of axillary bud development in upland cotton has not yet been reported. We obtained a mutant (designated mZ571) with a high-budding phenotype in axillary bud development from the low-budding phenotype variety G. hirsutum Z571 (CCRI 9A02), which provided ideal materials for the study of complex regulatory networks of axillary bud development. In this study, RNA sequencing was carried out to detect gene expression levels during three stages of axillary buds in Z571 (LB, low budding) and mZ571 mutant (HB, high budding). A total of 7162 DEGs were identified in the three groups (HB-E vs. LB-E, HB-G1 vs. LB-G1, HB-G2 vs. LB-G2), including 4014 downregulated and 3184 upregulated DEGs. Additionally, 221 DEGs were commonly identified in all three groups, accounting for approximately 3.09% of the total DEGs. These DEGs were identified, annotated and classified. A significant number of DEGs were related to hormone metabolism, hormone signal transduction, and starch and sucrose metabolism. In addition, 45, 22 and 9 DEGs involved in hormone metabolic pathways and 67, 22 and 19 DEGs involved in hormone signal transduction pathwayspathway were identified in HB-E vs. LB-E, HB-G1 vs. LB-G1, and HB-G2 vs. LB-G2, respectively, suggesting that endogenous hormones are the primary factors influencing cotton axillary bud growth. Hormone and soluble sugar content measurements revealed that mZ571 exhibited higher concentrations of zeatin, gibberellins and soluble sugar in all three stages, which confirmed that these hormone metabolism-, hormone signal transduction- and starch metabolism-related genes showed interaction effects contributing to the divergence of axillary bud growth between mZ571 and Z571. Our results confirmed the importance of endogenous hormones and sugars in the development of axillary buds, and we found that mZ571 plants, with a high-budding phenotype of axillary buds, exhibited higher endogenous hormone and sugar concentrations. Overall, we present a model for the emergence and development of cotton axillary buds that provides insights into the complexity and dynamic nature of the regulatory network during axillary bud emergence and development.

Gene: !affects! Hormone metabolism 
Gene: !affects! Hormone signal transduction 
Gene: !affects! Starch and sucrose metabolism 
Gene: !enhances! Zeatin concentration 
Gene: !enhances! Gibberellins concentration 
Gene: !enhances! Soluble sugar concentration