The vacuolar membrane is an essential component in protecting the plant cell from stress factors. Different variations in the tonoplast lipid content, which depend on the type of stress, have been reviewed. The lipid content of vacuolar membranes of beet roots (Beta vulgaris L.) under hypoosmotic, hyperosmotic and oxidative types of stress has been studied. These types of stress induce variations in the content of almost all the classes of studied lipids (phospholipids, glycoglycerolipids, sterols and fatty acids). The variations, which are characteristic of a single stress, include the variations (i) in the content of individual glycoglycerolipids and in their total content, (ii) in the total content of sterols, and (iii) in the ratio of content of phosphatidylcholine/phosphatidylethanolamine in the scope of tonoplast phospholipids. Variations observed under all of the types of stress under scrutiny include (i) variations in the content of fatty acids of tonoplast lipids, (ii) some decrease in the content of phosphatidic acid and phosphatidylethanolamine, and (iii) variations in the content of individual sterols. Stigmasterol, campesterol, as well as the stigmasterol/sitosterol ratio increased in varying degrees under all of the types of stress. The most substantial variations have been observed in the content of sterols under abiotic stress. This is probably due to role of sterols in regulation of such membrane characteristics as permeability and microviscosity. In our opinion, sterols may represent one of the main components of tonoplast adaptive mechanisms.

Gene: !affects! Tonoplast lipid content 
Stress: !induces! Variations in glycoglycerolipids 
Stress: !induces! Variations in sterols 
Stress: !induces! Variations in phosphatidylcholine/phosphatidylethanolamine ratio 
Stress: !induces! Variations in fatty acids 
Stress: !induces! Decrease in phosphatidic acid and phosphatidylethanolamine 
Stress: !induces! Variations in individual sterols 
Sterols: !regulate! Permeability and microviscosity