Ammonium transporter (AMT)-mediated acquisition of ammonium nitrogen from soils is essential for the nitrogen demand of plants, especially for those plants growing in flooded or acidic soils where ammonium is dominant. Recent advances show that AMTs additionally participate in many other physiological processes such as transporting ammonium from symbiotic fungi to plants, transporting ammonium from roots to shoots, transferring ammonium in leaves and reproductive organs, or facilitating resistance to plant diseases via ammonium transport. Besides being a transporter, several AMTs are required for the root development upon ammonium exposure. To avoid the adverse effects of inadequate or excessive intake of ammonium nitrogen on plant growth and development, activities of AMTs are fine-tuned not only at the transcriptional level by the participation of at least four transcription factors, but also at protein level by phosphorylation, pH, endocytosis, and heterotrimerization. Despite these progresses, it is worth noting that stronger growth inhibition, not facilitation, unfortunately occurs when AMT overexpression lines are exposed to optimal or slightly excessive ammonium. This implies that a long road remains towards overcoming potential limiting factors and achieving AMT-facilitated yield increase to accomplish the goal of persistent yield increase under the present high nitrogen input mode in agriculture.

AMT: !mediates! ammonium nitrogen acquisition 
AMT: !transports! ammonium from symbiotic fungi to plants 
AMT: !transports! ammonium from roots to shoots 
AMT: !transfers! ammonium in leaves and reproductive organs 
AMT: !facilitates! resistance to plant diseases 
AMT: !required for! root development upon ammonium exposure 
Transcription factors: !regulate! AMT activities at transcriptional level 
Phosphorylation: !modulates! AMT activities at protein level 
pH: !modulates! AMT activities at protein level 
Endocytosis: !modulates! AMT activities at protein level 
Heterotrimerization: !modulates! AMT activities at protein level