Duckweed is a promising food crop with multiple benefits for space applications. Fresh duckweed could deliver synergistically acting essential antioxidant nutrients to a crew - but only if growth conditions provide the plant with the right cues to trigger antioxidant formation. We grew <i>Lemna gibba</i> under continuous growth light ranging from low to very high intensities (photosynthetic photon flux densities = PPFDs) in order to investigate the effect on plant growth, photosynthesis, and level of carotenoid antioxidants that are essential human micronutrients. <i>Lemna gibba</i> achieved remarkably high growth rates under modest growth PPFD by virtue of superior light absorption resulting from minimal self-shading and high chlorophyll levels. Conversely, <i>L. gibba</i>'s growth rate remained high even under very high growth PPFDs. This notable ability of <i>L. gibba</i> to avoid inactivation of photosynthesis and diminished growth under very high growth PPFDs resulted from a combination of downregulation of chlorophyll synthesis and increased biochemical photoprotection that limited a build-up of excessive excitation energy. This biochemical photoprotection included accumulation of zeaxanthin (an essential human micronutrient) and high levels of zeaxanthin-catalyzed thermal energy dissipation of excess excitation. Compared to the light levels needed to saturate <i>L. gibba</i> photosynthesis and growth, higher light levels were thus required for strong induction of the essential antioxidant zeaxanthin. These results indicate a need for design of light protocols that achieve simultaneous optimization of plant yield, nutritional quality, and light-use efficiency to circumvent the fact that the light requirement to saturate plant growth is lower than that for production of high zeaxanthin levels. How this trade-off between light-use efficiency of growth and nutritional quality might be minimized or circumvented to co-optimize all desired features is discussed.

Lemna gibba: !achieves high growth rate under! modest PPFD
Lemna gibba: !avoids inactivation of photosynthesis and diminished growth under! very high PPFD
Chlorophyll synthesis: !downregulated under! very high PPFD
Biochemical photoprotection: !limits build-up of excessive excitation energy under! very high PPFD
Zeaxanthin: !accumulated and catalyzed thermal energy dissipation of excess excitation under! very high PPFD
Light levels: !required to saturate Lemna gibba photosynthesis and growth is lower than that for production of high zeaxanthin levels!