Although exposure to low frequency electromagnetic radiation is harmful to plants, LF-EM irradiated Nerium oleander seedlings exhibited enhanced development and growth, probably taking advantage of defined structural leaf deformations. Currently, evidence supports the undesirable, often destructive impact of low frequency electromagnetic (LF-EM) radiation on plants. The response of plants to LF-EM radiation often entails induction in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, a subject matter that is well documented. Nerium oleander is a Mediterranean plant species, which evolved remarkable resistance to various environmental stress conditions. In the current investigation, cultivated N. oleander plants, following their long-term exposure to LF-EM radiation, exhibited major structural modifications as the flattening of crypts, the elimination of trichomes and the reduction of the layers of the epidermal cells. These changes co-existed with an oxidative stress response manifested by a significant increase in reactive oxygen species at both the roots and the above ground parts, a decline in the absorbance of light by photosynthetic pigments and the substantially increased biosynthesis of L-Dopa decarboxylase (DDC), an enzyme catalyzing the production of secondary metabolites that alleviate stress. The exposed plants exhibited greater primary plant productivity, despite a manifested photosynthetic pigment limitation and the severe oxidative stress. This unique response of N. oleander to severe abiotic stress conditions may be owed to the advantage offered by a structural change consistent to an easier diffusion of CO<sub>2</sub> within the leaves. A major plant response to an emerging "pollutant" was documented.

LF-EM: !induces! Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites 
Nerium oleander: !exhibits! Resistance to environmental stress 
LF-EM: !causes! Structural modifications 
Reactive oxygen species: !increases! In roots and above ground parts 
Photosynthetic pigments: !declines! In absorbance of light 
L-Dopa decarboxylase: !increases! Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites 
Primary plant productivity: !enhances! Despite photosynthetic pigment limitation 
CO<sub>2</sub>: !facilitates! Easier diffusion within leaves