Temperature is an essential physical factor that affects the plant life cycle. Almost all plant species have evolved a robust signal transduction system that enables them to sense changes in the surrounding temperature, relay this message and accordingly adjust their metabolism and cellular functions to avoid heat stress-related damage. Wheat (Triticum aestivum), being a cool-season crop, is very sensitive to heat stress. Any increase in the ambient temperature, especially at the reproductive and grain-filling stages, can cause a drastic loss in wheat yield. Heat stress causes lipid peroxidation due to oxidative stress, resulting in the damage of thylakoid membranes and the disruption of their function, which ultimately decreases photosynthesis and crop yield. The cell membrane/plasma membrane plays prominent roles as an interface system that perceives and translates the changes in environmental signals into intracellular responses. Thus, membrane lipid composition is a critical factor in heat stress tolerance or susceptibility in wheat. In this review, we elucidate the possible involvement of calcium influx as an early heat stress-responsive mechanism in wheat plants. In addition, the physiological implications underlying the changes in lipid metabolism under high-temperature stress in wheat and other plant species will be discussed. In-depth knowledge about wheat lipid reprograming can help develop heat-tolerant wheat varieties and provide approaches to solve the impact of global climate change.

Temperature: !affects! Plant life cycle
Signal transduction system: !enables! Relaying of message
Wheat: !very sensitive to! Heat stress
Heat stress: !causes! Lipid peroxidation
Thylakoid membranes: !disrupted by! Oxidative stress
Cell membrane/plasma membrane: !plays role in! Translating environmental signals
Calcium influx: !involved in! Early heat stress-responsive mechanism
Lipid metabolism: !changes under! High-temperature stress
Heat-tolerant wheat varieties: !developed from! Knowledge about wheat lipid reprograming