The function of the transcription factor KNOTTED ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA7 (KNAT7) is still unclear since it appears to be either a negative or a positive regulator for secondary cell wall deposition with its loss-of-function mutant displaying thicker interfascicular and xylary fiber cell walls but thinner vessel cell walls in inflorescence stems. To explore the exact function of KNAT7, class II KNOTTED1-LIKE HOMEOBOX (KNOX II) genes in Arabidopsis including KNAT3, KNAT4, and KNAT5 were studied together. By chimeric repressor technology, we found that both KNAT3 and KNAT7 repressors exhibited a similar dwarf phenotype. Both KNAT3 and KNAT7 genes were expressed in the inflorescence stems and the knat3 knat7 double mutant exhibited a dwarf phenotype similar to the repressor lines. A stem cross-section of knat3 knat7 displayed an enhanced irregular xylem phenotype as compared with the single mutants, and its cell wall thickness in xylem vessels and interfascicular fibers was significantly reduced. Analysis of cell wall chemical composition revealed that syringyl lignin was significantly decreased while guaiacyl lignin was increased in the knat3 knat7 double mutant. Coincidently, the knat3 knat7 transcriptome showed that most lignin pathway genes were activated, whereas the syringyl lignin-related gene Ferulate 5-Hydroxylase (F5H) was down-regulated. Protein interaction analysis revealed that KNAT3 and KNAT7 can form a heterodimer, and KNAT3, but not KNAT7, can interact with the key secondary cell wall formation transcription factors NST1/2, which suggests that the KNAT3-NST1/2 heterodimer complex regulates F5H to promote syringyl lignin synthesis. These results indicate that KNAT3 and KNAT7 synergistically work together to promote secondary cell wall biosynthesis.

KNAT7: !affects! secondary cell wall deposition
KNAT3: !interacts with! KNAT7
KNAT3: !interacts with! NST1/2
KNAT3: !represses! F5H
KNAT3: !enhances! syringyl lignin synthesis
KNAT7: !localizes to! inflorescence stems
KNAT3: !synthesizes! dwarf phenotype