CmCAD2 and CmCAD3 function more positively than CmCAD1 in oriental melon for lignin synthesis which is important to ensure internal water status and thus for drought tolerance. Well-lignification may be the guarantee of efficient axial water transport and barrier of lateral water flow in oriental melon tolerating drought stress, however remains to be verified. As an important enzyme in monolignol synthesis pathway, five cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) genes were generally induced in melon seedlings by drought. Here we further revealed the roles of CmCAD1, 2, and 3 in lignin synthesis and for drought tolerance. Results found that overexpressing CmCAD2 or 3 strongly recovered CAD activities, lignin synthesis and composition in Arabidopsis cadc cadd, whose lignin synthesis is disrupted, while CmCAD1 functioned modestly. In melon seedlings, silenced CmCAD2 and 3 individually or collectively decreased CAD activities and lignin depositions drastically, resulting in dwarfed phenotypes. Reduced lignin, mainly composed by guaiacyl units catalyzed by CmCAD3, is mainly due to the limited lignification in tracheary elements and development of Casparion strip. While CmCAD1 and 2 exhibited catalysis to p-coumaraldehyde and sinapaldehyde, respectively. Compared with CmCAD1, drought treatments revealed higher sensitivity of CmCAD2 and/or 3 silenced melon seedlings, accompanying with lower relative water contents, water potentials and relatively higher total soluble sugar contents. Slightly up-regulated expressions of aquaporin genes together with limited lignification might imply higher lateral water loss in stems of silenced lines. In Arabidopsis, CmCAD2 and 3 transgenic lines enhanced cadc cadd drought tolerance through recovering lignin synthesis and root development, accompanying with decreased electrolyte leakage ratios and increased RWCs, thus improved survival rates. Briefly, lignin synthesized by CmCAD2 and 3 functions importantly for drought tolerance in melon.

CmCAD2: !synthesizes! lignin
CmCAD3: !synthesizes! lignin
CmCAD1: !modestly synthesizes! lignin
CmCAD2: !enhances! drought tolerance
CmCAD3: !enhances! drought tolerance
CmCAD2: !represses! root development
CmCAD3: !represses! root development
CmCAD2: !affects! water potential
CmCAD3: !affects! water potential