Tuber color is an important trait for Helianthus tuberosus L. (Jerusalem artichoke). Usually, purple tubers with high anthocyanin content are more nutritious than white tuber. But, the molecular mechanism underlying it is unknown. In the current study, high-throughput RNA-sequencing was used to compare the transcriptomes between plants with tubers with red or white epidermis. Compared with the white-skinned tubers of cultivar QY3, anthocyanin biosynthesis structural genes had greater expression in the red-skinned tubers of cultivar QY1, indicating that the anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway was activated in 'QY1'; quantitative PCR confirmed this difference in expression. HtMYB2 (Unigene44371_All) was the only MYB transcription factor, homologous to the MYB transcription factor regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis, expressed in the red tuber epidermis of 'QY1'. The anthocyanin concentration in the root, stem, leaf, flower, and tuber epidermis of 'QY1' was higher than in 'QY3', especially tuber epidermis. Correspondingly, HtMYB2 had greater expression in these tissues of 'QY1' than in 'QY3'. The expression of HtMYB2 was associated with anthocyanin accumulation in the different tissues. Overexpression of HtMYB2 activated the anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway, accumulating the pigment in leaves of transgenic tobacco, supporting the model that HtMYB2 regulated anthocyanin biosynthesis. Further experiments found that HtMYB2 had the same coding sequence and genomic sequence in 'QY1' and 'QY3', but that there were several single nucleotide polymorphisms and one insertion-deletion (indel) mutation of 21 nucleotides in the promoter region between the two alleles. The deletion of three nucleotides "AAA" made the promoter of 'QY1' predicted to contain one more possible promoter region. A specific primer, based on the indel, could differentiate between cultivars with red or white tuber epidermis. The genetic variation in HtMYB2 was associated with the tuber skin color in a natural population. RNA-seq can successfully isolate the candidate gene (HTMYB2) controlling anthocyanin biosynthesis in purple epidermis of Jerusalem artichoke tuber. HTMYB2 can regulate anthocyanin biosynthesis in plants and is closely related to the formation of purple phenotype in tubers. This study should be useful in understanding the genetic mechanism underlying different tuber skin colors and in breeding new H. tuberosus cultivars with different tuber skin colors.

HtMYB2: !regulates! anthocyanin biosynthesis 
HtMYB2: !associated with! anthocyanin accumulation 
HtMYB2: !differentiates between! cultivars with red or white tuber epidermis 
HtMYB2: !related to! formation of purple phenotype in tubers