The objective of this study was to assess the effect of metalliferous conditions on the functioning of photosynthetic electron transport in waste heap populations of a pseudometallophyte, Viola tricolor L. Measurements of chlorophyll a fluorescence and the absorbance changes at 830 nm enabled a non-invasive assessment of photosynthetic apparatus performance. This was complemented by the evaluation of the chlorophyll content. Low temperature chlorophyll fluorescence emission spectra were also recorded. Based on the OJIP test performed in situ, we demonstrated a disturbed condition of photosystem II (PSII) in three metalliferous populations in comparison with a non-metallicolous one. The combined effects of elevated concentrations of zinc, cadmium and lead in soil resulted in the decline of some parameters describing the efficiency and electron flow through PSII. The differences between waste heap populations seemed to be partly correlated with the concentration of heavy metals in the soil. The characteristic of electron transport at photosystem I (PSI) in the light-adapted state revealed increased values of PSI donor-side limitation (Y<sub>ND</sub>) and a declined PSI quantum efficiency (Y<sub>I</sub>). It was also demonstrated that the waste heap conditions negatively affect the total chlorophyll content in leaves and led to an increased ratio of fluorescence emission at 77 K (F730/F685). The obtained data indicate that, regardless of the high adaptation of metallicolous populations, photosynthetic electron transport is hampered in V. tricolor plants at metal polluted sites.

Chlorophyll a fluorescence: !measures! Photosynthetic apparatus performance
Metalliferous conditions: !affects! Photosystem II (PSII)
Heavy metals: !correlates with! Differences between waste heap populations
PSI donor-side limitation: !increases! Under waste heap conditions
Total chlorophyll content: !declines! Under waste heap conditions
F730/F685 ratio: !increases! Under waste heap conditions