Plants that experience a lack of sufficient irrigation undergo hydric stress, which causes the modification of their mechanical properties. These changes include a complex network of chemical and physical signals that interact between plant-plant and plant-environment systems in a mechanism that is still not well understood, and that differs among species. This mechanical response implies different levels of vibration when the plant experiences structural modifications from self-hydraulic adjustments of flux exchange at specific frequencies, with these carrying behavioral information. To measure these signals, highly sensitive instrumentation that allows the decoding of displacement velocity and displacement of plants, which is possible through calibrated equipment such as 3D scanning laser vibrometers, is necessary. Laser vibrometry technology allows for noninvasive measurements in real-time. Physiological changes could reasonably affect the biomechanical condition of plants in terms of the frequency (hertz) and intensity of the plant's vibration. In this research, it is proposed that the frequency changes of a plant's vibration are related to the plant's hydric condition and that these frequency vibrations have the ecological potential to communicate water changes and levels of hydric stress. The peak of the velocity of plant displacements was found to vary from 0.079 to 1.74 mm/s, and natural frequencies (hertz) range is between 1.8 and 2.6 Hz for plants with low hydric stress (LHS), between 1.3 and 1.6 Hz for plants with medium hydric stress (MHS), and between 6.7 and 7.8 Hz for plants with high hydric stress. These values could act as preliminary references for water management using noninvasive techniques and, knowledge of the range of natural frequencies of hydric stress risk in chili pepper crops can be applied in precision agriculture practices.

Plants: !experience! Hydric Stress
Hydric Stress: !causes! Modification of Mechanical Properties
Plant-Plant/Plant-Environment Systems: !interact in! Complex Network
3D Scanning Laser Vibrometers: !allow for! Noninvasive Measurements
Physiological Changes: !affect! Biomechanical Condition
Frequency Vibrations: !communicate! Water Changes/Levels of Hydric Stress
Velocity of Plant Displacements: !varies from! 0.079 to 1.74 mm/s
Natural Frequencies (Hertz): !range from! 1.8 to 2.6 Hz (LHS), 1.3 to 1.6 Hz (MHS), 6.7 to 7.8 Hz (HHS)