['32490348', 'WHIRLY2 is a single-stranded DNA binding protein associated with mitochondrial  nucleoids. In the why 2-1 mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana, a major proportion of  leaf mitochondria has an aberrant structure characterized by disorganized  nucleoids, reduced abundance of cristae, and a low matrix density despite the  fact that the macroscopic phenotype during vegetative growth is not different  from wild type. These features coincide with an impairment of the functionality  and dynamics of mitochondria that have been characterized in detail in wild-type  and why 2-1 mutant cell cultures. In contrast to the development of the  vegetative parts, seed germination is compromised in the why 2-1 mutant. In line  with that, the expression level of why 2 in seeds of wild-type plants is higher  than that of why 3, whereas in adult plant no difference is found. Intriguingly,  in early stages of shoots development of the why 2-1 mutant, although not in  seeds, the expression level of why 3 is enhanced. These results suggest that  WHIRLY3 is a potential candidate to compensate for the lack of WHIRLY2 in the why  2-1 mutant. Such compensation is possible only if the two proteins are localized  in the same organelle. Indeed, in organello protein transport experiments using  intact mitochondria and chloroplasts revealed that WHIRLY3 can be dually targeted  into both, chloroplasts and mitochondria. Together, these data indicate that the  alterations of mitochondria nucleoids are tightly linked to alterations of  mitochondria morphology and functionality. This is even more evident in those  phases of plant life when mitochondrial activity is particularly high, such as  seed germination. Moreover, our results indicate that the differential expression  of why 2 and why 3 predetermines the functional replacement of WHIRLY2 by  WHIRLY3, which is restricted though to the vegetative parts of the plant.', '2020 May', 'Plant Direct', '10.1002/pld3.229', 'ORCID:']

WHIRLY2: !affects! Mitochondrial nucleoids 
WHIRLY2: !localizes to! Mitochondria 
WHIRLY3: !interacts with! WHIRLY2 
WHIRLY3: !enhances! Expression level in early stages of shoots development 
WHIRLY3: !represses! Expression level in seeds 
WHIRLY3: !synthesizes! Chloroplasts and mitochondria