Maize shoot development progresses from non-pigmented meristematic cells at the base of the leaf to expanded and non-dividing green cells of the leaf blade. This transition is accompanied by the conversion of promitochondria and proplastids to their mature forms and massive fragmentation of both mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and plastid DNA (ptDNA), collectively termed organellar DNA (orgDNA). We measured developmental changes in reactive oxygen species (ROS), which at high concentrations can lead to oxidative stress and DNA damage, as well as antioxidant agents and oxidative damage in orgDNA. Our plants were grown under normal, non-stressful conditions. Nonetheless, we found more oxidative damage in orgDNA from leaf than stalk tissues and higher levels of hydrogen peroxide, superoxide, and superoxide dismutase in leaf than stalk tissues and in light-grown compared to dark-grown leaves. In both mitochondria and plastids, activities of the antioxidant enzyme peroxidase were higher in stalk than in leaves and in dark-grown than light-grown leaves. In protoplasts, the amount of the small-molecule antioxidants, glutathione and ascorbic acid, and catalase activity were also higher in the stalk than in leaf tissue. The data suggest that the degree of oxidative stress in the organelles is lower in stalk than leaf and lower in dark than light growth conditions. We speculate that the damaged/fragmented orgDNA in leaves (but not the basal meristem) results from ROS signaling to the nucleus to stop delivering DNA repair proteins to mature organelles producing large amounts of ROS.

ROS: !higher in! Leaf 
ROS: !lower in! Stalk 
ROS: !higher in! Light-grown leaves 
ROS: !lower in! Dark-grown leaves 
Peroxidase: !higher in! Stalk 
Peroxidase: !lower in! Leaves 
Glutathione/Ascorbic Acid/Catalase: !higher in! Stalk 
Glutathione/Ascorbic Acid/Catalase: !lower in! Leaf 
DNA Repair Proteins: !delivered to! Mature organelles 
DNA Repair Proteins: !stopped from being delivered to! Basal meristem