Identification of the allelopathy-interrelated metabolites from the allelopathic rice rhizosphere is crucial to understand the allelopathic mechanism of rice, which in turn can promote its applications to farming. In this study, the metabolites from the rhizosphere soil of five different rice lines, including allelopathic rice accession PI312777 (PI) and non-allelopathic rice accession Lemont (Le) as well as their genetic derivatives (e.g., phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) gene overexpression transgenic lines of PI and Le, namely, PO and LO respectively, and PAL RNA interference line of PI, namely, PR) were identified and comparatively analyzed to explore the positive compounds that are involved in the process of rice allelopathy. The results showed that 21 non-polar compounds and 21 polar compounds differed in content in the rhizosphere soil of PI and Le, which include several volatile fatty acids and long-chain fatty acids. The relative contents of fatty acids also differed between PAL overexpressing or RNA interference (RNAi)-silenced line and their wild-type respectively. Acetic acid content also differed among groups, i.e., it is higher in the high allelopathic potential rice. Further analysis showed that different metabolites from the ADS8 resin-extracted phase were more abundant than that those from the ADS21 resin-extracted phase, suggesting that the allelochemicals in root exudates of allelopathic rice are mainly non-polar substances. KEGG annotation of these differential metabolites revealed that these compounds were related to nutrient metabolism, secondary metabolite synthesis, signaling substance synthesis, and toxin degradation. Rice allelochemicals deposited in the ADS8 resin-extracted phase were more abundant than those in the ADS21 resin-extracted phase. Allelochemicals in root exudates of allelopathic rice are mainly non-polar substances, and long-chain fatty acids are considered as allelopathy interrelated metabolites.

PI312777: !produces! Allelochemicals 
PAL gene: !overexpresses in! PO 
PAL gene: !RNAi-silences in! PR 
Acetic acid: !higher in! High allelopathic potential rice 
ADS8 resin: !contains more! Allelochemicals 
Nutrient metabolism: !related to! Differential metabolites 
Secondary metabolite synthesis: !related to! Differential metabolites 
Signaling substance synthesis: !related to! Differential metabolites 
Toxin degradation: !related to! Differential metabolites 
Long-chain fatty acids: !considered as! Allelopathy interrelated metabolites