Soil and water pollution due to nitrate are becoming increasingly serious worldwide. The government also put forward relevant governance policies, and a large number of scholars studied chemical physics and other methods to remove nitrate in water, but the cost was substantial. Studies have found that planting systems including grasses have the potential to remove nitrates. However, there are few studies on nitrate linked pathway and nitrate assimilation during its early growth. We have evaluated three different feed-plant species with three levels of overnight seed nitrate treatments along with a control. The activity of different enzymes from 2 weeks old shoots was measured to get a comprehension of proline-associated pentose phosphate pathway coupled with nitrate assimilation and phenolic-linked antioxidant response system in these species under nitrate treatments. All three feed-plant species showed high nitrate tolerance during germination and early growth stages. It is perceived that the accumulation of total soluble phenolics and total antioxidant activity was high in all three feed-plant species under high nitrate treatments. In terms of high G6PDH activity along with low SDH activity in alfalfa, there may be a shift of carbon flux in this species under high nitrate treatments. Higher activity of these enzymes along with higher SOD and GPX activity was observed in alfalfa. The efficient mechanism of nitrate stress tolerance of alfalfa also correlated with higher photochemical efficiency. Perennial ryegrass also showed excellent potential under high nitrate treatments by adopting an efficient mechanism to counter nitrate-induced oxidative stress. Under the condition of nitrate treatment, the germination rates of the three feed-plant species are still ideal, and they have good enzyme activity and have the potential to remove nitrate.

Gene: !affects! Nitrate assimilation
Gene: !enhances! Photochemical efficiency
Gene: !synthesizes! Total soluble phenolics
Gene: !represses! SDH activity
Gene: !interacts with! G6PDH activity
Gene: !localizes to! Total antioxidant activity