Cellular membranes are dynamic structures, continuously adjusting their composition, allowing plants to respond to developmental signals, stresses, and changing environments. To facilitate transmembrane transport of substrates, plant membranes are embedded with both active and passive transporters. Aquaporins (AQPs) constitute a major family of membrane spanning channel proteins that selectively facilitate the passive bidirectional passage of substrates across biological membranes at an astonishing 10<sup>8</sup> molecules per second. AQPs are the most diversified in the plant kingdom, comprising of five major subfamilies that differ in temporal and spatial gene expression, subcellular protein localisation, substrate specificity, and post-translational regulatory mechanisms; collectively providing a dynamic transportation network spanning the entire plant. Plant AQPs can transport a range of solutes essential for numerous plant processes including, water relations, growth and development, stress responses, root nutrient uptake, and photosynthesis. The ability to manipulate AQPs towards improving plant productivity, is reliant on expanding our insight into the diversity and functional roles of AQPs. We characterised the AQP family from Nicotiana tabacum (NtAQPs; tobacco), a popular model system capable of scaling from the laboratory to the field. Tobacco is closely related to major economic crops (e.g. tomato, potato, eggplant and peppers) and itself has new commercial applications. Tobacco harbours 76 AQPs making it the second largest characterised AQP family. These fall into five distinct subfamilies, for which we characterised phylogenetic relationships, gene structures, protein sequences, selectivity filter compositions, sub-cellular localisation, and tissue-specific expression. We also identified the AQPs from tobacco's parental genomes (N. sylvestris and N. tomentosiformis), allowing us to characterise the evolutionary history of the NtAQP family. Assigning orthology to tomato and potato AQPs allowed for cross-species comparisons of conservation in protein structures, gene expression, and potential physiological roles. This study provides a comprehensive characterisation of the tobacco AQP family, and strengthens the current knowledge of AQP biology. The refined gene/protein models, tissue-specific expression analysis, and cross-species comparisons, provide valuable insight into the evolutionary history and likely physiological roles of NtAQPs and their Solanaceae orthologs. Collectively, these results will support future functional studies and help transfer basic research to applied agriculture.

AQPs: !facilitate! passive bidirectional passage of substrates
AQPs: !differ in! temporal and spatial gene expression
AQPs: !transport! solutes essential for numerous plant processes
AQPs: !harbour! 76 AQPs in Nicotiana tabacum
AQPs: !characterised! phylogenetic relationships, gene structures, protein sequences
AQPs: !identified! AQPs from tobacco's parental genomes
AQPs: !assigned orthology to! tomato and potato AQPs
AQPs: !provide insight into! evolutionary history and likely physiological roles