Over the past decades, numerous efforts were made towards the improvement of cereal crops mostly employing traditional or molecular breeding approaches. The current scenario made it possible to efficiently explore molecular understanding by targeting different genes to achieve desirable plants. To provide guaranteed food security for the rising world population particularly under vulnerable climatic condition, development of high yielding stress tolerant crops is needed. In this regard, technologies upgradation in the field of genome editing looks promising. Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 is a rapidly growing genome editing technique being effectively applied in different organisms, that includes both model and crop plants. In recent times CRISPR/Cas9 is being considered as a technology which revolutionized fundamental as well as applied research in plant breeding. Genome editing using CRISPR/Cas9 system has been successfully demonstrated in many cereal crops including rice, wheat, maize, and barley. Availability of whole genome sequence information for number of crops along with the advancement in genome-editing techniques provides several possibilities to achieve desirable traits. In this review, the options available for crop improvement by implementing CRISPR/Cas9 based genome-editing techniques with special emphasis on cereal crops have been summarized. Recent advances providing opportunities to simultaneously edit many target genes were also discussed. The review also addressed recent advancements enabling precise base editing and gene expression modifications. In addition, the article also highlighted limitations such as transformation efficiency, specific promoters and most importantly the ethical and regulatory issues related to commercial release of novel crop varieties developed through genome editing.

CRISPR/Cas9: !revolutionizes! Plant Breeding
Genome Editing: !applied to! Cereal Crops
Whole Genome Sequence: !enables! Crop Improvement
Base Editing: !provides! Opportunities
Gene Expression: !modifies! Precisely
Transformation Efficiency: !limits! Genome Editing
Promoters: !affects! Transformation Efficiency
Ethical Issues: !regulates! Commercial Release