The main source of polyunsaturated acyl-CoA in cytoplasmic acyl-CoA pool of Camelina sativa seeds are fatty acids derived from phosphatidylcholine followed by phosphatidic acid. Contribution of phosphatidylethanolamine is negligible. While phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) is the second most abundant phospholipid, phosphatidic acid (PA) only constitutes a small fraction of C. sativa seeds' polar lipids. In spite of this, the relative contribution of PA in providing fatty acids for the synthesis of acyl-CoA, supplying cytosolic acyl-CoA pool seems to be much higher than the contribution of PE. Our data indicate that up to 5% of fatty acids present in mature C. sativa seeds are first esterified with PA, in comparison to 2% first esterified with PE, before being transferred into acyl-CoA pool via backward reactions of either acyl-CoA:lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferases (CsLPAATs) or acyl-CoA:lysophoshatidylethanolamine acyltransferases (CsLPEATs). Those acyl-CoAs are later reused for lipid biosynthesis or remodelling. In the forward reactions both aforementioned acyltransferases display the highest activity at 30 °C. The spectrum of optimal pH differs for both enzymes with CsLPAATs most active between pH 7.5-9.0 and CsLPEATs between pH 9.0 to 10.0. Whereas addition of magnesium ions stimulates CsLPAATs, calcium and potassium ions inhibit them in concentrations of 0.05-2.0 mM. All three types of ions inhibit CsLPEATs activity. Both tested acyltransferases present the highest preferences towards 16:0-CoA and unsaturated 18-carbon acyl-CoAs in forward reactions. However, CsLPAATs preferentially utilise 18:1-CoA and CsLPEATs preferentially utilise 18:2-CoA while catalysing fatty acid remodelling of PA and PE, respectively.

Phosphatidylcholine: !provides! fatty acids 
Phosphatidic acid: !contributes more to! acyl-CoA pool 
CsLPAATs: !catalyse! backward reactions 
CsLPEATs: !catalyse! backward reactions 
CsLPAATs: !optimal at! 30°C 
CsLPEATs: !optimal at! 9.0-10.0 pH 
CsLPAATs: !stimulated by! magnesium ions 
CsLPAATs: !inhibited by! calcium/potassium ions 
CsLPEATs: !inhibited by! calcium/potassium ions 
CsLPAATs: !prefers! 16:0-CoA/18:1-CoA 
CsLPEATs: !prefers! 18:2-CoA