['32538516', 'Triacylglycerols have important physiological roles in photosynthetic organisms,  and are widely used as food, feed and industrial materials in our daily life.  Phospholipid:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (PDAT) is the pivotal enzyme  catalyzing the acyl-CoA-independent biosynthesis of triacylglycerols, which is  unique in plants, algae and fungi, but not in animals, and has essential  functions in plant and algal growth, development and stress responses. Currently,  this enzyme has yet to be examined in an evolutionary context at the level of the  green lineage. Some fundamental questions remain unanswered, such as how PDATs  evolved in photosynthetic organisms and whether the evolution of terrestrial  plant PDATs from a lineage of charophyte green algae diverges in enzyme function.  As such, we used molecular evolutionary analysis and biochemical assays to  address these questions. Our results indicated that PDAT underwent divergent  evolution in the green lineage: PDATs exist in a wide range of plants and algae,  but not in cyanobacteria. Although PDATs exhibit the conservation of several  features, phylogenetic and selection-pressure analyses revealed that overall they  evolved to be highly divergent, driven by different selection constraints.  Positive selection, as one major driving force, may have resulted in enzymes with  a higher functional importance in land plants than green algae. Further  structural and mutagenesis analyses demonstrated that some amino acid sites under  positive selection are critically important to PDAT structure and function, and  may be central in lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase family enzymes in general.', '2020 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.14880', 'ORCID:']

PDAT: !catalyzes! Triacylglycerols 
PDAT: !evolved in! Green lineage 
PDAT: !exists in! Plants and algae 
PDAT: !driven by! Different selection constraints 
Positive selection: !may have resulted in! Enzymes with higher functional importance 
Amino acid sites: !under positive selection are! Critically important to PDAT structure and function