['32537558', 'Glutaredoxins (GRXs) are small oxidoreductase enzymes that can reduce disulfide  bonds in target proteins. The class III GRX gene family is unique to land plants,  and Arabidopsis thaliana has 21 class III GRXs, which remain largely  uncharacterized. About 80% of A. thaliana class III GRXs are transcriptionally  regulated by nitrate, and several recent studies have suggested roles for these  GRXs in nitrogen signaling. Our objective was to functionally characterize two  nitrate-induced GRX genes, AtGRXS5 and AtGRXS8, defining their roles in signaling  and development in the A. thaliana root. We demonstrated that AtGRXS5 and AtGRXS8  are primarily expressed in root and shoot vasculature (phloem), and that the  corresponding GRX proteins display nucleo-cytosolic subcellular localization.  Ectopic expression of AtGRXS8 in transgenic plants caused major alterations in  root system architecture: Normal primary root development, but a near absence of  lateral roots. RNA sequencing demonstrated that the roots of  AtGRXS8-overexpressing plants show strongly reduced transcript abundance for many  primary nitrate response genes, including the major high-affinity nitrate  transporters. Correspondingly, high-affinity nitrate uptake and the transport of  nitrate from roots to shoots are compromised in AtGRXS8-overexpressing plants.  Finally, we demonstrated that the AtGRXS8 protein can physically interact with  the TGA1 and TGA4 transcription factors, which are central regulators of early  transcriptional responses to nitrate in A. thaliana roots. Overall, these results  suggest that AtGRXS8 acts to quench both transcriptional and developmental  aspects of primary nitrate response, potentially by interfering with the activity  of the TGA1 and TGA4 transcription factors.', '2020 Jun', 'Plant Direct', '10.1002/pld3.227', 'ORCID:']

AtGRXS5: !localizes to! root and shoot vasculature 
AtGRXS8: !localizes to! nucleo-cytosolic subcellular localization 
AtGRXS8: !enhances! major alterations in root system architecture 
AtGRXS8: !represses! primary nitrate response genes 
AtGRXS8: !interacts with! TGA1 and TGA4 transcription factors