Cereal endosperm represents the most important source of the world's food; nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms underlying cell and tissue differentiation in cereal grains remain poorly understood. Endosperm cellularization commences at the maternal-filial intersection of grains and generates endosperm transfer cells (ETCs), a cell type with a prominent anatomy optimized for efficient nutrient transport. Barley HISTIDINE KINASE1 (HvHK1) was identified as a receptor component with spatially restricted expression in the syncytial endosperm where ETCs emerge. Here, we demonstrate its function in ETC fate acquisition using RNA interference-mediated downregulation of HvHK1. Repression of HvHK1 impairs cell specification in the central ETC region and the development of transfer cell morphology, and consecutively defects differentiation of adjacent endosperm tissues. Coinciding with reduced expression of HvHK1, disturbed cell plate formation and fusion were observed at the initiation of endosperm cellularization, revealing that HvHK1 triggers initial cytokinesis of ETCs. Cell-type-specific RNA sequencing confirmed loss of transfer cell identity, compromised cell wall biogenesis and reduced transport capacities in aberrant cells and elucidated two-component signaling and hormone pathways that are mediated by HvHK1. Gene regulatory network modeling was used to specify the direct targets of HvHK1; this predicted non-canonical auxin signaling elements as the main regulatory links governing cellularization of ETCs, potentially through interaction with type-B response regulators. This work provides clues to previously unknown molecular mechanisms directing ETC specification, a process with fundamental impact on grain yield in cereals.

HvHK1: !triggers! initial cytokinesis of ETCs
HvHK1: !mediates! two-component signaling and hormone pathways
HvHK1: !impairs! cell specification in the central ETC region
HvHK1: !compromises! cell wall biogenesis
HvHK1: !reduces! transport capacities in aberrant cells
HvHK1: !interacts with! type-B response regulators
HvHK1: !governs! cellularization of ETCs