Theoretically, paralogous genes generated through whole genome duplications should share identical expression levels due to their identical sequences and chromatin environments. However, functional divergences and expression differences have arisen due to selective pressures throughout evolution. A comprehensive investigation of the expression patterns of paralogous gene pairs in response to various stresses and a study of correlations between the expression levels and sequence divergences of the paralogs are needed. In this study, we analyzed the expression patterns of paralogous genes under different types of stress and investigated the correlations between the expression levels and sequence divergences of the paralogs. We analyzed the differential expression patterns of the paralogs under four different types of stress (drought, cold, infection, and herbivory) and classified them into three main types according to their expression patterns. We then further analyzed the differential expression patterns under various degrees of stress and constructed corresponding co-expression networks of differentially expressed paralogs and transcription factors. Finally, we investigated the correlations between the expression levels and sequence divergences of the paralogs and identified positive correlations between expression level and sequence divergence. With regard to sequence divergence, we identified correlations between selective pressures and phylogenetic relationships. These results shed light on differential expression patterns of paralogs in response to environmental stresses and are helpful for understanding the relationships between expression levels and sequences divergences.

paralogs: !share! expression levels
paralogs: !differ in! expression patterns
paralogs: !classified into! 3 types
paralogs: !correlated with! sequence divergences
paralogs: !positively correlated with! expression levels
sequence divergence: !correlated with! selective pressures
sequence divergence: !correlated with! phylogenetic relationships