The biostimulant potential of three different organic acids (OAs) present in the rhizosphere, specifically lactic, oxalic, and citric acids, have been studied. The results showed a rapid and complete metabolism of these three acids with soil microorganisms using them as a source of carbon and energy. Biostimulation was confirmed by soil biochemical studies which showed an increase in enzymatic activities, such as dehydrogenase and phosphatase, lactic and citric acids being those that produced the greatest biostimulation. With regard to microbiota composition, amplicon sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene showed changes in the structure of soil microbial communities. Applying OAs produced a decrease in richness and diversity indices, inducing specific changes in the structure of the microbiological communities. Applying lactic acid induced rapid changes in microbiota composition at both phylum and family taxonomic levels, favoring the proliferation of microorganisms involved in its degradation and soil fertility, such as the genus <i>Bacillus</i> and the family Micrococcaceae. Once the lactic acid was degraded, the biodiversity tended to return to similar phyla, but specific distinctive families and genera remained, leaving a pattern of induction of taxa described as plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB), such as the <i>Sinorhizobium</i> and <i>Lysobacter</i> genera, and the Pseudomonaceae family. Similar behavior was found with citric acid, which favored the proliferation and dominance of microorganisms of the Clostridiaceae family, involved in its degradation, as well as microorganisms of both the Micrococcaceae and Pseudomonadaceae families which were found on day 7, leaving a similar pattern of induction as that found after the mineralization of lactic acid. On the other hand, oxalic acid induced long-lasting changes in the bacterial community composition. This was characterized by an increase in the proportion of the Burkholderiales order, which includes microorganisms involved in the degradation of this acid and microorganisms described as PGPB. This study presents evidence supporting the use of OAs as potential soil fertility inducers, due both to their effects in enhancing the dominance of taxa described as PGPB and to their stimulating soil microbial activity.

lactic acid: !favors! genus Bacillus 
lactic acid: !favors! family Micrococcaceae 
citric acid: !favors! family Clostridiaceae 
citric acid: !favors! family Micrococcaceae 
citric acid: !favors! family Pseudomonadaceae 
oxalic acid: !increases! proportion of Burkholderiales order