Recent studies have demonstrated that exogenous polyamines have protective effects under various stress condition. A broader understanding of the role of the polyamine pool fine regulation and the alterations of polyamine-related physiological processes could be obtained by comparing the stress effects in different genotypes. In this study, the impact of pre-treatment with putrescine in response to osmotic stress was investigated in the drought-tolerant Katya and drought-sensitive Zora wheat (Triticum aestivum) cultivars. Photosynthetic performance, in vivo thermoluminescence emission from leaves, leaf temperature, polyamine and salicylic acid levels, contents of osmoprotectants, and activities of antioxidant enzymes in the leaves were investigated not only to reveal differences in the physiological processes associated to drought tolerance, but to highlight the modulating strategies of polyamine metabolism between a drought-tolerant and a drought-sensitive wheat genotype. Results showed that the tolerance of Katya under osmotic stress conditions was characterized by higher photosynthetic ability, stable charge separation across the thylakoid membrane in photosystem II, higher proline accumulation and antioxidant activity. Thermoluminescence also revealed differences between the two varieties - a downshift of the B band and an increase of the afterglow band under osmotic stress in Zora, providing original complementary information to leaf photosynthesis. Katya variety exhibited higher constitutive levels of the signaling molecules putrescine and salicylic acid compared to the sensitive Zora. However, responses to exogenous putrescine were more advantageous for the sensitive variety under PEG treatment, which may be in relation with the decreased catabolism of polyamines, suggesting the increased need for polyamine under stress conditions.

Gene: !affects! Photosynthetic performance
Gene: !affects! Thermoluminescence emission
Gene: !affects! Leaf temperature
Gene: !affects! Polyamine levels
Gene: !affects! Salicylic acid levels
Gene: !affects! Osmoprotectant contents
Gene: !affects! Antioxidant enzyme activities
Gene: !enhances! Drought tolerance
Gene: !enhances! Charge separation
Gene: !enhances! Proline accumulation
Gene: !enhances! Antioxidant activity
Gene: !represses! Catabolism of polyamines