Global demand for phosphorus (P) requires new agronomic practices to address sustainability challenges while increasing food production. Foliar P fertilization could increase P use efficiency; however, leaf entry pathways for inorganic phosphate ion (Pi) uptake remain unknown, and it is unclear whether foliar P applications can meet plant nutrient demands. We developed two techniques to trace foliar P uptake in P-deficient spring barley (<i>Hordeum vulgare</i>) and to monitor the effectiveness of the treatment on restoring P functionality. First, a whole-leaf P status assay was developed using an IMAGING PAM system; nonphotochemical quenching was a proxy for P status, as P-deficient barley developed nonphotochemical quenching at a faster rate than P-sufficient barley. The assay showed restoration of P functionality in P-deficient plants 24 h after foliar P application. Treated leaves reverted to P deficiency after 7 d, while newly emerging leaves exhibited partial restoration compared with untreated P-deficient plants, indicating Pi remobilization. Second, vanadate was tested as a possible foliar Pi tracer using high-resolution laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry elemental mapping. The strong colocalization of vanadium and P signal intensities demonstrated that vanadate was a sensitive and useful Pi tracer. Vanadate and Pi uptake predominantly occurred via fiber cells located above leaf veins, with pathways to the vascular tissue possibly facilitated by the bundle sheath extension. Minor indications of stomatal and cuticular Pi uptake were also observed. These techniques provided an approach to understand how Pi crosses the leaf surface and assimilates to meet plant nutrient demands.

Foliar P fertilization: !increases! P use efficiency 
IMAGING PAM system: !measures! P status 
P-deficient plants: !develop! nonphotochemical quenching 
Foliar P application: !restores! P functionality 
Vanadate: !traces! Pi uptake 
Laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry: !maps! Vanadium and P signal intensities 
Fiber cells: !facilitate! Pathways to vascular tissue 
Stomata/cuticle: !show! Minor indications of Pi uptake