Ionizing radiation is a genotoxic anthropogenic stressor. It can cause heritable changes in the plant genome, which can be either adaptive or detrimental. There is still considerable uncertainty about the effects of chronic low-intensity doses since earlier studies reported somewhat contradictory conclusions. Our project focused on the recovery from the multiyear chronic ionizing radiation stress. Soybean (Glycine max) was grown in field plots located at the Chernobyl exclusion zone and transferred to the clean ground in the subsequent generation. We profiled proteome of mature seeds by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Overall, 15 differentially abundant protein spots were identified in the field comparison and 11 in the recovery generation, primarily belonging to storage proteins, disease/defense, and metabolism categories. Data suggested that during multigenerational growth in a contaminated environment, detrimental heritable changes were accumulated. Chlorophyll fluorescence parameters were measured on the late vegetative state, pointing to partial recovery of photosynthesis from stress imposed by contaminating radionuclides. A plausible explanation for the observed phenomena is insufficient provisioning of seeds by lower quality resources, causing a persistent effect in the offspring generation. Additionally, we hypothesized that immunity against phytopathogens was compromised in the contaminated field, but perhaps even primed in the clean ground, yet this idea requires direct functional validation in future experiments. Despite showing clear signs of physiological recovery, one season was not enough to normalize biochemical processes. Overall, our data contribute to the more informed agricultural radioprotection.

Ionizing radiation: !causes! heritable changes
Soybean: !grown in! Chernobyl exclusion zone
Proteome: !profiled in! mature seeds
Storage proteins: !differentially abundant in! field comparison
Metabolism category: !differentially abundant in! recovery generation
Chlorophyll fluorescence parameters: !measured on! late vegetative state
Lower quality resources: !causing persistent effect in! offspring generation
Immunity against phytopathogens: !hypothesized to be compromised in! contaminated field