We previously developed a large-scale genome restructuring technology called the TAQing system. It can induce genomic rearrangements by introducing transient and conditional formation of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) via heat activation of a restriction enzyme TaqI, which can cleave DNA at 5'-TCGA-3' sequences in the genome at higher temperatures (37-42°C). Such heat treatment sometimes confers lethal damage in certain plant species and TaqI cannot induce rearrangements in AT-rich regions. To overcome such problems we developed an extended TAQing (Ex-TAQing) system, which enables the use of a wider range of restriction enzymes active at standard plant-growing temperatures. We established the Ex-TAQing system using MseI that can efficiently cleave DNA at room temperature (at temperatures ranging from 22 to 25°C) and the 5'-TTAA-3' sequence which is highly abundant in the Arabidopsis genome. A synthetic intron-spanning MseI gene, which was placed downstream of a heat-shock-inducible promoter, was conditionally expressed upon milder heat treatment (33°C) to generate DSBs in Arabidopsis chromosomes. Genome resequencing revealed various types of genomic rearrangements, including copy number variations, translocation and direct end-joining at MseI cleavage sites. The Ex-TAQing system could induce large-scale rearrangements in diploids more frequently (17.4%, n = 23) than the standard TAQing system. The application of this system to tetraploids generated several strains with chromosomal rearrangements associated with beneficial phenotypes, such as high salinity stress tolerance and hypersensitivity to abscisic acid. We have developed the Ex-TAQing system, allowing more diverse patterns of genomic rearrangements, by employing various types of endonucleases and have opened a way to expand the capacity for artificial genome reorganization.

TaqI: !cleaves! DNA
MseI: !cleaves! DNA
Ex-TAQing system: !employs! MseI
Ex-TAQing system: !induces! genomic rearrangements
Ex-TAQing system: !generates! strains with chromosomal rearrangements
Ex-TAQing system: !expands! capacity for artificial genome reorganization