Sucrose non-fermenting 1 related protein kinases (SnRK) play crucial roles in responding to biotic and abiotic stresses through activating protein phosphorylation pathways. However, little information of SnRK genes was available in Brassica napus, one of important oil crops. Recently, the released sequences of the reference genome of B.napus provide a good chance to perform genome-wide identification and characterization of BnSnRK gene family in the rapeseed. Totally 114 SnRK genes distributed on 19 chromosomes were identified in the genome of B.napus and classified into three subfamilies on the basis of phylogenetic analysis and the domain types. According to gene structure and motif composition analysis, the BnSnRK sequences showed obvious divergence among three subfamilies. Gene duplication and synteny between the genomes of the rapeseed and Arabidopsis were also analyzed to provide insights into the evolutionary characteristics of BnSnRK family genes. Cis-element analysis revealed that BnSnRKs may response to diverse environmental stresses. Moreover, the expression patterns of BnSnRKs in various tissues and under diverse abiotic stresses were distinct difference. Besides, Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) distribution analysis suggests the function disparity of BnSnRK family genes in different genotypes of the rapeseed. We examined genomic structures, evolution features, expression patterns and SNP distribution of 114 BnSnRKs. The results provide valuable information for functional characterization of BnSnRK genes in future studies.

SnRK: !plays crucial roles in! responding to biotic and abiotic stresses
B.napus: !has! 114 SnRK genes
BnSnRKs: !classified into! three subfamilies
BnSnRKs: !showed divergence among! three subfamilies
Gene duplication: !occurred between! genomes of rapeseed and Arabidopsis
Cis-element analysis: !revealed that BnSnRKs may response to! diverse environmental stresses
Expression patterns: !were distinct for! BnSnRKs in various tissues and under diverse abiotic stresses
SNP distribution: !suggested function disparity of BnSnRK family genes in! different genotypes of the rapeseed