Synergism between enzymes is of crucial importance in cell metabolism. This synergism occurs often through a spatial organisation favouring proximity and substrate channelling. In this context, we developed a strategy for evaluating the impact of the geometry between two enzymes involved in nature in the recycling of the carbon derived from plant cell wall polymers. By using an innovative covalent association process using two protein fragments, Jo and In, we produced two bi-modular chimeric complexes connecting a xylanase and a xylosidase, involved in the deconstruction of xylose-based plant cell wall polymer. We first show that the intrinsic activity of the individual enzymes was preserved. Small Angle X-rays Scattering (SAXS) analysis of the complexes highlighted two different spatial organisations in solution, affecting both the distance between the enzymes (53 Å and 28 Å) and the distance between the catalytic pockets (94 Å and 75 Å). Reducing sugar and HPAEC-PAD analysis revealed different behaviour regarding the hydrolysis of Beechwood xylan. After 24 h of hydrolysis, one complex was able to release a higher amount of reducing sugar compare to the free enzymes (i.e., 15,640 and 14,549 µM of equivalent xylose, respectively). However, more interestingly, the two complexes were able to release variable percentages of xylooligosaccharides compared to the free enzymes. The structure of the complexes revealed some putative steric hindrance, which impacted both enzymatic efficiency and the product profile. This report shows that controlling the spatial geometry between two enzymes would help to better investigate synergism effect within complex multi-enzymatic machinery and control the final product.

xylanase: !connects to! xylosidase 
xylanase: !interacts with! xylosidase 
complexes: !release! higher amount of reducing sugar 
complexes: !release! variable percentages of xylooligosaccharides 
structure: !affects! enzymatic efficiency 
structure: !affects! product profile