Fritillariae Bulbus are the most commonly used antitussive and edible herbs in China. Based on UPLC-QTOF-MS and UPLC-QQQ-MS, the validated MRM-based non-targeted quantitative method was applied to determinate the contents of 48 Fritillaria alkaloids (FAs) in three Fritillaria species (F. thunbergii Miq., F. unibracteata and F. ussuriensis). The RNA-Seq results showed that gene transcript levels have different expression patterns in three Fritillaria species. Based on transcriptome data, the full-length cDNA sequences of squalene epoxidase gene were cloned and characterized. Natural evolution of squalene epoxidase genes resulted in four mutations (C236R, M489L, G510A and K517R) in three Fritillaria species. Molecular docking analysis showed that the 236 residue is located inside the pocket and the binding center while other three residues are located on the surface of the protein. Functional verification indicated the mutations of SQE (C236R) could effectively increase the activity of SQE and obtain higher yield of 2,3-oxidosqualene in recombinant yeast. And the mutations of SQE (M489L and G510A), which increased the hydrophobicity of the protein surface, could also enhance the activity of SQE. This study provides major insights into the metabolites differentiation of FAs biosynthesis, and a firm foundation for the quality control and metabolic engineering of Fritillariae bulbus.

Fritillariae Bulbus: !contains! 48 FAs 
UPLC-QTOF-MS/UPLC-QQQ-MS: !determinate! contents of 48 FAs 
RNA-Seq: !showed! expression patterns in three Fritillaria species 
Squalene epoxidase gene: !cloned and characterized! from transcriptome data 
Natural evolution: !resulted in! four mutations in three Fritillaria species 
Molecular docking analysis: !showed! 236 residue located inside pocket and binding center 
Functional verification: !indicated! C236R mutation could increase activity of SQE 
M489L/G510A mutations: !increased! hydrophobicity of protein surface 
Metabolic engineering: !provides foundation for! quality control of Fritillariae bulbus