MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small endogenous RNAs that play important regulatory roles in plants by negatively affecting gene expression. Studies on the identification of miRNAs and their functions in various plant species and organs have significantly contributed to plant development research. In the current study, we utilized high-throughput sequencing to detect the miRNAs in the root, stem, and leaf tissues of raspberry (<i>Rubus idaeus</i>). A total of more than 35 million small RNA reads ranging in size from 18 to 35 nucleotides were obtained, with 147 known miRNAs and 542 novel miRNAs identified among the three organs. Sequence verification and the relative expression profiles of the six known miRNAs were investigated by stem-loop quantitative real-time PCR. Furthermore, the potential target genes of the known and novel miRNAs were predicted and subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway annotation. Enrichment analysis of the GO-associated biological processes and molecular functions revealed that these target genes were potentially involved in a wide range of metabolic pathways and developmental processes. Moreover, the miRNA target prediction revealed that most of the targets predicted as transcription factor-coding genes are involved in cellular and metabolic processes. This report is the first to identify miRNAs in raspberry. The detected miRNAs were analyzed by cluster analysis according to their expression, which revealed that these conservative miRNAs are necessary for plant functioning. The results add novel miRNAs to the raspberry transcriptome, providing a useful resource for the further elucidation of the functional roles of miRNAs in raspberry growth and development.

MicroRNA: !negatively affects! gene expression
MicroRNA: !identifies! novel miRNAs
MicroRNA: !predicts! target genes
Target genes: !involved in! metabolic pathways
Target genes: !involved in! developmental processes
Target genes: !coding for! transcription factors