The aim of this work was to evaluate the general role of the vacuolar pyrophosphatase proton pump (V-PPase) in sucrose accumulation in citrus species. First, three citrus V-PPase genes, designated CsVPP-1, CsVPP-2, and CsVPP-4, were identified in the citrus genome. CsVPP-1 and CsVPP-2 belonging to citrus type I V-PPase genes are targeted to the tonoplast, and CsVPP-4 belonging to citrus type II V-PPase genes is located in the Golgi bodies. Moreover, there was a significantly positive correlation between transcript levels of type I V-PPase genes and sucrose, rather than hexose, content in fruits of seven citrus cultivars. Drought and abscisic acid treatments significantly induced the CsVPP-1 and CsVPP-2 transcript levels, as well as the sucrose content. The overexpression of type I V-PPase genes significantly increased PPase activity, decreased pyrophosphate contents, and increased sucrose contents, whereas V-PPase inhibition produced the opposite effect in both citrus fruits and leaves. Furthermore, altering the expression levels of type I V-PPase genes significantly influenced the transcript levels of sucrose transporter genes. Taken together, this study demonstrated that CsVPP-1 and CsVPP-2 play key roles in sucrose storage in the vacuole by regulating pyrophosphate homeostasis, ultimately the sucrose biosynthesis and transcript levels of sucrose transport genes, providing a novel lead for engineering or breeding modified taste in citrus and other fruits.

CsVPP-1: !localizes to! tonoplast 
CsVPP-2: !localizes to! tonoplast 
CsVPP-4: !localizes to! Golgi bodies 
CsVPP-1: !correlates with! sucrose content 
CsVPP-2: !correlates with! sucrose content 
CsVPP-1: !enhances! PPase activity 
CsVPP-2: !enhances! PPase activity 
CsVPP-1: !represses! pyrophosphate content 
CsVPP-2: !represses! pyrophosphate content 
CsVPP-1: !enhances! sucrose content 
CsVPP-2: !enhances! sucrose content 
CsVPP-1: !affects! transcript levels of sucrose transporter genes 
CsVPP-2: !affects! transcript levels of sucrose transporter genes