Starch is synthesized during daylight for temporary storage in leaves and then degraded during the subsequent night to support plant growth and development. Impairment of starch degradation leads to stunted growth, even senescence and death. The nuclear pore complex is involved in many cellular processes, but its relationship with starch degradation has been unclear until now. We previously identified that two Nucleoporin98 genes (Nup98a and Nup98b) redundantly regulate flowering via the CONSTANS (CO)-independent pathway in Arabidopsis thaliana. The double mutant also shows severe senescence phenotypes. We find that Nucleoporin 98 participates in the regulation of sugar metabolism in leaves and is also involved in senescence regulation in Arabidopsis. We show that Nup98a and Nup98b function redundantly at different stages of starch degradation. The nup98a-1 nup98b-1 double mutant accumulates more starch, showing a severe early senescence phenotype compared to wild type plants. The expression of marker genes related to starch degradation is impaired in the nup98a-1 nup98b-1 double mutant, and marker genes of carbon starvation and senescence express their products earlier and in higher abundance than in wild type plants, suggesting that abnormalities in energy metabolism are the main cause of senescence in the double mutant. Addition of sucrose to the growth medium rescues early senescence phenotypes of the nup98a-1 nup98b-1 mutant. Our results provide evidence for a novel role of the nuclear pore complex in energy metabolism related to growth and development, in which Nup98 functions in starch degradation to control growth regulation in Arabidopsis.

Nup98a: !regulates! flowering
Nup98b: !regulates! flowering
Nup98a: !involved in! sugar metabolism
Nup98b: !involved in! sugar metabolism
Nup98a: !functions in! starch degradation
Nup98b: !functions in! starch degradation
Starch: !accumulated by! nup98a-1 nup98b-1 double mutant
Marker genes: !expressed differently in! nup98a-1 nup98b-1 double mutant
Sucrose: !rescues! early senescence phenotypes of nup98a-1 nup98b-1 mutant