Soybean is an important oilseed crop grown globally. However, two examples of environmental stresses that drastically regulate soybean growth are low light and high-temperature. Emerging evidence suggests a possible interconnection between these two environmental stimuli. Low light and high-temperature as individual factors have been reported to regulate plant hypocotyl elongation. However, their interactive signal effect on soybean growth and development remains largely unclear. Here, we report that gibberellins (GAs) and auxin are required for soybean hypocotyl elongation under low light and high-temperature interaction. Our analysis indicated that low light and high-temperature interaction enhanced the regulation of soybean hypocotyl elongation and that the endogenous GA<sub>3</sub> , GA<sub>7</sub> , indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and indole-3-pyruvate (IPA) contents significantly increased. Again, analysis of the effect of exogenous phytohormones and biosynthesis inhibitors treatments showed that exogenous GA, IAA, and paclobutrazol (PAC), 2, 3, 5,-triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA) treatments significantly regulated soybean seedlings growth under low light and high-temperature interaction. Further qRT-PCR analysis showed that the expression level of GA biosynthesis pathway genes (GmGA3ox1, GmGA3ox2 and GmGA3) and auxin biosynthesis pathway genes (GmYUCCA3, GmYUCCA5 and GmYUCCA7) significantly increased under (i) low light and high-temperature interaction and (ii) exogenous GA and IAA treatments. Altogether, these observations support the hypothesis that gibberellins and auxin regulate soybean hypocotyl elongation under low light and high-temperature stress interaction.

Low light: !enhances! High-temperature 
Gibberellins: !regulates! Soybean hypocotyl elongation 
High-temperature: !increases! Endogenous GA<sub>3</sub>, GA<sub>7</sub>, IAA, and IPA contents 
Exogenous phytohormones: !regulates! Soybean seedlings growth 
GA biosynthesis pathway genes: !increases expression level of! Low light and high-temperature interaction 
Auxin biosynthesis pathway genes: !increases expression level of! Low light and high-temperature interaction 
Exogenous GA and IAA treatments: !increases expression level of! GA biosynthesis pathway genes and auxin biosynthesis pathway genes