The effect of the lighting environment during postharvest storage of ornamentals has largely been neglected in previous research. Anthurium is a cold-sensitive species originating from tropical climates and is widely cultivated all around the world for its colorful spathes. To investigate the effects of light spectrum on the performance of Anthurium cut flowers under cold storage, two cultivars [Calore (red spathe) and Angel (withe spathe)] were placed at low temperature (4°C), either in darkness (D) or under different light spectra [red (R), blue (B), 70:30% red:blue (RB), and white (W)] at an intensity of 125 µmol.m<sup>-2</sup>.s<sup>-1</sup>. In both cultivars, the longest and shortest vase lives were observed in spathes exposed to the R and B spectra, respectively. In both cultivars, electrolyte leakage (EL) of spathe was highest under the B and W spectra and lowest under the R spectrum. The highest rate of flower water loss from the spathes was observed under the B-containing light spectra, whereas the lowest rate of water loss was observed in D and under the R spectrum. Negative correlations were observed between EL and vase life and between anthocyanin concentration and EL for both Anthurium cultivars. A positive correlation was found between anthocyanin concentration and vase life. For both Anthurium cultivars, spectral light composition with higher percentage of B resulted in higher EL and as a result shorter vase life in cut flowers under cold storage condition. The negative effect of the B light spectrum on vase life of Anthurium can be explained through its effect on water loss and on oxidative stress and membrane integrity. The quality of Anthurium cut flowers should benefit from environments with restricted B light spectrum during postharvest handling.

Light: !affects! Anthurium
EL: !correlates with! Vase Life
EL: !correlates with! Anthocyanin Concentration
Anthocyanin Concentration: !correlates with! Vase Life
B Light Spectrum: !increases! EL
B Light Spectrum: !decreases! Vase Life
B Light Spectrum: !increases! Water Loss