The response of compensatory growth is an important adaptive strategy for plants to grazing. However, most previous studies on compensatory growth of plants focused on the compensation of the biomass or the number of sexual reproductive offspring and neglected the compensatory growth of vegetative reproduction (VR). This is important not only for plant compensatory growth studies, but also for theoretical and practical studies of grassland production. The clonal tussock grass <i>Hordeum brevisubulatum</i> was selected as the research object. Four different clipping severities (unclipping and clipping stubble at heights of 15, 10, and 5 cm) at the jointing stage and flowering stage were implemented to study the effect of simulated grazing. To explore the effect of recovery growth time on plant growth after simulated grazing, three sampling times were used at different recovery times after simulated grazing (1, 3, and 7 weeks). We found that light and moderate grazing severity significantly increased the number of vegetative reproduction modules, the promotion of simulated grazing on the number of vegetative reproduction modules was higher in the jointing stage than the flowering stage, and the increase in simulated grazing severity decreased with prolonged recovery growth time. The number of tillers significantly decreased with the increase in simulated grazing in both the jointing and flowering stages at 1 week after damage, and the decreasing effect weakened with the prolonged recovery growth time. The bud number mainly showed over-compensation, the juvenile tiller number showed complete compensation, and the tiller number showed under-compensation at 1 and 3 weeks after recovery growth. The number of tillers showed complete compensation under different grazing severities in the jointing stage, while it showed under-compensation in the flowering stage at 7 weeks after recovery growth. Our results indicated that different grazing severities in the jointing stage could promote the output of tillers with matter production capacity from vegetative reproduction modules, as well as improve the capability of compensatory growth. Therefore, in plant production, there will be a sustainable development effect on the renewal and productivity of the <i>H. brevisubulatum</i> population, resulting in different grazing severities in the jointing stage.

Grazing: !promotes! Number of vegetative reproduction modules 
Simulated grazing: !increases! Number of tillers 
Grazing severity: !decreases! Number of tillers 
Recovery growth time: !weakens! Decreasing effect of grazing severity 
Vegetative reproduction modules: !improve! Capability of compensatory growth