Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam.) is a highly heterozygous autohexaploid crop with high yield and high anthocyanin content. Purple sweet potato is the main source of anthocyanins, and the mechanism of anthocyanin biosynthesis in storage roots has not been fully revealed. In order to reveal the mechanism of anthocyanin biosynthesis and identify new homologous genes involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis in the storage roots of sweet potato, we used Ningzishu 1 and Jizishu 2 as parents to construct a F<sub>1</sub> hybrid population. Seven anthocyanin-containing lines and three anthocyanin-free lines were selected for full-length and second-generation transcriptome analyses. A total of 598,375 circular consensus sequencing reads were identified from full-length transcriptome sequencing. After analysis and correction of second-generation transcriptome data, 41,356 transcripts and 18,176 unigenes were obtained. Through a comparative analysis between anthocyanin-containing and anthocyanin-free groups 2329 unigenes were found to be significantly differentially expressed, of which 1235 were significantly up-regulated and 1094 were significantly down-regulated. GO enrichment analysis showed that the differentially expressed unigenes were significantly enriched in molecular function and biological process. KEGG enrichment analysis showed that the up-regulated unigenes were significantly enriched in the flavonoid biosynthesis and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathways, and the down-regulated unigenes were significantly enriched in the plant hormone signal transduction pathway. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis of differentially expressed unigenes revealed that anthocyanin biosynthesis genes were co-expressed with transcription factors such as MYB, bHLH and WRKY at the transcription level. Our study will shed light on the regulatory mechanism of anthocyanin biosynthesis in sweet potato storage roots at the transcriptome level.

Sweet potato: !produces! Anthocyanins 
Ningzishu 1/Jizishu 2: !hybridize to form! F1 hybrid population 
Anthocyanin-containing/Anthocyanin-free lines: !compared in! Transcriptome analysis 
Differentially expressed unigenes: !enriched in! Molecular function/Biological process 
Flavonoid biosynthesis/Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathways: !upregulated! Unigenes 
Plant hormone signal transduction pathway: !downregulated! Unigenes 
MYB/bHLH/WRKY transcription factors: !co-expressed with! Anthocyanin biosynthesis genes