Autophagic recycling of proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and organelles is essential for cellular homeostasis and optimal health, especially under nutrient-limiting conditions. To better understand how this turnover affects plant growth, development, and survival upon nutrient stress, we applied an integrated multiomics approach to study maize (<i>Zea mays</i>) autophagy mutants subjected to fixed-carbon starvation induced by darkness. Broad metabolic alterations were evident in leaves missing the core autophagy component ATG12 under normal growth conditions (e.g., lipids and secondary metabolism), while changes in amino acid-, carbohydrate-, and nucleotide-related metabolites selectively emerged during fixed-carbon starvation. Through combined proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, we identified numerous autophagy-responsive proteins, which revealed processes underpinning the various metabolic changes seen during carbon stress as well as potential autophagic cargo. Strikingly, a strong upregulation of various catabolic processes was observed in the absence of autophagy, including increases in simple carbohydrate levels with a commensurate drop in starch levels, elevated free amino acid levels with a corresponding reduction in intact protein levels, and a strong increase in the abundance of several nitrogen-rich nucleotide catabolites. Altogether, this analysis showed that fixed-carbon starvation in the absence of autophagy adjusts the choice of respiratory substrates, promotes the transition of peroxisomes to glyoxysomes, and enhances the retention of assimilated nitrogen.

ATG12: !affects! Metabolic Alterations 
ATG12: !promotes! Transition of Peroxisomes to Glyoxysomes 
ATG12: !enhances! Retention of Assimilated Nitrogen 
Carbon Stress: !induces! Changes in Amino Acid, Carbohydrate, and Nucleotide-Related Metabolites 
Autophagy-Responsive Proteins: !reveal! Processes Underpinning Metabolic Changes 
Catabolic Processes: !upregulated! in Absence of Autophagy