Gibberellin (GA) is one of the most essential phytohormones that modulate plant growth and development. Jute (Corchorus sp.) is the second most important source of bast fiber. Our result has shown that exogenous GA can positively regulate jute height and related characteristics which mean increasing endogenous GA production will help to get a jute variety with improved characteristics. However, genes involved in jute GA biosynthesis have not been analyzed precisely. Genome-wide analysis identified twenty-two candidate genes involved in jute GA biosynthesis pathway. Among them, four genes- CoCPS, CoKS, CoKO and CoKAO work in early steps. Seven CoGA20oxs, three CoGA3oxs, and eight GA2oxs genes work in the later steps. These genes were characterized through phylogenetic, motif, gene structure, and promoter region analysis along with chromosomal localization. Spatial gene expression analysis revealed that 11 GA oxidases were actively related to jute GA production and four of them were marked as key regulators based on their expression level. All the biosynthesis genes both early and later steps showed tissue specificity. GA oxidase genes were under feedback regulation whereas early steps genes were not subject to such regulation. Enriched knowledge about jute GA biosynthesis pathway and genes will help to increase endogenous GA production in jute by changing the expression level of key regulator genes. CoGA20ox7, CoGA3ox2, CoGA2ox3, and CoGA2ox5 may be the most important genes for GA production.

GA: !positively regulates! jute height
CoCPS: !works in! early steps
CoKS: !works in! early steps
CoKO: !works in! early steps
CoKAO: !works in! early steps
CoGA20oxs: !works in! later steps
CoGA3oxs: !works in! later steps
CoGA2oxs: !works in! later steps
GA oxidases: !actively related to! jute GA production
GA oxidases: !marked as key regulators! based on expression level
biosynthesis genes: !show tissue specificity!
GA oxidase genes: !subject to feedback regulation!
CoGA20ox7: !most important gene for! GA production
CoGA3ox2: !most important gene for! GA production
CoGA2ox3: !most important gene for! GA production
CoGA2ox5: !most important gene for! GA production