Male sterility is an efficient trait for hybrid seed production and germplasm innovation. Until now, most studies on male sterility were on cytoplasmic and recessive genic sterility, with few on dominant genic male sterility, especially in cotton, due to lack of such mutant. We discovered a natural male sterile (MS) Sea Island cotton (G. barbadense) mutant. Genetic analysis showed the mutation was caused by a dominant mutation in a single nuclear gene. Comparative cytological observation of anther sections from MS and wild-type (WT) uncovered cellular differences in anther at and after the tetrad stage of pollen mother cells (PMC). In the MS anthers, the outer wall of pollen grains was free of spinules, the tapetum was vacuolated and showed delayed degradation, consequently, no functional pollen grains. Comparison of transcriptomes from meiosis, tetrad, mononuclear and binuclear pollen, and pollen maturation stages identified 13,783 non-redundant differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between MS and WT. Based on the number of DEGs, analyses of enriched GO terms and KEGG pathways, it was evident that significant transcriptomic changes occurred at and after the tetrad stage, consistent with cytological observation, and that the major differences were on metabolism of starch, sucrose, ascorbate, aldarate, alanine, aspartate and glutamate, and biosynthesis of cutin, suberine and wax. WGCNA analysis identified five modules containing 920 genes highly related to anther development, especially the greenyellow module with 54 genes that was highly associated with PMC meiosis and tetrad formation. A NAC transcription factor (Gh_D11G2469) was identified as a hub gene for this module, which warrants further functional characterization. We demonstrated that the MS trait was controlled by a single dominant nuclear gene and caused by delayed tapetum degradation at the tetrad stage. Comparative transcriptome analysis and gene network construction identified DEGs, enriched GO terms and metabolic pathways, and hub genes potentially associated with anther development and the MS trait. These results contribute to our understanding of dominant genic male sterility (DGMS) and provided source for innovation of cotton germplasm.

Male sterility: !caused by! dominant mutation in single nuclear gene 
dominant mutation: !delays! tapetum degradation at tetrad stage 
DEGs: !associated with! anther development and MS trait 
MS trait: !controlled by! single dominant nuclear gene 
transcriptome analysis: !identifies! enriched GO terms and metabolic pathways 
WGCNA analysis: !identifies! hub genes associated with anther development 
NAC transcription factor: !identified as! hub gene for module