Bacterial blight of rice, caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), is a devastating rice disease in Southeast Asia and West Africa. OsSWEET14, encoding a sugar transporter, is known to be a major susceptible gene of bacterial blight targeted by four different transcription activator-like (TAL) effectors from either Asian or African Xoo strains. However, the OsSWEET14 single knockout or promoter mutants in the Kitaake background are moderately resistant or even susceptible to African Xoo strains. Therefore, in this study, we knocked out OsSWEET14 in rice cv. Zhonghua 11 background for disease assessment. In this study, CRISPR/Cas9 was utilized to disrupt the function of OsSWEET14 by modifying its corresponding coding region in the genome of rice cv. Zhonghua 11 (CR-S14). In total, we obtained nine different OsSWEET14-mutant alleles. Besides conferring broad-spectrum resistance to Asian Xoo strains, tested mutant alleles also showed strong resistance to African Xoo strain AXO1947. Moreover, the expression of OsSWEET14 was detected in vascular tissues, including the stem, leaf sheath, leaf blade and root. The disruption of OsSWEET14 led to increased plant height without a reduction in yield. Disruption of OsSWEET14 in the Zhonghua 11 background is able to confer strong resistance to African Xoo strain AXO1947 and Asian Xoo strain PXO86. CR-S14 has normal reproductive growth and enhanced plant height under normal growth conditions. These results imply that CR-S14 may serve as a better tester line than sweet14 single-knockout mutant in the Kitaake background for the diagnostic kit for rice blight resistance. The genetic background and increased plant height need to be taken into consideration when utilizing OsSWEET14 for resistant rice breeding.

OsSWEET14: !affects! bacterial blight resistance 
OsSWEET14: !localizes to! vascular tissues 
CRISPR/Cas9: !disrupts! OsSWEET14 
CR-S14: !confers! strong resistance to African Xoo strain AXO1947 
CR-S14: !enhances! plant height