Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas L.) is a food consumed worldwide, an industrial raw material and new energy crop. The storage root is the most economical part of the crop. However, the mechanism of storage root initiation and development is still unclear. In this study, conserved and novel miRNAs during storage root development were identified by high-throughput sequencing technology by constructing small RNA libraries from sweet potato fibrous roots (F) and storage roots at four different developmental stages (storage roots with different diameters: 1 cm, D1; 3 cm, D3; 5 cm, D5 and 10 cm, D10). A total of 61 known miRNAs and 471 novel miRNAs were identified. In addition, 145 differentially expressed miRNAs were identified in the F library compared with the four storage root libraries, with 30 known miRNAs and 115 novel miRNAs. Moreover, the targets of the differentially expressed miRNAs were predicted and their network was further investigated by GO analysis using our previous transcriptome data. The GO analysis revealed that antioxidant activity and binding process were the most enriched terms of the target genes. The secondary structure and expression of six candidate miRNAs including three conserved miRNAs and three novel miRNAs were investigated and their predicted targets were validated by qRT-PCR. The results showed that the expression levels of the miRNAs were all consistent with the sequencing data. Most of the miRNAs and their corresponding targets had obvious negative correlations. This study contributed to elucidating the potential miRNA mediated regulatory mechanism of storage root development in sweet potato. The specific differentially expressed miRNAs in sweet potato storage roots can be used to breed high-yield sweet potatoes and other tuberous root crops.

miRNA: !identifies! conserved and novel miRNAs
miRNA: !differentially expresses! targets
miRNA: !enhances! antioxidant activity
miRNA: !binds to! binding process
miRNA: !correlates negatively with! target genes
miRNA: !validates! qRT-PCR results