Key Message A resistant E. grandis genotype showed a constitutive overexpression of genes related to resistance to myrtle rust caused by A. psidii. Abstract Myrtle rust caused by Austropuccinia psidii is considered one of the most important fungal diseases affecting Eucalyptus spp. plantations in Brazil. Although the selection and planting of resistant eucalypt genotypes have been the major strategies to manage the disease in Brazil, the molecular mechanisms involved in resistance are still unclear. In this study, we evaluated the gene expression profile of two contrasting Eucalyptus grandis genotypes in resistance level to rust by RNA-Seq. The two genotypes showed a very different background gene expression level even without A. psidii infection. The resistant genotype had a constitutive overexpression of a large number of protein-coding genes compared to the susceptible genotype. These genes were mainly associated with signal transduction, photosynthesis, regulation and response to salicylic acid (SA), and protein kinase leucine-rich receptors (PK-LRR). PK-LRR and SA mediated disease resistance are well known to be effective against obligate biotroph pathogens, such as A. psidii. In addition, at 24 h after infection, the susceptible genotype was able to activate some response, however, several resistance-related proteins had their expression level reduced with A. psidii infection. Here, we present the first analysis of E. grandis genotypes transcriptomes infected by A. psidii and it reveals a constitutive overexpression of several resistance-related genes in the resistant genotype compared to the susceptible one. Our findings have the potential to be used as candidate molecular markers for resistance to myrtle rust.

E. grandis: !overexpresses! resistance-related genes
resistant genotype: !constitutively overexpresses! protein-coding genes
signal transduction: !associated with! photosynthesis
SA: !regulates and responds to! PK-LRR
A. psidii: !induces! response in susceptible genotype
susceptible genotype: !reduces expression of! resistance-related proteins