Melatonin is a multifunctional biomolecule found in both animals and plants. In this review, the biosynthesis, levels, signaling, and possible roles of melatonin and its metabolites in plants is summarized. Tryptamine 5-hydroxylase (T5H), which catalyzes the conversion of tryptamine into serotonin, has been proposed as a target to create a melatonin knockout mutant presenting a lesion-mimic phenotype in rice. With a reduced anabolic capacity for melatonin biosynthesis and an increased catabolic capacity for melatonin metabolism, all plants generally maintain low melatonin levels. Some plants, including Arabidopsis and Nicotiana tabacum (tobacco), do not possess tryptophan decarboxylase (TDC), the first committed step enzyme required for melatonin biosynthesis. Major melatonin metabolites include cyclic 3-hydroxymelatonin (3-OHM) and 2-hydroxymelatonin (2-OHM). Other melatonin metabolites such as N<sup>1</sup> -acetyl-N<sup>2</sup> -formyl-5-methoxykynuramine (AFMK), N-acetyl-5-methoxykynuramine (AMK) and 5-methoxytryptamine (5-MT) are also produced when melatonin is applied to Oryza sativa (rice). The signaling pathways of melatonin and its metabolites act via the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, possibly with Cand2 acting as a melatonin receptor, although the integrity of Cand2 remains controversial. Melatonin mediates many important functions in growth stimulation and stress tolerance through its potent antioxidant activity and function in activating the MAPK cascade. The concentration distribution of melatonin metabolites appears to be species specific because corresponding enzymes such as M2H, M3H, catalases, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and N-acetylserotonin deacetylase (ASDAC) are differentially expressed among plant species and even among different tissues within species. Differential levels of melatonin and its metabolites can lead to differential physiological effects among plants when melatonin is either applied exogenously or overproduced through ectopic overexpression.

T5H: !catalyzes! conversion of tryptamine to serotonin 
TDC: !required for! melatonin biosynthesis 
3-OHM/2-OHM: !major metabolites of! melatonin 
AFMK/AMK/5-MT: !produced when! melatonin applied to rice 
MAPK cascade: !signaling pathways of! melatonin and its metabolites 
Cand2: !potential receptor of! melatonin 
M2H/M3H/catalases/IDO/ASDAC: !differentially expressed among! plant species