An improved CRISPR/Cas9 system with the Arabidopsis UBQ10 promoter-driven Cas9 exhibits consistently high mutation efficiency in Arabidopsis and M. truncatula. CRISPR/Cas9 is a powerful genome editing technology that has been applied in several crop species for trait improvement due to its simplicity, versatility, and specificity. However, the mutation efficiency of CRISPR/Cas9 in Arabidopsis and M. truncatula (Mt) is still challenging and inconsistent. To analyze the functionality of the CRISPR/Cas9 system in two model dicot species, four different promoter-driven Cas9 systems to target phytoene desaturase (PDS) genes were designed. Agrobacterium-mediated transformation was used for the delivery of constructed vectors to host plants. Phenotypic and genotypic analyses revealed that the Arabidopsis UBQ10 promoter-driven Cas9 significantly improves the mutation efficiency to 95% in Arabidopsis and 70% in M. truncatula. Moreover, the UBQ10-Cas9 system yielded 11% homozygous mutants in the T1 generation in Arabidopsis. Sequencing analyses of mutation events indicated that single-nucleotide insertions are the most frequent events in Arabidopsis, whereas multi-nucleotide deletions are dominant in bi-allelic and mono-allelic homozygous mutants in M. truncatula. Taken together, the UBQ10 promoter facilitates the best improvement in the CRISPR/Cas9 efficiency in PDS gene editing, followed by the EC1.2 promoter. Consistently, the improved UBQ10-Cas9 vector highly enhanced the mutation efficiency by four-fold over the commonly used 35S promoter in both dicot species.

CRISPR/Cas9: !enhances! mutation efficiency 
Arabidopsis UBQ10 promoter-driven Cas9: !improves! mutation efficiency 
Arabidopsis UBQ10 promoter-driven Cas9: !yields! 11% homozygous mutants 
Single-nucleotide insertions: !are the most frequent events! in Arabidopsis 
Multi-nucleotide deletions: !dominate! bi-allelic and mono-allelic homozygous mutants in M. truncatula 
UBQ10 promoter: !facilitates! best improvement in CRISPR/Cas9 efficiency 
EC1.2 promoter: !follows! UBQ10 promoter 
35S promoter: !is commonly used! but !four-fold less efficient! than UBQ10-Cas9 vector