Spike is one of the crop yield organs in wheat plants. Determination of the phenological stages, including heading time point (HTP), and area of spike from non-invasive phenotyping images provides the necessary information for the inference of growth-related traits. The algorithm previously developed by Qiongyan et al. for spike detection in 2-D images turns out to be less accurate when applied to the European cultivars that produce many more leaves. Therefore, we here present an improved and extended method where (i) wavelet amplitude is used as an input to the Laws texture energy-based neural network instead of original grayscale images and (ii) non-spike structures (e.g., leaves) are subsequently suppressed by combining the result of the neural network prediction with a Frangi-filtered image. Using this two-step approach, a 98.6% overall accuracy of neural network segmentation based on direct comparison with ground-truth data could be achieved. Moreover, the comparative error rate in spike HTP detection and growth correlation among the ground truth, the algorithm developed by Qiongyan et al., and the proposed algorithm are discussed in this paper. The proposed algorithm was also capable of significantly reducing the error rate of the HTP detection by 75% and improving the accuracy of spike area estimation by 50% in comparison with the Qionagyan et al. method. With these algorithmic improvements, HTP detection on a diverse set of 369 plants was performed in a high-throughput manner. This analysis demonstrated that the HTP of 104 plants (comprises of 57 genotypes) with lower biomass and tillering range (e.g., earlier-heading types) were correctly determined. However, fine-tuning or extension of the developed method is required for high biomass plants where spike emerges within green bushes. In conclusion, our proposed method allows significantly more reliable results for HTP detection and spike growth analysis to be achieved in application to European cultivars with earlier-heading types.

Wavelet amplitude: !used as input to! Laws texture energy-based neural network
Neural network prediction: !combined with! Frangi-filtered image
HTP detection: !performed in! high-throughput manner
HTP detection: !correctly determined for! 104 plants
Proposed method: !allows more reliable results for! HTP detection and spike growth analysis