Pollen abortion could be mainly attributed to abnormal meiosis in the mutant. Multiomics analysis uncovered significant epigenetic variations between the mutant and its wild type during the pollen abortion process. Male sterility caused by aborted pollen can result in seedless fruit. A seedless Ponkan mandarin mutant (bud sport) was used to compare the transcriptome, methylome, and metabolome with its progenitor to understand the mechanism of citrus pollen abortion. Cytological observations showed that the anther of the mutant could form microspore mother cells, although the microspores failed to develop fertile pollen at the anther dehiscence stage. Based on pollen phenotypic analysis, pollen abortion could be mainly attributed to abnormal meiosis in the mutant. A transcriptome analysis uncovered the molecular mechanisms underlying pollen abortion between the mutant and its wild type. A total of 5421 differentially expressed genes were identified, and some of these genes were involved in the meiosis, hormone biosynthesis and signaling, carbohydrate, and flavonoid pathways. A total of 50,845 differentially methylated regions corresponding to 15,426 differentially methylated genes in the genic region were found between the mutant and its wild type by the methylome analysis. The expression level of these genes was negatively correlated with their methylation level, especially in the promoter regions. In addition, 197 differential metabolites were identified between the mutant and its wild type based on the metabolome analysis. The transcription and metabolome analysis further indicated that the expression of genes in the flavonoid, carbohydrate, and hormone metabolic pathways was significantly modulated in the pollen of the mutant. These results indicated that demethylation may alleviate the silencing of carbohydrate genes in the mutant, resulting in excessive starch and sugar hydrolysis and thereby causing pollen abortion in the mutant.

Pollen abortion: !attributed to! abnormal meiosis 
Transcriptome analysis: !uncovered! molecular mechanisms 
Differentially expressed genes: !involved in! meiosis, hormone biosynthesis and signaling, carbohydrate, and flavonoid pathways 
Methylome analysis: !identified! differentially methylated regions and genes 
Metabolome analysis: !identified! differential metabolites 
Flavonoid, carbohydrate, and hormone metabolic pathways: !modulated in! mutant pollen