Avocados (Persea americana Mill.) are climacteric fruits, the ripening of which during postharvest at room temperature is strongly ethylene dependent. However, the role of other phytohormones in the modulation of postharvest ripening of avocados is still poorly understood. The optimal ripening state of avocados is attained a few days after harvest depending on the genotype, growing region and initial maturity stage of the fruit, and cold temperature storage is commonly used to delay this process. Here, we hypothesized that the ripening of avocados at room temperature may be governed not only by ethylene, but also by other phytohormones. With this aim, we analyzed the hormonal profiling of avocados subjected to either 4 °C and 25 °C during 10 days of postharvest. A biphasic response was observed during postharvest ripening of avocados at room temperature. While ethylene alone appeared to govern fruit ripening during the first transfer from cold to room temperature, a complex hormonal interplay occurred during ripening of avocados leading to a progressive fruit softening at room temperatures. Aside from ethylene, auxin, gibberellins, jasmonates and ABA appeared to be involved in avocado fruit ripening during postharvest at room temperature. Cold storage for a period of 10 days inhibited this hormonal response related to ripening. Furthermore, avocados stored at cold temperatures underwent a quick response in order to tolerate cold stress leading to changes in endogenous ABA and jasmonates. We conclude that a complex hormonal interplay, rather than ethylene alone, modulates postharvest ripening of avocados and that cold storage can effectively be employed as a technique to prevent avocados from a rapid ripening thanks to the cold stress tolerance mechanisms deployed by fruits through multiple hormonal regulation.

ethylene: !governs! ripening 
auxin: !involved in! ripening 
gibberellins: !involved in! ripening 
jasmonates: !involved in! ripening 
ABA: !involved in! ripening 
cold storage: !inhibits! hormonal response 
cold storage: !deploys! cold stress tolerance mechanisms