A new Piper nigrum cysteine proteinase inhibitor, PnCPI, belonging to group I of phytocystatins, with inhibitory activity against papain and growth of Fusarium solani f. sp. piperis, was isolated and characterized. Previous studies (de Souza et al. 2011) have identified a partial cDNA sequence of putative cysteine proteinase inhibitor differentially expressed in roots of black pepper (P. nigrum L.) infected by F. solani f. sp. piperis. Here, we aimed to isolate the full-length cDNA and genomic sequences of the P. nigrum cysteine proteinase inhibitor gene, named PnCPI. Sequence analyses showed that the PnCPI gene encodes a deduced protein of 108 amino acid residues with a predicted molecular mass of 12.3 kDa and isoelectric point of 6.51. Besides the LARFAV-like sequence, common to all phytocystatins, PnCPI contains three conserved motifs of the superfamily cystatin: a glycine residue at the N-terminal region, the QxVxG reactive site more centrally positioned, and one tryptophan in the C-terminal region. PnCPI, belonging to group I of phytocystatins, showed high identity with cystatins isolated from several plant species. Sequence analyses also revealed no putative signal peptide at the N-terminal of PnCPI, as well as no introns within the genomic sequence corresponding to the PnCPI coding region. Molecular modeling showed the ability of PnCPI to interact with papain, while its inhibitory activity against this protease was confirmed after heterologous expression in Escherichia coli. The effects of heat treatments on the inhibitory activity of recombinant PnCPI, rPnCPI, were evaluated. In addition, rPnCPI exhibited in vitro activity against F. solani f. sp. piperis, revealing a new cystatin with the potential antifungal application. The identification of PnCPI as a functional cystatin able to inhibit the in vitro growth of F. solani f. sp. piperis indicates other factors contributing to in vivo susceptibility of black pepper to root rot disease.

PnCPI: !encodes! protein 
protein: !contains! LARFAV-like sequence 
protein: !has! three conserved motifs 
PnCPI: !showed high identity with! cystatins 
PnCPI: !exhibited in vitro activity against! F. solani f. sp. piperis 
rPnCPI: !interacts with! papain 
rPnCPI: !inhibits! in vitro growth of F. solani f. sp. piperis