['32663165', 'Chloroplast proteostasis is governed by a network of peptidases. As a part of  this network, we show that Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) chloroplast  glutamyl peptidase (CGEP) is a homo-oligomeric stromal Ser-type (S9D) peptidase  with both exo- and endo-peptidase activity. Arabidopsis CGEP null mutant alleles  (cgep) had no visible phenotype but showed strong genetic interactions with  stromal CLP protease system mutants, resulting in reduced growth. Loss of CGEP  upregulated the chloroplast protein chaperone machinery and 70S ribosomal  proteins, but other parts of the proteostasis network were unaffected. Both  comparative proteomics and mRNA-based coexpression analyses strongly suggested  that the function of CGEP is at least partly involved in starch metabolism  regulation. Recombinant CGEP degraded peptides and proteins smaller than  approximately 25 kD.  CGEP specifically cleaved substrates on the C-terminal side of Glu irrespective  of neighboring residues, as shown using peptide libraries incubated with  recombinant CGEP and mass spectrometry. CGEP was shown to undergo autocatalytic  C-terminal cleavage at E946, removing 15 residues, both in vitro and in vivo. A  conserved motif (A[S/T]GGG[N/G]PE(946)) immediately upstream of E946 was  identified in dicotyledons, but not monocotyledons. Structural modeling suggested  that C-terminal processing increases the upper substrate size limit by improving  catalytic cavity access. In vivo complementation with catalytically inactive  CGEP-S781R or a CGEP variant with an unprocessed C-terminus in a cgep clpr2-1  background was used to demonstrate the physiological importance of both CGEP  peptidase activity and its autocatalytic processing. CGEP homologs of  photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic bacteria lack the C-terminal prosequence,  suggesting it is a recent functional adaptation in plants.', '2020 Sep', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.20.00752', 'ORCID:']

CGEP: !governs! Chloroplast proteostasis 
CGEP: !interacts with! CLP protease system mutants 
CGEP: !upregulates! Chloroplast protein chaperone machinery 
CGEP: !degrades! Peptides and proteins 
CGEP: !cleaves! Substrates on C-terminal side of Glu 
CGEP: !autocatalytically cleaves! At E946 
CGEP: !physiologically important! Peptidase activity and autocatalytic processing 
CGEP: !lacks! C-terminal prosequence in bacteria