['32664862', 'BACKGROUND: Cold stress inhibits normal physiological metabolism in plants,  thereby seriously affecting plant development. Meanwhile, plants also actively  adjust their metabolism and development to adapt to changing environments.  Several cold tolerance regulators have been found to participate in the  regulation of plant development. Previously, we reported that BYPASS1-LIKE (B1L),  a DUF793 family protein, participates in the regulation of cold tolerance, at  least partly through stabilizing C-REPEAT BINDING FACTORS (CBFs). In this study,  we found that B1L interacts with TRANSTHYRETIN-LIKE (TTL) protein, which is  involved in brassinosteroid (BR)-mediated plant growth and catalyses the  synthesis of S-allantoin, and both proteins participate in modulating plant  growth and cold tolerance. RESULTS: The results obtained with yeast two hybrid  (Y2H) and bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assays showed that B1L  directly interacted with TTL. Similar to the ttl-1 and ttl-2 mutants, the b1l  mutant displayed a longer hypocotyl and greater fresh weight than wild type,  whereas B1L-overexpressing lines exhibited a shorter hypocotyl and reduced fresh  weight. Moreover, ttl-1 displayed freezing tolerance to cold treatment compared  with WT, whereas the b1l mutant and TTL-overexpressing lines were  freezing-sensitive. The b1l ttl double mutant had a developmental phenotype and  freezing tolerance that were highly similar to those of ttl-1 compared to b1l,  indicating that TTL is important for B1L function. Although low concentrations of  brassinolide (0.1 or 1 nM) displayed similarly promoted hypocotyl elongation of  WT and b1l under normal temperature, it showed less effect to the hypocotyl  elongation of b1l than to that of WT under cold conditions. In addition, the b1l  mutant also contained less amount of allantoin than Col-0. CONCLUSION: Our  results indicate that B1L and TTL co-regulate development and cold tolerance in  Arabidopsis, and BR and allantoin may participate in these processes through B1L  and TTL.', '2020 Jul 14', 'BMC Plant Biol', '10.1186/s12870-020-02534-w', 'An']

B1L: !interacts with! TTL
B1L: !regulates! cold tolerance
TTL: !regulates! plant growth
BR: !participates through! B1L and TTL
allantoin: !participates through! B1L and TTL