['32661276', 'The DNA methyltransferases MET1 and CMT3 are known to be responsible for  maintenance of DNA methylation at symmetric CG and CHG sites, respectively, in  Arabidopsis thaliana. However, it is unknown how the expression of  methyltransferase genes is regulated in different cell states and whether change  in expression affects DNA methylation at the whole-genome level. Using a reverse  genetic screen, we identified TCX5, a tesmin/TSO1-like CXC domain-containing  protein, and demonstrated that it is a transcriptional repressor of genes  required for maintenance of DNA methylation, which include MET1, CMT3, DDM1, KYP  and VIMs. TCX5 functions redundantly with its paralogue TCX6 in repressing the  expression of these genes. In the tcx5 tcx6 double mutant, expression of these  genes is markedly increased, thereby leading to markedly increased DNA  methylation at CHG sites and, to a lesser extent, at CG sites at the whole-genome  level. Furthermore, our whole-genome DNA methylation analysis indicated that the  CG and CHG methylation level is lower in differentiated quiescent cells than in  dividing cells in the wild type but is comparable in the tcx5/6 mutant,  suggesting that TCX5/6 are required for maintenance of the difference in DNA  methylation between the two cell types. We identified TCX5/6-containing  multi-subunit complexes, which are known as DREAM in other eukaryotes, and  demonstrated that the Arabidopsis DREAM components function as a whole to  preclude DNA hypermethylation. Given that the DREAM complexes are conserved from  plants to animals, the preclusion of DNA hypermethylation by DREAM complexes may  represent a conserved mechanism in eukaryotes.', '2020 Aug', 'Nat Plants', '10.1038/s41477-020-0710-7', 'ORCID:']

MET1: !maintains! DNA methylation at CG sites
CMT3: !maintains! DNA methylation at CHG sites
TCX5/6: !repress! MET1, CMT3, DDM1, KYP and VIMs
TCX5/6: !preclude! DNA hypermethylation
DREAM complexes: !conserve! preclusion of DNA hypermethylation