In recent years, RNA interference (RNAi) machinery has widely been explored by plant biologists for its potential applications in disease management, plant development, and germplasm improvement. RNAi-based technologies have mainly been applied in the form of transgenic plant generation and host-induced-gene-silencing (HIGS). However, the approval of RNAi-based transgenic plants has always been challenging due to the proclaimed concerns surrounding their impacts on human health and the environment. Lately, exogenous applications of double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs), short interfering RNAs (siRNAs), and hairpin RNAs (hpRNAs) has emerged as another technology that could be regarded as more eco-friendly, sustainable, and publicly acceptable than genetic transformation. Inside the plant cell, dsRNAs can undergo several steps of processing, which not only triggers RNAi machinery but may also involve transitive and systemic silencing, as well as epigenetic modifications. Therefore, along with the considerations of proper exogenous applications of dsRNAs, defining their final destination into plant cells is highly relevant. In this review, we highlighted the significance of several factors that affect dsRNA-induced gene silencing, the fate of exogenous dsRNAs in the plant cell, and the challenges surrounding production technologies, cost-effectiveness, and dsRNAs stability under open-field conditions. This review also provided insights into the potential applications of exogenous dsRNAs in plant protection and crop improvement.

RNAi machinery: !widely explored by! plant biologists 
dsRNAs: !triggers! RNAi machinery 
dsRNAs: !undergoes! processing 
processing: !involves! transitive and systemic silencing 
processing: !involves! epigenetic modifications 
exogenous dsRNAs: !affects! gene silencing 
exogenous dsRNAs: !defines! final destination into plant cells 
several factors: !affects! dsRNA-induced gene silencing 
production technologies: !challenges! cost-effectiveness 
open-field conditions: !challenges! dsRNAs stability 
exogenous dsRNAs: !potential applications in! plant protection 
exogenous dsRNAs: !potential applications in! crop improvement