In Brassicaceae, tissue damage triggers the mustard oil bomb i.e., activates the degradation of glucosinolates by myrosinases leading to a rapid accumulation of isothiocyanates at the site of damage. Isothiocyanates are reactive electrophilic species (RES) known to covalently bind to thiols in proteins and glutathione, a process that is not only toxic to herbivores and microbes but can also cause cell death of healthy plant tissues. Previously, it has been shown that subtoxic isothiocyanate concentrations can induce transcriptional reprogramming in intact plant cells. Glutathione depletion by RES leading to breakdown of the redox potential has been proposed as a central and common RES signal transduction mechanism. Using transcriptome analyses, we show that after exposure of Arabidopsis seedlings (grown in liquid culture) to subtoxic concentrations of sulforaphane hundreds of genes were regulated without depletion of the cellular glutathione pool. Heat shock genes were among the most highly up-regulated genes and this response was found to be dependent on the canonical heat shock factors A1 (HSFA1). HSFA1-deficient plants were more sensitive to isothiocyanates than wild type plants. Moreover, pretreatment of Arabidopsis seedlings with subtoxic concentrations of isothiocyanates increased resistance against exposure to toxic levels of isothiocyanates and, hence, may reduce the autotoxicity of the mustard oil bomb by inducing cell protection mechanisms.

Tissue damage: !triggers! mustard oil bomb 
Mustard oil bomb: !activates! degradation of glucosinolates 
Glucosinolates: !leads to! accumulation of isothiocyanates 
Isothiocyanates: !binds to! thiols in proteins and glutathione 
Glutathione: !depleted by! reactive electrophilic species 
Reactive electrophilic species: !proposed as! central signal transduction mechanism 
Transcriptome analyses: !show! hundreds of genes regulated without depletion of cellular glutathione pool 
Heat shock genes: !among most highly up-regulated! after exposure to sulforaphane 
Heat shock factors A1: !dependent on! response to isothiocyanates 
HSFA1-deficient plants: !more sensitive to! isothiocyanates than wild type plants 
Subtoxic concentrations of isothiocyanates: !increase resistance against! toxic levels of isothiocyanates