The infection of wheat leaves by Pyricularia oryzae induced remarkable reprogramming of the primary metabolism (amino acids, sugars, and organic acids) in favor of a successful fungal infection and certain changes were conserved among cultivars regardless of their level of resistance to blast. Wheat blast, caused by Pyricularia oryzae, has become one of the major threats for food security worldwide. Here, we investigated the behavior of three wheat cultivars (BR-18, Embrapa-16, and BRS-Guamirim), differing in their level of resistance to blast, by analyzing changes in cellular damage, antioxidative metabolism, and defense compounds as well as their photosynthetic performance and metabolite profile. Blast severity was lower by 45 and 33% in Embrapa-16 and BR-18 cultivars (moderately resistant), respectively, at 120 h after inoculation in comparison to BRS-Guamirim cultivar (susceptible). Cellular damage caused by P. oryzae infection was great in BRS-Guamirim compared to BR-18. The photosynthetic performance of infected plants was altered due to diffusional and biochemical limitations for CO<sub>2</sub> fixation. At the beginning of the infection process, dramatic changes in both carbohydrate metabolism and on the levels of amino acids, intermediate compounds of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and polyamines were noticed regardless of cultivar suggesting an extensive metabolic reprogramming of the plants following fungal infection. Nevertheless, Embrapa-16 plants displayed a more robust and efficient antioxidant metabolism, higher phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and polyphenoloxidase activities and higher concentrations of phenolics and lignin, which, altogether, helped them to counteract more efficiently the infection by P. oryzae. Our results demonstrated that P. oryzae infection significantly modified the metabolism of wheat plants and different types of metabolic defence may act both additively and synergistically to provide additional plant protection to blast.

Pyricularia oryzae: !induces! Reprogramming of Primary Metabolism
Wheat Blast: !caused by! Pyricularia oryzae
Cellular Damage: !greater in! BRS-Guamirim
Photosynthetic Performance: !altered due to! Diffusional and Biochemical Limitations
Carbohydrate Metabolism: !dramatically changed following! Fungal Infection
Embrapa-16 Plants: !displayed more robust! Antioxidant Metabolism
Phenylalanine Ammonia-Lyase: !higher in! Embrapa-16 Plants
Polyphenoloxidase Activities: !higher in! Embrapa-16 Plants
Phenolics and Lignin: !higher concentrations of! Embrapa-16 Plants
Metabolic Defence: !acts both additively and synergistically to provide! Plant Protection