Lonicera japonica Thunb. (L. japonica) has the functions of clearing away heat and detoxifying, broad-spectrum antibacterial and anti-virus, etc. More than 70% of anti-inflammatory and cold Chinese patent medicines contain L. japonica. Trichomes comprise specialized multicellular structures that have the capacity to synthesize and secrete secondary metabolites and protect plants from biotic and abiotic stresses. The extraction of trichome secretions has great commercial value. However, little is known about the trichome formation mechanism in L. japonica. Therefore, the study of trichome development between different varieties provides a basis for selecting suitable planting resources. Here, we present a genome-wide comparative transcriptome analysis between two L. japonica cultivars, toward the identification of biological processes and functional gene activities that occur during flowering stage trichome development. In this study, the density and average lengths of flower trichomes were at their highest during three-green periods (S2). Using the Illumina RNA-Seq method, we obtained 134,304 unigenes, 33,733 of which were differentially expressed. In an analysis of 40 differentially expressed unigenes (DEGs) involved in trichome development, 29 of these were transcription factors. The DEGs analysis of plant hormone signal transduction indicated that plant growth and development may be independent of gibberellin (GA) and cytokinine (CTK) signaling pathways, and plant stress may be independent of jasmonic acid (JA) and ethylene (ET) signaling pathways. We screened several genes involved in the floral biosynthesis of odors, tastes, colors, and plant hormones, and proposed biosynthetic pathways for sesquiterpenoid, triterpenoid, monoterpenoid, flavonoid, and plant hormones. Furthermore, 82 DEGs were assigned to cell cycles and 2616 were predicted as plant resistance genes (PRGs). This study provides a comprehensive characterization of the expression profiles of flower development during the seven developmental stages of L. japonica, thereby offering valuable insights into the molecular networks that underly flower development in L. japonica.

L. japonica: !synthesizes! secondary metabolites 
DEGs: !involved in! trichome development 
GA/CTK: !independent of! plant growth and development 
JA/ET: !independent of! plant stress 
DEGs: !assigned to! cell cycles 
PRGs: !predicted as! plant resistance genes