Plant life relies on complex arrays of environmental stress sensing and signalling mechanisms. Extremophile plants develop and grow in harsh environments with extremes of cold, heat, drought, desiccation, or salinity, which have resulted in original adaptations. In accordance with their polyphyletic origins, extremophile plants likely possess core mechanisms of plant abiotic stress signalling. However, novel properties or regulations may have emerged in the context of extremophile adaptations. Comparative omics of extremophile genetic models, such as Arabidopsis lyrata, Craterostigma plantagineum, Eutrema salsugineum, and Physcomitrella patens, reveal diverse strategies of sensing and signalling that lead to a general improvement in abiotic stress responses. Current research points to putative differences of sensing and emphasizes significant modifications of regulatory mechanisms, at the level of secondary messengers (Ca2+, phospholipids, reactive oxygen species), signal transduction (intracellular sensors, protein kinases, transcription factors, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis) or signalling crosstalk. Involvement of hormone signalling, especially ABA signalling, cell homeostasis surveillance, and epigenetic mechanisms, also shows that large-scale gene regulation, whole-plant integration, and probably stress memory are important features of adaptation to extreme conditions. This evolutionary and functional plasticity of signalling systems in extremophile plants may have important implications for plant biotechnology, crop improvement, and ecological risk assessment under conditions of climate change.

Environmental stress: !sensed by! Extremophile plants 
Extremophile plants: !adapt to! Harsh environments 
Arabidopsis lyrata, Craterostigma plantagineum, Eutrema salsugineum, Physcomitrella patens: !reveal! Diverse strategies of sensing and signalling 
Secondary messengers (Ca2+, phospholipids, reactive oxygen species): !mediate! Signal transduction 
Intracellular sensors, protein kinases, transcription factors, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis: !regulate! Signalling crosstalk 
Hormone signalling, ABA signalling, cell homeostasis surveillance, epigenetic mechanisms: !contribute to! Adaptation to extreme conditions 
Adaptation to extreme conditions: !implies! Plant biotechnology, crop improvement, ecological risk assessment