Collectively, plants produce a huge variety of secondary metabolites (SMs) which are involved in the adaptation of plants to biotic and abiotic stresses. The most characteristic feature of SMs is their striking inter- and intraspecific chemical diversity. Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (CYPs) often play an important role in the biosynthesis of SMs and thus in the evolution of chemical diversity. Here we studied the diversity and evolution of CYPs of two Jacobaea species which contain a characteristic group of SMs namely the pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs). We retrieved CYPs from RNA-seq data of J. vulgaris and J. aquatica, resulting in 221 and 157 full-length CYP genes, respectively. The analyses of conserved motifs confirmed that Jacobaea CYP proteins share conserved motifs including the heme-binding signature, the PERF motif, the K-helix and the I-helix. KEGG annotation revealed that the CYPs assigned as being SM metabolic pathway genes were all from the CYP71 clan but no CYPs were assigned as being involved in alkaloid pathways. Phylogenetic analyses of full-length CYPs were conducted for the six largest CYP families of Jacobaea (CYP71, CYP76, CYP706, CYP82, CYP93 and CYP72) and were compared with CYPs of two other members of the Asteraceae, Helianthus annuus and Lactuca sativa, and with Arabidopsis thaliana. The phylogenetic trees showed strong lineage specific diversification of CYPs, implying that the evolution of CYPs has been very fast even within the Asteraceae family. Only in the closely related species J. vulgaris and J. aquatica, CYPs were found often in pairs, confirming a close relationship in the evolutionary history. This study discovered 378 full-length CYPs in Jacobaea species, which can be used for future exploration of their functions, including possible involvement in PA biosynthesis and PA diversity.

CYP: !synthesizes! SMs 
Jacobaea: !produces! PAs 
RNA-seq data: !retrieves! CYPs 
CYP: !shares! conserved motifs 
KEGG annotation: !assigns! CYPs to SM metabolic pathways 
Phylogenetic analyses: !compares! CYPs of Jacobaea with other Asteraceae species 
J. vulgaris/aquatica: !contains! pairs of CYPs 
378 full-length CYPs: !discovered! in Jacobaea species