Plants have fundamental dependences on nitrogen and sulfur and frequently have to cope with chronic limitations when their supply is sub-optimal. This study aimed at characterizing the metabolomic, proteomic, and transcriptomic changes occurring in Arabidopsis leaves under chronic nitrate (Low-N) and chronic sulfate (Low-S) limitations in order to compare their effects, determine interconnections, and examine strategies of adaptation. Metabolite profiling globally revealed opposite effects of Low-S and Low-N on carbohydrate and amino acid accumulations, whilst proteomic data showed that both treatments resulted in increases in catabolic processes, stimulation of mitochondrial and cytosolic metabolism, and decreases in chloroplast metabolism. Lower abundances of ribosomal proteins and translation factors under Low-N and Low-S corresponded with growth limitation. At the transcript level, the major and specific effect of Low-N was the enhancement of expression of defence and immunity genes. The main effect of chronic Low-S was a decrease in transcripts of genes involved in cell division, DNA replication, and cytoskeleton, and an increase in the expression of autophagy genes. This was consistent with a role of target-of-rapamycin kinase in the control of plant metabolism and cell growth and division under chronic Low-S. In addition, Low-S decreased the expression of several NLP transcription factors, which are master actors in nitrate sensing. Finally, both the transcriptome and proteome data indicated that Low-S repressed glucosinolate synthesis, and that Low-N exacerbated glucosinolate degradation. This showed the importance of glucosinolate as buffering molecules for N and S management.

Low-N: !enhances! defence/immunity genes
Low-S: !decreases! cell division/DNA replication/cytoskeleton genes
Low-S: !increases! autophagy genes
Low-S: !represses! NLP transcription factors
Low-N/Low-S: !exacerbates! glucosinolate degradation
Low-S: !represses! glucosinolate synthesis