['32699028', 'Systemic acquired acclimation (SAA) is a key biological process essential for  plant survival under conditions of abiotic stress. SAA was recently shown to be  controlled by a rapid systemic signaling mechanism termed the reactive oxygen  species (ROS) wave in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). MYB30 is a key  transcriptional regulator mediating many different biological processes. MYB30  was found to act downstream of the ROS wave in systemic tissues of Arabidopsis in  response to local high light (HL) stress treatment. However, the function of  MYB30 in systemic signaling and SAA is unknown. To determine the relationship  among MYB30, the ROS wave, and systemic acclimation in Arabidopsis, the SAA  response to HL stress of myb30 mutants and wild-type plants was determined.  Although myb30 plants were found to display enhanced rates of ROS wave  propagation and their local tissues acclimated to the HL stress, they were  deficient in SAA to HL stress. Compared to wild type, the systemic transcriptomic  response of myb30 plants was also deficient, lacking in the expression of over  3,500 transcripts. A putative set of 150 core transcripts directly associated  with MYB30 function during HL stress was determined. Our study identifies MYB30  as a key regulator that links systemic ROS signaling with systemic transcriptomic  responses, SAA, and plant acclimation to HL stress. In addition, it demonstrates  that plant acclimation and systemic ROS signaling are interlinked and that the  lack of systemic acclimation drives systemic ROS signaling to occur at faster  rates, suggesting a feedback mechanism (potentially involving MYB30) between  these two processes.', '2020 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.20.00859', 'ORCID:']

MYB30: !mediates! Biological Processes 
ROS wave: !controls! SAA 
MYB30: !acts downstream of! ROS wave 
MYB30: !links! Systemic ROS signaling & Systemic Transcriptomic Responses 
MYB30: !regulates! Plant Acclimation to HL Stress 
SAA: !interlinked with! Systemic ROS Signaling 
Lack of SAA: !drives! Systemic ROS Signaling