Calvin cycle plays a crucial role in carbon fixation which provides the precursors of organic macromolecules for plant growth and development. Currently, no gene involved in Calvin cycle has been identified in monocotyledonous plants through mutant or/and map-based cloning approach. Here, we isolated a low-tillering mutant, c6635, in rice (Oryza sativa). The mutant displayed light green leaves and intensely declined pigment contents and photosynthetic capacity at early growth stage. Moreover, its individual plant showed a much smaller size, and most individuals produced only two tillers. At mature stage, its productive panicles, grain number and seed setting rate were significantly decreased, which lead to a sharp reduction of the grain yield. We confirmed that a single nucleotide mutation in LOC_Os04g16680 gene encoding sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphatase (SBPase) involved in Calvin cycle was responsible for the mutant phenotype of c6635 through map-based cloning, MutMap analysis and complementation experiments. Sequence analysis suggested that the point mutation caused an amino acid change from Gly-364 to Asp at the C-terminal of SBPase. In addition, OsSBPase gene was mainly expressed in leaf, and the encoded protein was located in chloroplast. The mutation of OsSBPase could significantly affect expression levels of some key genes involved in Calvin cycle. We successfully identified a SBPase gene in monocotyledonous plants. Meanwhile, we demonstrated that a single nucleotide substitution at the 3'-end of this gene severely affects plant growth and grain yield, implying that the Gly-364 at the C-terminal of SBPase could play an important role in SBPase function in rice.

Calvin cycle: !plays crucial role in! Carbon fixation 
SBPase gene: !isolated in! Rice 
SBPase gene: !causes mutation in! c6635 
SBPase gene: !encodes! Sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphatase 
Gly-364: !located at! C-terminal of SBPase 
Mutation: !affects expression levels of! Key genes involved in Calvin cycle 
Gly-364: !plays important role in! SBPase function