N6-Methyladenosine (m6A) is the most widespread RNA modification that plays roles in the regulation of genes and genome stability. YT521-B homology (YTH) domain-containing RNA-binding proteins are important RNA binding proteins that affect the fate of m6A-containing RNA by binding m6A. Little is known about the YTH genes in common wheat (Triticum aestivum L.), one of the most important crops for humans. A total of 39 TaYTH genes were identified in common wheat, which are comprised of 13 homologous triads, and could be mapped in 18 out of the 21 chromosomes. A phylogenetic analysis revealed that the TaYTHs could be divided into two groups: YTHDF (TaDF) and YTHDC (TaDC). The TaYTHs in the same group share similar motif distributions and domain organizations, which indicates functional similarity between the closely related TaYTHs. The TaDF proteins share only one domain, which is the YTH domain. In contrast, the TaDCs possess three C3H1-type zinc finger repeats at their N-termini in addition to their central YTH domain. In TaDFs, the predicated aromatic cage pocket that binds the methylysine residue of m6A is composed of tryptophan, tryptophan, and tryptophan (WWW). In contrast, the aromatic cage pocket in the TaDCs is composed of tryptophan, tryptophan, and tyrosine (WWY). In addition to the general aspartic acid or asparagine residue used to form a hydrogen bond with N<sup>1</sup> of m6A, histidine might be utilized in some TaDFb proteins. An analysis of the expression using both online RNA-Seq data and quantitative real-time PCR verification revealed that the TaDFa and TaDFb genes are highly expressed in various tissues/organs compared with that of TaDFcs and TaDCs. In addition, the expression of the TaYTH genes is changed in response to various abiotic stresses. In this study, we identified 39 TaYTH genes from common wheat. The phylogenetic structure, chromosome distribution, and patterns of expression of these genes and their protein structures were analyzed. Our results provide a foundation for the functional analysis of TaYTHs in the future.

N6-Methyladenosine: !affects! Genes/Genome Stability
YT521-B homology domain-containing RNA-binding proteins: !affects! Fate of m6A-containing RNA
TaYTH genes: !localizes to! 18 out of 21 chromosomes
TaDF proteins: !share! YTH Domain
TaDCs: !possess! C3H1-type zinc finger repeats
TaDFs: !compose! Aromatic cage pocket of WWW
TaDCs: !compose! Aromatic cage pocket of WWY
TaDFb proteins: !utilize! Histidine
TaDFa/b genes: !highly expressed in! Various tissues/organs