Gene expression variations in response to fertilization between Physalis and Solanum might play essential roles in species divergence and fruit evolution. Fertilization triggers variation in fruit development and morphology. The Chinese lantern, a morphological novelty derived from the calyx, is formed upon fertilization in Physalis but is not observed in Solanum. The underlying genetic variations are largely unknown. Here, we documented the developmental and morphological differences in the flower and fruit between Physalis floridana and Solanum pimpinellifolium and then evaluated both the transcript sequence variation and gene expression at the transcriptomic level at fertilization between the two species. In Physalis transcriptomic analysis, 468 unigenes were identified as differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that were strongly regulated by fertilization across 3 years. In comparison with tomato, 14,536 strict single-copy orthologous gene pairs were identified between P. floridana and S. pimpinellifolium in the flower-fruit transcriptome. Nine types of gene variations with specific GO-enriched patterns were identified, covering 58.82% orthologous gene pairs that were DEGs in either trend or dosage at the flower-fruit transition between the two species, which could adequately distinguish Solanum and Physalis, implying that differential gene expression at fertilization might play essential roles during the divergence and fruit evolution of Solanum-Physalis. Virus-induced gene silencing analyses revealed the developmental roles of some transcription factor genes in fertility, Chinese lantern development, and fruit weight control in Physalis. This study presents the first floral transcriptomic resource of Physalis, and reveals some candidate genetic variations accounting for the early fruit developmental evolution in Physalis in comparison to Solanum.

Fertilization: !triggers! Variation
Physalis: !differentiates from! Solanum
DEGs: !strongly regulated by! Fertilization
Orthologous gene pairs: !distinguish! Solanum and Physalis
Gene variations: !play essential roles in! Species divergence and fruit evolution
Transcription factor genes: !control! Fertility, Chinese lantern development, and fruit weight