A wide range of prokaryotes produce and excrete bacteriocins (proteins with antimicrobial activity) to reduce competition from closely related strains. Application of bacteriocins is of great importance in food industries, while little research has been focused on the agricultural potential of bacteriocins. A number of bacteriocin producing bacteria are members of the phytomicrobiome, and some strains are plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR). Thuricin 17 is a single small peptide with a molecular weight of 3.162 kDa, a subclass IId bacteriocin produced by <i>Bacillus thuringiensis</i> NEB17, isolated from soybean nodules. It is either cidal or static to a wide range of prokaryotes. In this way, it removes key competition from the niche space of the producer organism. <i>B. thuringiensis</i> NEB17 was isolated from soybean root nodules, and thus is a member of the phytomicrobiome. Interestingly, thuricin 17 is not active against a wide range of rhizobial strains involved in symbiotic nitrogen fixation with legumes or against other PGPR. In addition, it stimulates plant growth, particularly in the presence of abiotic stresses. The stresses it assists with include key ones associated with climate change (drought, high temperature, and soil salinity). Hence, in the presence of stress, it increases the size of the overall niche space, within plant roots, for <i>B. thuringiensis</i> NEB17. Through its anti-microbial activity, it could also enhance plant growth <i>via</i> control of specific plant pathogens. None of the isolated bacteriocins have been examined as broadly as thuricin 17 on plant growth promotion. Thus, this review focuses on the effect of thuricin 17 as a microbe to plant signal that assists crop plants in managing stress and making agricultural systems more climate change resilient.

Bacillus thuringiensis NEB17: !produces! Thuricin 17 
Thuricin 17: !affects! Prokaryotes 
Thuricin 17: !stimulates! Plant growth 
Thuricin 17: !enhances! Niche space of producer organism 
Thuricin 17: !controls! Plant pathogens