Four polygalacturonase gene family members were highlighted that contribute to elucidate the roles of polygalacturonase during the fertility conversion process in male-sterile wheat. Polygalacturonase (PG) belongs to a large family of hydrolases with important functions in cell separation during plant growth and development via the degradation of pectin. Specific expressed PGs in anthers may be significant for male sterility research and hybrid wheat breeding, but they have not been characterized in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). In this study, we systematically studied the PG gene family using the latest published wheat reference genomic information. In total, 113 wheat PG genes were identified, which could be classified into six categories A-F according to their structure characteristics and phylogenetic comparisons with Arabidopsis and rice. Polyploidy and segmental duplications in wheat were proved to be mainly responsible for the expansion of the wheat PG gene family. RNA-seq showed that TaPGs have specific temporal and spatial expression characteristics, in which 12 TaPGs with spike-specific expression patterns were detected by qRT-PCR in different fertility anthers of KTM3315A, a thermo-sensitive cytoplasmic male-sterile wheat. Four of them specific upregulated (TaPG09, TaPG95, and TaPG93) or downregulated (TaPG87) at trinucleate stage of fertile anthers, and further aligning with the homologous in Arabidopsis revealed that they may undertake functions such as anther dehiscence, separation of pollen, pollen development, and pollen tube elongation, thereby inducing male fertility conversion in KTM3315A. These findings facilitate function investigations of the wheat PG gene family and provide new insights into the fertility conversion mechanism in male-sterile wheat.

Polygalacturonase: !degrades! Pectin 
TaPGs: !express! Temporally and spatially 
TaPG09, TaPG95, TaPG93: !upregulate! Trinucleate stage of fertile anthers 
TaPG87: !downregulate! Trinucleate stage of fertile anthers 
TaPGs: !undertake functions! Anther dehiscence, separation of pollen, pollen development, and pollen tube elongation 
TaPGs: !induce! Male fertility conversion in KTM3315A