Root membrane lipids are important biomolecules determining plant's ability to adapt to different growing environmental or climatic conditions. Herein, we demonstrate the potential use of root membrane lipids as biomarkers to discriminate silage-corn genotypes based on herbicide and insect/pest resistance genetic traits when cultivated on podzolic soils under short growing and moderately warm summer season in boreal climate. Lipids in root membranes of field grown silage-corn genotypes were previously quantified at crop maturity by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography-hydrophilic interaction chromatography-heated electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. The lipid identified and quantified in silage-corn roots were phospholipids, glycolipids and sphingolipids. Following hierarchical cluster analysis, three groups of membrane lipids were observed to be very effective in segregating the five silage-corn genotypes. The first group consisted of hexosylceramide (HexCer), phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylinositol (PI). The second group consisted of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA16:0) and lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC16:0), while the third group consisted of 37 molecular species from observed lipids (phospholipids, glycolipids, sphingolipids). Partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) based on 37 membrane lipid species, as well as principal component analysis using the variables important in projection derived from the PLS-DA segregated the five silage-corn genotypes into three groups according to their pesticide/herbicide resistant traits. This study is second to none using root lipidomics in discriminating different silage-corn genotypes based on their herbicide and insect/pest resistance genetic traits for cultivation in boreal climates. The segregated genotypes possess three different genetic traits for herbicide and insect/pest resistance including VT Double Pro (VT2P), VT Triple Pro Roundup Ready (VT3P/RR) and Roundup Ready-2 corn (RR2). These findings demonstrate that root membrane lipids could serve as appropriate chemical biosignatures to identify silage-corn genotypes based on herbicide and insect/pest resistance genetic traits suitable for cultivation in boreal climates.

Gene: !affects! Root membrane lipids 
Root membrane lipids: !discriminate! Silage-corn genotypes 
Hexosylceramide: !belongs to! First group 
Phosphatidylcholine: !belongs to! First group 
Phosphatidylinositol: !belongs to! First group 
Lysophosphatidic acid: !belongs to! Second group 
Lysophosphatidylcholine: !belongs to! Second group 
37 molecular species: !belong to! Third group 
PLS-DA: !segregates! Five silage-corn genotypes 
PCA: !segregates! Five silage-corn genotypes 
Root membrane lipids: !serve as! Chemical biosignatures