Harvest index (HI) is the ratio of grain to total shoot dry matter and is as a measure of reproductive efficiency. HI is determined by interactions between genotypes (G), environment (E), and crop management (M). Historic genetic yield gains due to breeding in wheat have largely been achieved by increasing HI. Environmental factors are important for HI and include seasonal pattern of water supply and extreme temperatures during crop reproductive development. Wheat production in Australia has been dominated by fast-developing spring cultivars that when sown in late-autumn will flower at an optimal time in early spring. Water limited potential yield can be increased by sowing slower developing wheats with a vernalization requirement (winter wheat) earlier than currently practiced such that their development is matched to environment and they flower at the optimal time. This means a longer vegetative phase which increases rooting depth, proportion of water-use transpired, and transpiration efficiency by allowing more growth during winter when vapour pressure deficit is low. All these factors can increase biomass accumulation, grain number and thus grain yield potential. However higher yields are not always realized due to a lower HI of early sown slow developing wheats compared to fast developing wheats sown later. Here, we evaluate genotype × management practices to improve HI and yield in early sown slow developing wheat crops using 6 field experiments conducted across south eastern Australia from 2014 to 2018 in yield environments ranging from ~1 to ~4.7 t/ha. Practices included low plant densities (30-50 plants/m²), mechanical defoliation, and deferred application of nitrogen fertilizer. Lower plant densities had similar yield and HI to higher plant densities. Defoliation tended to increase HI but reduce yield except when there was severe stem frost damage. Deferring nitrogen had a variable effect depending on starting soil N and in crop rainfall. All management strategies evaluated gave variable HI and yield responses with small effect sizes, and we conclude that none of them can reliably increase HI in early sown wheat. We propose that genetic improvement is the most promising avenue for increasing HI and yield in early sown wheat, and postulate that this could be achieved more rapidly through early generation screening for HI in slow developing genotypes than by crop management.

Harvest index: !determined by! genotypes, environment, crop management
Genetic yield: !increased by! increasing HI
Water limited potential yield: !increased by! sowing slower developing wheats earlier
Lower plant densities: !similar to! higher plant densities
Defoliation: !tended to increase! HI but reduce yield
Deferring nitrogen: !variable effect depending on! starting soil N and in crop rainfall
Management strategies: !gave variable! HI and yield responses
Genetic improvement: !most promising avenue for! increasing HI and yield