['32759271', 'In yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and human (Homo sapiens) mitochondria,  Oxidase assembly protein1 (Oxa1) is the general insertase for protein insertion  from the matrix side into the inner membrane while Cytochrome c oxidase assembly  protein18 (Cox18/Oxa2) is specifically involved in the topogenesis of the complex  IV subunit, Cox2. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mitochondria contain four  OXA homologs: OXA1a, OXA1b, OXA2a, and OXA2b. OXA2a and OXA2b are unique members  of the Oxa1 superfamily, in that they possess a tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)  domain at their C termini. Here, we determined the role of OXA2a by studying  viable mutant plants generated by partial complementation of homozygous lethal  OXA2a transfer-DNA insertional mutants using the developmentally regulated  ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3) promoter. The ABI3p:OXA2a plants displayed  growth retardation due to a reduction in the steady-state abundances of both  c-type cytochromes, cytochrome c (1) and cytochrome c The observed reduction in  the steady-state abundance of complex III could be attributed to cytochrome c (1)  being one of its subunits. Expression of a soluble heme lyase from an organism  with cytochrome c maturation system III could functionally complement the lack of  OXA2a. This implies that OXA2a is required for the system I cytochrome c  maturation of Arabidopsis. Due to the interaction of OXA2a with Cytochrome c  maturation protein CcmF C-terminal-like protein (CCMF(C)) in a yeast  split-ubiquitin based interaction assay, we propose that OXA2a aids in the  membrane insertion of CCMF(C), which is presumed to form the heme lyase component  of the cytochrome c maturation pathway. In contrast with the crucial role played  by the TPR domain of OXA2b, the TPR domain of OXA2a is not essential for its  functionality.', '2020 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.19.01248', 'ORCID:']

Oxa1: !inserts! proteins 
Cox18/Oxa2: !topogenizes! complex IV subunit Cox2 
OXA2a: !reduces! c-type cytochromes 
OXA2a: !interacts with! CCMF(C) 
CCMF(C): !forms! heme lyase component 
TPR domain of OXA2a: !not essential for! functionality