DNA methylation is a widespread epigenetic mark that affects gene expression and transposon mobility during plant development and stress responses. However, the role of DNA methylation in regulating the expression of microRNA (miRNA) genes remains largely unexplored. Here, we analyzed DNA methylation changes of miRNA genes using a pair of soybean (<i>Glycine max</i>) near-isogenic lines (NILs) differing in their response to soybean cyst nematode (SCN; <i>Heterodera glycines</i>). Differences in global DNA methylation levels over miRNA genes in response to SCN infection were observed between the isogenic lines. miRNA genes with significant changes in DNA methylation levels in the promoter and primary transcript-coding regions were detected in both lines. In the susceptible isogenic line (NIL-S), 82 differentially methylated miRNAs were identified in response to SCN infection whereas, in the resistant isogenic line (NIL-R), only 16 differentially methylated miRNAs were identified. Interestingly, gma-miR5032, gma-miR5043, gma-miR1520b, and gma-2107-ch16 showed opposite methylation patterns in the isogenic lines. In addition, the miRNA paralogs gma-miR5770a and gma-miR5770b showed hypermethylation and hypomethylation in NIL-S and NIL-R, respectively. Gene expression quantification of gma-miR5032, gma-miR5043, gma-miR1520b, and gma-miR5770a/b and their confirmed targets indicated a role of DNA methylation in regulating miRNA expression and, thus, their targets upon SCN infection. Furthermore, overexpression of these four miRNAs in NIL-S using transgenic hairy root system enhanced plant resistance to SCN to various degrees with a key role observed for miR5032. Together, our results provide new insights into the role of epigenetic mechanisms in controlling miRNA regulatory function during SCN-soybean interactions.[Formula: see text] Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

DNA methylation: !affects! gene expression 
miRNA genes: !show changes in! DNA methylation levels 
SCN infection: !causes! differences in global DNA methylation levels 
gma-miR5032, gma-miR5043, gma-miR1520b, and gma-2107-ch16: !have opposite methylation patterns! in isogenic lines 
gma-miR5770a and gma-miR5770b: !show hypermethylation and hypomethylation! in NIL-S and NIL-R respectively 
DNA methylation: !regulates! miRNA expression 
miRNA expression: !controls! their targets 
overexpression of miRNAs: !enhances! plant resistance to SCN