['32754173', 'Arginine acts as a precursor of polyamines in plants in two known pathways,  agmatine and ornithine routes. It is decarboxylated to agmatine by arginine  decarboxylase, and then transformed to putrescine by the consecutive action of  agmatine iminohydrolase and N-carbamoylputrescine amidohydrolase. Alternatively,  it can be hydrolyzed to ornithine by arginase and then decarboxylated by  ornithine decarboxylase to putrescine. Some plants lack a functional ornithine  pathway, but all have one or two arginases that can have dual cellular  localization, in mitochondria and plastids. It was recently shown that arginases  from Arabidopsis thaliana and soybean act also as agmatinases, thus they can  produce putrescine directly from agmatine. Therefore, arginase (together with  arginine decarboxylase) can complement putrescine production in plastids,  providing a third polyamine biosynthesis pathway in plants. Phylogenetic analysis  suggests that arginases, highly conserved in the plant kingdom, create the only  group of enzymes recognized in the family of ureohydrolases in plants. Arginases  are metalloenzymes with binuclear manganese cluster in the active site. In this  work, two arginases from A. thaliana and Medicago truncatula are structurally  characterized and their binding properties are discussed. Crystal structures with  bound ornithine show that plant hexameric arginases engage a long loop from the  neighboring subunit to stabilize alpha-amino and carboxyl groups of the ligand. This  unique ligand binding mode is unobserved in arginases from other domains of life.  Structural analysis shows that substrate binding by residues from two neighboring  subunits might also characterize some prokaryotic agmatinases. This feature of  plant arginases is most likely the determinant of their ability to recognize not  only arginine but also agmatine as their substrates, thus, to act as arginase and  agmatinase.', '2020', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2020.00987', 'Sekula']

Arginine: !precursor of! polyamines 
arginine decarboxylase: !decarboxylates! arginine 
agmatine iminohydrolase: !transforms! agmatine 
N-carbamoylputrescine amidohydrolase: !consecutive action of! agmatine iminohydrolase 
arginase: !hydrolyzes! ornithine 
ornithine decarboxylase: !decarboxylates! ornithine 
arginases: !dual cellular localization of! mitochondria and plastids 
arginases: !produce! putrescine 
arginases: !create! ureohydrolases 
arginases: !binuclear manganese cluster in! active site 
arginases: !stabilize! alpha-amino and carboxyl groups 
arginases: !recognize! arginine and agmatine