An integrative comparative transcriptomic approach on six sugar beet varieties showing different amount of sucrose loss during storage revealed genotype-specific main driver genes and pathways characterizing storability. Sugar beet is next to sugar cane one of the most important sugar crops accounting for about 15% of the sucrose produced worldwide. Since its processing is increasingly centralized, storage of beet roots over an extended time has become necessary. Sucrose loss during storage is a major concern for the sugar industry because the accumulation of invert sugar and byproducts severely affect sucrose manufacturing. This loss is mainly due to ongoing respiration, but changes in cell wall composition and pathogen infestation also contribute. While some varieties can cope better during storage, the underlying molecular mechanisms are currently undiscovered. We applied integrative transcriptomics on six varieties exhibiting different levels of sucrose loss during storage. Already prior to storage, well storable varieties were characterized by a higher number of parenchyma cells, a smaller cell area, and a thinner periderm. Supporting these findings, transcriptomics identified changes in genes involved in cell wall modifications. After 13 weeks of storage, over 900 differentially expressed genes were detected between well and badly storable varieties, mainly in the category of defense response but also in carbohydrate metabolism and the phenylpropanoid pathway. These findings were confirmed by gene co-expression network analysis where hub genes were identified as main drivers of invert sugar accumulation and sucrose loss. Our data provide insight into transcriptional changes in sugar beet roots during storage resulting in the characterization of key pathways and hub genes that might be further used as markers to improve pathogen resistance and storage properties.

genotype: !affects! Sucrose loss
cell wall: !modifies! Genes
defense response: !contributes to! Differentially expressed genes
carbohydrate metabolism: !influences! Phenylpropanoid pathway
gene co-expression network analysis: !identifies! Hub genes
hub genes: !drive! Invert sugar accumulation