Toxic heavy metals and metalloids in agricultural ecosystems are crucial factors that limit global crop productivity and food safety. Industrial toxic heavy metals and metalloids such as cadmium, lead, and arsenic have contaminated large areas of arable land in the world and their accumulation in the edible parts of crops is causing serious health risks to humans and animals. Plants have co-evolved with various concentrations of these toxic metals and metalloids in soil and water. Some green plant species have significant innovations in key genes for the adaptation of abiotic stress tolerance pathways that are able to tolerate heavy metals and metalloids. Increasing evidence has demonstrated that phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) plays a vital role in the alleviation of heavy metal and metalloid stresses in plants. Here, we trace the evolutionary origins of the key gene families connecting ABA signaling with tolerance to heavy metals and metalloids in green plants. We also summarize the molecular and physiological aspects of ABA in the uptake, root-to-shoot translocation, chelation, sequestration, reutilization, and accumulation of key heavy metals and metalloids in plants. The molecular evolution and interaction between the ABA signaling pathway and mechanisms for heavy metal and metalloid tolerance are highlighted in this review. Therefore, we propose that it is promising to manipulate ABA signaling in plant tissues to reduce the uptake and accumulation of toxic heavy metals and metalloids in crops through the application of ABA-producing bacteria or ABA analogues. This may lead to improvements in tolerance of major crops to heavy metals and metalloids.

ABA: !plays a vital role in! alleviation of heavy metal and metalloid stresses
ABA: !connects with! key gene families
ABA: !regulates! uptake, root-to-shoot translocation, chelation, sequestration, reutilization, and accumulation of key heavy metals and metalloids
ABA: !interacts with! mechanisms for heavy metal and metalloid tolerance
ABA: !promises to manipulate! plant tissues to reduce uptake and accumulation of toxic heavy metals and metalloids