Low temperature is a limiting factor of rice productivity and geographical distribution. Wild rice (Oryza rufipogon Griff.) is an important germplasm resource for rice improvement. It has superior tolerance to many abiotic stresses, including cold stress, but little is known about the mechanism underlying its resistance to cold. This study elucidated the molecular genetic mechanisms of wild rice in tolerating low temperature. Comprehensive transcriptome profiles of two rice genotypes (cold-sensitive ce 253 and cold-tolerant Y12-4) at the germinating stage under cold stress were comparatively analyzed. A total of 42.44-68.71 million readings were obtained, resulting in the alignment of 29,128 and 30,131 genes in genotypes 253 and Y12-4, respectively. Many common and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were analyzed in the cold-sensitive and cold-tolerant genotypes. Results showed more upregulated DEGs in the cold-tolerant genotype than in the cold-sensitive genotype at four stages under cold stress. Gene ontology enrichment analyses based on cellular process, metabolic process, response stimulus, membrane part, and catalytic activity indicated more upregulated genes than downregulated ones in the cold-tolerant genotype than in the cold-sensitive genotype. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was performed on seven randomly selected DEGs to confirm the RNA Sequencing (RNA-seq) data. These genes showed similar expression patterns corresponding with the RNA-Seq method. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) revealed Y12-4 showed more positive genes than 253 under cold stress. We also explored the cold tolerance gene LTG5 (Low Temperature Growth 5) encoding a UDP-glucosyltransferase. The overexpression of the LTG5 gene conferred cold tolerance to indica rice. Gene resources related to cold stress from wild rice can be valuable for improving the cold tolerance of crops.

Low temperature: !limits! Rice productivity
Wild rice: !has superior tolerance to! Abiotic stresses
Cold-sensitive genotype: !has more downregulated DEGs than! Cold-tolerant genotype
Gene ontology: !enriched in! Cellular process, metabolic process, response stimulus, membrane part, and catalytic activity
Quantitative real-time PCR: !confirmed! RNA-seq data
Weighted gene co-expression network analysis: !showed! Y12-4 had more positive genes than 253
LTG5 gene: !encodes! UDP-glucosyltransferase
LTG5 gene: !confers cold tolerance to! Indica rice