The worldwide use of plant biostimulants (PBs) represents an environmentally friendly tool to increase crop yield and productivity. PBs include different substances, compounds, and growth-promoting microorganism formulations, such as those derived from arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) or seaweed extracts (SEs), which are used to regulate or enhance physiological processes in plants. This study analyzed the physiological, ecological, and biochemical implications of the addition of two PBs, AMF or SE (both alone and in combination), on tomato plants (<i>Solanum lycopersicum</i> L. cv. "Rio Fuego"). The physiological responses evaluated were related to plant growth and photosynthetic performance. The ecological benefits were assessed based on the success of AMF colonization, flowering, resistance capacity, nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ), and polyphenol content. Biochemical effects were evaluated <i>via</i> protein, lipid, carbohydrate, nitrogen, and phosphorous content. Each PB was found to benefit tomato plants in a different but complementary manner. AMF resulted in an energetically expensive (high ETR<sub>MAX</sub> but low growth) but protective (high NPQ and polyphenol content) response. AMF + nutritive solution (NS) induced early floration but resulted in low protein, carbohydrate, and lipid content. Both AMF and AMF + NS favored foliar instead of root development. In contrast, SE and SE + NS favored protein content and root development and did not promote flowering. However, the combination of both PBs (AMF + SE) resulted in an additive effect, reflected in an increase in both foliar and root growth as well as protein and carbohydrate content. Moreover, a synergistic effect was also found, which was expressed in accelerated flowering and AMF colonization. We present evidence of benefits to plant performance (additive and synergistic) due to the interactive effects between microbial (AMF) and nonmicrobial (SEs) PBs and propose that the complementary modes of action of both PBs may be responsible for the observed positive effects due to the new and emerging properties of their components instead of exclusively being the result of known constituents. These results will be an important contribution to biostimulant research and to the development of a second generation of PBs in which combined and complementary mechanisms may be functionally designed.

AMF: !induces! energetically expensive response 
AMF: !promotes! NPQ and polyphenol content 
AMF: !favors! foliar development 
SE: !favors! protein content and root development 
SE: !inhibits! flowering 
AMF + SE: !induces! additive effect 
AMF + SE: !induces! synergistic effect 
AMF + SE: !accelerates! flowering 
AMF + SE: !promotes! AMF colonization