Salvianolic acids (SalAs), a group of secondary metabolites in Salvia miltiorrhiza, are widely used for treating cerebrovascular diseases. Their biosynthesis is modulated by a variety of abiotic factors, including ultraviolet-B (UV-B) irradiation; however, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. Here, an integrated metabolomic, proteomic, and transcriptomic approach coupled with transgenic analyses was employed to dissect the mechanisms underlying UV-B irradiation-induced SalA biosynthesis. Results of metabolomics showed that 28 metabolites, including 12 SalAs, were elevated in leaves of UV-B-treated S. miltiorrhiza. Meanwhile, the contents of several phytohormones, including jasmonic acid and salicylic acid, which positively modulate the biosynthesis of SalAs, also increased in UV-B-treated S. miltiorrhiza. Consistently, 20 core biosynthetic enzymes and numerous transcription factors that are involved in SalA biosynthesis were elevated in treated samples as indicated by a comprehensive proteomic analysis. Correlation and gene expression analyses demonstrated that the NAC1 gene, encoding a NAC transcriptional factor, was positively involved in UV-B-induced SalA biosynthesis. Accordingly, overexpression and RNA interference of NAC1 increased and decreased SalA contents, respectively, through regulation of key biosynthetic enzymes. Furthermore, ChIP-qPCR and Dual-LUC assays showed that NAC1 could directly bind to the CATGTG and CATGTC motifs present in the promoters of the SalA biosynthesis-related genes PAL3 and TAT3, respectively, and activate their expression. Our results collectively demonstrate that NAC1 plays a crucial role in UV-B irradiation-induced SalA biosynthesis. Taken together, our findings provide mechanistic insights into the UV-B-induced SalA biosynthesis in S. miltiorrhiza, and shed light on a great potential for the development of SalA-abundant varieties through genetic engineering.

UV-B: !induces! SalA biosynthesis
NAC1: !regulates! SalA biosynthesis
NAC1: !activates! PAL3/TAT3 expression
NAC1: !binds to! CATGTG/CATGTC motifs