Haematococcus lacustris inhabits supralittoral rock ponds and forms, under natural conditions, biofilms including layered cyanobacterial and fermentative microbial mats. Dry mats, formed under extremely stressful conditions, contained only haematocysts. Under favorable growth conditions, modeled for dry biofilms in vitro, microalgal free-living stages were detected. Haematococcus lacustris is the microalga known for its high potential to survive under a wide range of unfavorable conditions, particularly in the supralittoral temporal rock ponds of the White Sea. Previously, we described microbial communities containing H. lacustris in this region. In many cases, they were organized into systems exhibiting complex three-dimensional structure similar to that of natural biofilms. In this study, for the first time, we clarify structural description and provide microscopic evidence that these communities of H. lacustris and bacteria are assembled into the true biofilms. There are (1) simple single layer biofilms on the surface of rocks and macrophytic algae, (2) floccules (or flocs) not attached to a surface, (3) as well as stratified (layered) biofilms, wet, and dehydrated in nature. Being involved into primary organic production, H. lacustris and cyanobacteria are located exclusively in the upper layers of stratified biofilms, where they are capable to absorb sufficient for photosynthesis amount of light. The presence of acidic polysaccharides in the extracellular matrix revealed by specific staining with ruthenium red in the H. lacustris-containing microbial communities is a biochemical evidence of biofilm formation. Meanwhile, the presence of bacterial L-form is an ultrastructural confirmation of that fact. Under favorable conditions, modeled in vitro, H. lacustris from the dry microbial mats moves to the free-living states represented by vegetative palmelloid cells and motile zoospores. Owing to the fact that inside biofilms cells of microorganisms exist under stable conditions, we consider the biofilm formation as an additional mechanism that contributes to the survival of H. lacustris in the supralittoral zone of the White Sea.

Haematococcus lacustris: !inhabits! Supralittoral rock ponds 
Haematococcus lacustris: !forms! Biofilms 
Biofilms: !contain! Haematocysts 
Biofilms: !exhibit! Complex three-dimensional structure 
Biofilms: !consist of! Single layer, floccules, stratified layers 
Haematococcus lacustris: !absorbs! Light 
Extracellular matrix: !reveals! Acidic polysaccharides 
Bacterial L-form: !confirms! Biofilm formation 
Haematococcus lacustris: !moves to! Free-living states 
Biofilm formation: !contributes to! Survival of H. lacustris