Uridine diphosphate (UDP)-dependent glycosyltransferases catalyse the glycosylation of small molecules and play important roles in maintaining cell homeostasis and regulating plant development. Glycosyltransferases are widely distributed, but their detailed roles in regulating plant growth and development are largely unknown. In this study, we identified a UDP-glycosyltransferase, UGT85A53, from Camellia sinensis, the expression of which was strongly induced by various abiotic stress factors and its protein product was distributed in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. Ectopic overexpression of CsUGT85A53 in Arabidopsis resulted in an early-flowering phenotype under both long- and short-day conditions. The transcript accumulation of the flowering repressor genes FLC and ABI5, an activator of FLC in ABA-regulated flowering signaling, were both significantly decreased in transgenic Arabidopsis compared with wild-type plants. The decreased expression level of FLC might be associated with an increased level of DNA methylation that was observed in CsUGT85A53-overexpressing (OE) plants. Biochemical analyses showed that CsUGT85A53 could glucosylate ABA to form inactive ABA-glycoside in vitro and in planta. Overexpression of CsUGT85A53 in Arabidopsis resulted in a decreased concentration of free ABA and increased concentration of ABA-glucoside. The early-flowering phenotype in the CsUGT85A53-OE transgenic lines was restored by ABA application. Furthermore, CsUGT85A53-OE plants displayed an ABA-insensitive phenotype with higher germination rates compared with controls in the presence of low concentrations of exogenous ABA. Our findings are the first to identify a UGT in tea plants that catalyses ABA glucosylation and enhance flowering transition as a positive regulator.

UGT85A53: !catalyzes! Glycosylation 
UGT85A53: !induces! Early-flowering 
UGT85A53: !decreases! FLC expression 
UGT85A53: !increases! DNA methylation 
UGT85A53: !glucosylates! ABA 
UGT85A53: !decreases! Free ABA 
UGT85A53: !enhances! Flowering transition