Soil salinity is one of the major environmental stresses faced by the plants. Sodium chloride is the most important salt responsible for inducing salt stress by disrupting the osmotic potential. Due to various innate mechanisms, plants adapt to the sodic niche around them. Genes and transcription factors regulating ion transport and exclusion such as salt overly sensitive (SOS), Na<sup>+</sup> /H<sup>+</sup> exchangers (NHXs), high sodium affinity transporter (HKT) and plasma membrane protein (PMP) are activated during salinity stress and help in alleviating cells of ion toxicity. For salt tolerance in plants signal transduction and gene expression is regulated via transcription factors such as NAM (no apical meristem), ATAF (Arabidopsis transcription activation factor), CUC (cup-shaped cotyledon), Apetala 2/ethylene responsive factor (AP2/ERF), W-box binding factor (WRKY) and basic leucine zipper domain (bZIP). Cross-talk between all these transcription factors and genes aid in developing the tolerance mechanisms adopted by plants against salt stress. These genes and transcription factors regulate the movement of ions out of the cells by opening various membrane ion channels. Mutants or knockouts of all these genes are known to be less salt-tolerant compared to wild-types. Using novel molecular techniques such as analysis of genome, transcriptome, ionome and metabolome of a plant, can help in expanding the understanding of salt tolerance mechanism in plants. In this review, we discuss the genes responsible for imparting salt tolerance under salinity stress through transport dynamics of ion balance and need to integrate high-throughput molecular biology techniques to delineate the issue.

SOS: !activates! ion transport
NHXs: !activates! ion exclusion
HKT: !activates! sodium affinity transporter
PMP: !activates! plasma membrane protein
NAM: !regulates! signal transduction
ATAF: !regulates! gene expression
CUC: !regulates! ion movement
AP2/ERF: !regulates! ion movement
WRKY: !regulates! ion movement
bZIP: !regulates! ion movement
genome: !integrates! high-throughput molecular biology