Adaptation to different pollinators is an important driver of speciation in the angiosperms. Genetic approaches such as QTL mapping have been successfully used to identify the underlying speciation genes. However, these methods are often limited by widespread suppression of recombination due to divergence between species. While the mutations that caused the interspecific differences in floral color and scent have been elucidated in a variety of plant genera, the genes that are responsible for morphological differences remain mostly unknown. Differences in floral organ length determine the pollination efficiency of hawkmoths and hummingbirds, and therefore the genes that control these differences are potential speciation genes. Identifying such genes is challenging, especially in non-model species and when studying complex traits for which little prior genetic and biochemical knowledge is available. Here we combine transcriptomics with detailed growth analysis to identify candidate transcription factors underlying interspecific variation in the styles of Petunia flowers. Starting from a set of 2284 genes, stepwise filtering for expression in styles, differential expression between species, correlation with growth-related traits, allele-specific expression in interspecific hybrids, and/or high-impact polymorphisms resulted in a set of 43 candidate speciation genes. Validation by virus-induced gene silencing identified two MYB transcription factors, EOBI and EOBII, that were previously shown to regulate floral scent emission, a trait associated with pollination by hawkmoths.

Adaptation: !driven by! Speciation
QTL mapping: !used to identify! Underlying speciation genes
Mutations: !elucidated in! Plant genera
Genes: !control! Floral organ length
Transcriptomics: !combined with! Detailed growth analysis
Set of 2284 genes: !filtered for! Expression in styles
Differential expression: !between species! Correlation with growth-related traits
Allele-specific expression: !in interspecific hybrids! High-impact polymorphisms
Candidate speciation genes: !resulted in! Set of 43
Virus-induced gene silencing: !identified! Two MYB transcription factors