['32780529', 'Phototropins (phot1 and phot2) are plant blue light receptor kinases that  function to mediate phototropism, chloroplast movement, leaf flattening, and  stomatal opening in Arabidopsis. Considerable progress has been made in  understanding the mechanisms associated with phototropin receptor activation by  light. However, the identities of phototropin signaling components are less well  understood by comparison. In this study, we specifically searched for protein  kinases that interact with phototropins by using an in vitro screening method  (AlphaScreen) to profile interactions against an Arabidopsis protein kinase  library. We found that CBL-interacting protein kinase 23 (CIPK23) interacts with  both phot1 and phot2. Although these interactions were verified by in vitro  pull-down and in vivo bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays, CIPK23 was  not phosphorylated by phot1, as least in vitro. Mutants lacking CIPK23 were found  to exhibit impaired stomatal opening in response to blue light but no deficits in  other phototropin-mediated responses. We further found that blue light activation  of inward-rectifying K(+) (K(+) (in) ) channels was impaired in the guard cells  of cipk23 mutants, whereas activation of the plasma membrane H(+) -ATPase was  not. The blue light activation of K(+) (in) channels was also impaired in the  mutant of BLUS1, which is one of the phototropin substrates in guard cells. We  therefore conclude that CIPK23 promotes stomatal opening through activation of  K(+) (in) channels most likely in concert with BLUS1, but through a mechanism  other than activation of the H(+) -ATPase. The role of CIPK23 as a newly  identified component of phototropin signaling in stomatal guard cells is  discussed.', '2020 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.14955', 'Shimazaki']

phot1/phot2: !mediate! phototropism 
CIPK23: !interacts with! phot1/phot2 
CIPK23: !promotes! stomatal opening 
CIPK23: !activates! K+ (in) channels 
BLUS1: !substrate of! phototropin 
BLUS1: !impairs! blue light activation of K+ (in) channels