With rising food demands, crop production on salinized lands is increasingly necessary. Sunflower (<i>Helianthus annuus</i>), a moderately salt-tolerant crop, exhibits a tradeoff where more vigorous, high-performing genotypes have a greater proportional decline in biomass under salinity stress. Prior research has found deviations from this relationship across genotypes. Here, we identified the traits and genomic regions underlying variation in this expectation-deviation tolerance (the magnitude and direction of deviations from the expected effect of salinity). We grew a sunflower diversity panel under control and salt-stressed conditions and measured a suite of morphological (growth, mass allocation, plant and leaf morphology) and leaf ionomic traits. The genetic basis of variation and plasticity in these traits was investigated via genome-wide association, which also enabled the identification of genomic regions (i.e. haplotypic blocks) influencing multiple traits. We found that the magnitude and direction of plasticity in whole-root mass fraction, fine root mass fraction, and chlorophyll content, as well as leaf sodium and potassium content under saline conditions, were most strongly correlated with expectation-deviation tolerance. We identified multiple genomic regions underlying these traits as well as a single alpha-mannosidase gene directly associated with this tolerance metric. Our results show that, by taking the vigor-salinity effect tradeoff into account, we can identify unique traits and genes associated with salinity tolerance. Since these traits and genomic regions are distinct from those associated with high vigor (i.e. growth in benign conditions), they provide an avenue for increasing salinity tolerance in high-performing sunflower genotypes without compromising vigor.

genotype: !exhibits! tradeoff
salinity stress: !causes! proportional decline in biomass
traits: !underlie! variation in expectation-deviation tolerance
genome-wide association: !identifies! genomic regions influencing multiple traits
whole-root mass fraction, fine root mass fraction, chlorophyll content, leaf sodium and potassium content: !correlated with! expectation-deviation tolerance
alpha-mannosidase gene: !directly associated with! expectation-deviation tolerance