Improving plant water-use efficiency (WUE) is important to plant survival and crop yield in the context of water limitation. In this study, SlTLFP8 (Tubby-like F-box protein 8) was identified as an osmotic-induced gene in tomato. Transgenic tomato with up-regulated expression of SlTLFP8 showed enhanced water-deficient resistance, whereas knockout mutants generated by CRISPR/Cas9 were more sensitive to water deficit. SlTLFP8 overexpression significantly enhanced WUE by suppressing transpiration under both water-sufficient and water-deficient conditions. Further study showed that overexpressing SlTLFP8 significantly increased leaf epidermal cell size and thereby decreased stomatal density 10-20%, conversely SlTLFP8 knockout resulted in decreased cell size and thereby increased stomatal density 20-50%. SlTLFP8 overexpression and knockout modulated ploidy levels in leaf cells. Changes in expression of cell cycle related genes also indicated that SlTLFP8 affected cell size and stomatal density through endocycle transition. Despite changes in stomata density and transpiration, altering the expression of SlTLFP8 did not change photosynthesis. Additionally, biomass was not altered and there was little difference in fruit yield for transgenic and wild type lines under water-sufficient and water-deficient conditions. Our results demonstrate the effect of SlTLFP8 on endoreduplication and the potential of SlTLFP8 for improvement of WUE. BRIEF SUMMERY: This work found a new mechanism of TLP (Tubby like protein) response to water-deficient stress. SlTLFP8, a member of TLP family, regulates water-deficient resistance by modulating water loss via affecting stomatal density. Expression of SlTLFP8 was induced by osmotic stress. Transgenic tomato lines with SlTLFP8 overexpression or SlTLFP8 knockout showed significantly differences in water-use efficiency (WUE) and water-deficient resistance. The difference of leaf water loss caused by transpiration is the main explanation of the difference in WUE and water-deficient resistance. Additionally, overexpressing SlTLFP8 significantly decreased stomatal density, while SlTLFP8 knockout resulted in increased stomatal density, and SlTLFP8 affected stomatal density through endoreduplication and altered epidermal cell size. Despite changes in stomata density, altering the expression of SlTLFP8 did not result in distinct changes in photosynthesis, biomass and yield of tomato.

SlTLFP8: !induces! Osmotic Stress
SlTLFP8: !enhances! WUE
SlTLFP8: !modulates! Water Loss
SlTLFP8: !alters! Stomatal Density
SlTLFP8: !affects! Endoreduplication
SlTLFP8: !changes! Epidermal Cell Size
Stomatal Density: !regulates! Transpiration