Tomato gray leaf spot caused by Stemphylium lycopersici (S. lycopersici) is a serious disease that can severely hinder tomato production. To date, only Sm has been reported to provide resistance against this disease, and the molecular mechanism underlying resistance to this disease in tomato remains unclear. To better understand the mechanism of tomato resistance to S. lycopersici, real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)-based analysis, physiological indexes, microscopy observations and transgenic technology were used in this study. Our results showed that the expression of SlERF01 was strongly induced by S. lycopersici and by exogenous applications of the hormones salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA). Furthermore, overexpression of SlERF01 enhanced the hypersensitive response (HR) to S. lycopersici and elevated the expression of defense genes in tomato. Furthermore, the accumulation of lignin, callose and hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) increased in the transgenic lines after inoculation with S. lycopersici. Taken together, our results showed that SlERF01 played an indispensable role in multiple SA, JA and reactive oxygen species (ROS) signaling pathways to provide resistance to S. lycopersici invasion. Our findings also indicated that SlERF01 could activate the expression of the PR1 gene and enhance resistance to S. lycopersici. We identified the SlERF01 gene, which encodes a novel tomato AP2/ERF transcription factor (TF). Functional analysis revealed that SlERF01 positively regulates tomato resistance to S. lycopersici. Our findings indicate that SlERF01 plays a key role in multiple SA, JA and ROS signaling pathways to provide resistance to invasion by S. lycopersici. The findings of this study not only help to better understand the mechanisms of response to pathogens but also enable targeted breeding strategies for tomato resistance to S. lycopersici.

SlERF01: !enhances! Resistance to S. lycopersici
SlERF01: !activates! PR1 gene
SlERF01: !induces! Expression of defense genes
SlERF01: !regulates! SA, JA and ROS signaling pathways
S. lycopersici: !induces! SlERF01 expression