Grape is highly sensitive to gibberellin (GA), which is crucial during seed and berry development (SBD) either by itself or by interacting with other hormones, such as auxin, Abscisic acid (ABA), and Cytokinin (CK). However, no systematic analysis of GA metabolic and signal transduction (MST) pathway has been undertaken in grapevine. In this study, total endogenous GA<sub>3</sub> content significantly decreased during SBD, and a total of 48 known genes in GA metabolic (GAM; 31) and signal transduction (ST; 17) pathways were identified in this process. In the GAM pathway, out of 31 genes, VvGA20ox1-1, VvGA3ox4-1, and VvGA2ox1-1 may be the major factors interacting at the green-berry stage (GBS) accompanied with higher accumulation rate. GA biosynthesis was greater than GA inactivation at GBS, confirming the importance of seeds in GA synthesis. The visible correlation between endogenous GA<sub>3</sub> content and gene expression profiles suggested that the transcriptional regulation of GA biosynthesis pathway genes was a key mechanism of GA accumulation at the stone-hardening stage (SHS). Interestingly, we observed a negative feedback regulation between VvGA3oxs-VvGAI1-4, VvGA2oxs-VvGAI1-4, and VvGID1B-VvGAI1-4 in maintaining the balance of GA<sub>3</sub> content in berries. Moreover, 11 miRNAs may be involved in the modulation of GA MST pathway by mediating their target genes, such as VvGA3ox, VvGID1B, and VvGAMYB. Many genes in auxin, ABA, and CK MST pathways were further identified and found to have a special pattern in the berry, and the crosstalk between GA and these hormones may modulate the complex process during SBD through the interaction gene network of the multihormone pathway. Lastly, based on the expression characterization of multihormone MST pathway genes, a proposed model of the GA-mediated multihormone regulatory network during SBD was proposed. Our results provided novel insights into GA-mediated regulatory networks during SBD in grape. The complexity of GA-mediated multihormone ST in SBD was also elucidated, thereby providing valuable information for future functional characterizations of specific genes in grape.

VvGA20ox1-1: !interacts with! VvGA3ox4-1
VvGA2ox1-1: !interacts with! VvGA3ox4-1
VvGA3oxs: !represses! VvGAI1-4
VvGA2oxs: !represses! VvGAI1-4
VvGID1B: !represses! VvGAI1-4
VvGA3ox: !targeted by! miRNAs
VvGID1B: !targeted by! miRNAs
VvGAMYB: !targeted by! miRNAs
Auxin: !interacts with! GA
ABA: !interacts with! GA
CK: !interacts with! GA