Climate change increases the occurrence of prolonged drought periods with large implications for forest functioning. Scots pine (<i>Pinus sylvestris</i>) is one of the most abundant conifers worldwide, and evidence is rising that its resilience to severe drought is limited. However, we know little about its ability to recover from drought-induced embolism. To analyze postdrought hydraulic recovery, we investigated stress and recovery dynamics of leaf gas exchange, nonstructural carbohydrates, and hydraulic properties in 2.5-year-old Scots pine seedlings. We quantified the degree of xylem embolism by combining in vivo x-ray microtomography with intrusive techniques including measurements of hydraulic conductivity and dye staining during drought progression and short-term (2 d) and long-term (4 weeks) recovery. Seedlings were grown under controlled conditions, and irrigation was withheld until stomata closed and xylem water potential declined to -3.2 MPa on average, causing a 46% loss of stem hydraulic conductivity. Following drought release, we found a gradual recovery of leaf gas exchange to 50% to 60% of control values. This partial recovery indicates hydraulic limitations due to drought-induced damage. Whereas xylem water potential recovered close to control values within 2 d, both x-ray microtomography and intrusive measurements revealed no recovery of stem hydraulic conductivity. Moreover, we did not find indications for nonstructural carbohydrate reserves limiting hydraulic recovery. Our findings demonstrate that Scots pine is able to survive severe drought and to partially recover, although we assume that xylem development during the next growing season might compensate for some of the hydraulic impairment. Such drought-induced legacy effects are important when considering vegetation responses to extreme events.

Climate change: !increases! Prolonged drought
Scots pine: !limited resilience to! Severe drought
Leaf gas exchange: !quantified degree of! Xylem embolism
Irrigation: !withheld until! Stomata closed
Xylem water potential: !declined to! -3.2 MPa
Stem hydraulic conductivity: !lost 46% of! Control values
Leaf gas exchange: !recovered 50-60% of! Control values
Xylem water potential: !recovered close to! Control values
Stem hydraulic conductivity: !showed no recovery of! Control values