Phosphorus (P) -rich soils develop in phosphorite residing areas while P-deficient soils are ubiquitous in subtropical regions. Little has been reported that how metabolites participate in the seed development and the processes involved in their coping with contrasting-nutrient environments. Here we quantified the metabolites of Quercus variabilis acorns in the early (July), middle (August), late (September) development stages, and determined element (C, H, O, N, P, K, Ca, Mg, S, Fe, Al, Mn, Na, Zn, and Cu) concentrations of acorns in the late stage, at geologically-derived contrasting-P sites in subtropical China. The primary metabolic pathways included sugar metabolism, the TCA cycle, and amino acid metabolism. Most metabolites (especially C- and N-containing metabolites) increased and then decreased from July to September. Acorns between the two sites were significantly discriminated at the three stages, respectively, by metabolites (predominantly sugars and organic acids). Concentrations of P, orthophosphoric acid and most sugars were higher; erythrose was lower in late-stage acorns at P-rich sites than those at P-deficient sites. No significant differences existed in the size and dry mass of individual acorns between oak populations at the two sites. Oak acorns at the two sites formed distinct metabolic phenotypes related to their distinct geologically-derived soil conditions, and the late-stage acorns tended to increase P-use-efficiency in the material synthesis process at P-deficient sites, relative to those at P-rich sites.

Metabolites: !increase and decrease! from July to September
Metabolites: !discriminate! Acorns between two sites
P-rich site: !higher concentrations of! P, orthophosphoric acid and sugars
P-deficient site: !lower concentration of! erythrose
Size/dry mass: !no significant differences! between oak populations at two sites
Metabolic phenotypes: !form distinct! related to geologically-derived soil conditions
P-use-efficiency: !increases! in material synthesis process at P-deficient sites