['32845293', 'Plant genomes generally contain two aldehyde dehydrogenase 10 (ALDH10) genes,  which encode NAD+-dependent enzymes. These oxidize various aminoaldehydes that  are produced by the catabolism of amino acids and polyamines. ALDH10s are closely  related to the animal and fungal trimethylaminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenases  (TMABADHs) that are involved in the synthesis of gamma-butyrobetaine, the precursor  of carnitine. Here, we explore the ability of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteins  AtALDH10A8 and AtALDH10A9 to oxidize aminoaldehydes. We demonstrate that these  enzymes display high TMABADH activities in vitro. Moreover, they can complement  the Candida albicans tmabadhDelta/Delta null mutant. These findings illustrate the link  between AtALDH10A8 and AtALDH10A9 and gamma-butyrobetaine synthesis. An analysis of  single and double knockout Arabidopsis mutant lines revealed that the double  mutants had reduced gamma-butyrobetaine levels. However, there were no changes in the  carnitine contents of these mutants. The double mutants were more sensitive to  salt stress. In addition, the siliques of the double mutants had a significant  proportion of seeds that failed to mature. The mature seeds contained higher  amounts of triacylglycerol, facilitating accelerated germination. Taken together,  these results show that ALDH10 enzymes are involved in gamma-butyrobetaine synthesis.  Furthermore, gamma-butyrobetaine fulfils a range of physiological roles in addition  to those related to carnitine biosynthesis.', '2020 Dec 31', 'J Exp Bot', '10.1093/jxb/eraa394', 'Perrin']

ALDH10: !encodes! NAD+-dependent enzymes 
NAD+-dependent enzymes: !oxidize! aminoaldehydes 
AtALDH10A8/AtALDH10A9: !display! TMABADH activities 
TMABADH: !involved in! gamma-butyrobetaine synthesis 
AtALDH10A8/AtALDH10A9: !complement! Candida albicans tmabadhDelta/Delta null mutant 
double knockout Arabidopsis mutants: !have reduced! gamma-butyrobetaine levels 
double knockout Arabidopsis mutants: !are more sensitive to! salt stress 
double knockout Arabidopsis mutants: !have higher! triacylglycerol content 
gamma-butyrobetaine: !fulfils! physiological roles