The growth rate hypothesis (GRH) states that a negative correlation exists between the growth rate and N:P and C:P ratios, because fast-growing organisms need relatively more phosphorus-rich RNA to support their high rates of protein synthesis. However, it is still uncertain whether the GRH is applicable in freshwater wetlands. Several studies have shown that water level and sediment type are key factors influencing plant growth and plant C:N:P characteristics in freshwater wetlands. Thus, this study aimed to elucidate the influence of these factors on plant growth and test the GRH under varying water levels and sediment conditions. We designed a controlled experiment at three water levels and under three sediment types using the two dominant plants (<i>Carex brevicuspis</i> and <i>Polygonum hydropiper</i>) in the East Dongting Lake wetland, and we further investigated the relative growth rate (RGR); concentrations of total carbon (TC), total nitrogen (TN), and total phosphorus (TP); and plant stoichiometry (ratios of C:N, C:P, and N:P) in the aboveground and belowground parts and whole plants in both species. Results demonstrated that the RGR and TC of both species decreased significantly with decreasing sediment nutrient supply and increasing water level. However, TN and TP of both species were markedly higher at high water levels than at low water levels; furthermore, these were significantly higher on clay than on the other two sediment types at each water level. The C:N and C:P ratios of both species decreased with increasing sediment nutrient supply and water level, whereas N:P decreased in both species with increasing sediment nutrient supply. The aboveground part of <i>C. brevicuspis</i> as well as the aboveground part and whole plant of <i>P. hydropiper</i> were negatively correlated with N:P, which is consistent with the GRH. However, the relationship between the belowground RGR and N:P of these species was inconsistent with GRH. Therefore, the water level and sediment type and their interaction significantly influenced plant RGR and C:N:P characteristics. The RGR and plant stoichiometry differed significantly between plant organs, indicating that the GRH needs refinement when applied to wetland macrophytes.

water level: !influences! plant growth 
sediment type: !influences! plant growth 
water level: !influences! C:N:P characteristics 
sediment type: !influences! C:N:P characteristics 
RGR: !correlated with! N:P 
C:N: !correlated with! water level 
C:P: !correlated with! water level 
N:P: !correlated with! sediment type