['32859754', 'Patatin-related phospholipase As (pPLAs) are major hydrolases acting on  acyl-lipids and play important roles in various plant developmental processes.  pPLAIII group members, which lack a canonical catalytic Ser motif, have been less  studied than other pPLAs. We report here the characterization of pPLAIIIalpha in  Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) based on the biochemical and physiological  characterization of pPLAIIIalpha knockouts, complementants, and overexpressors, as  well as heterologous expression of the protein. In vitro activity assays on the  purified recombinant protein showed that despite lack of canonical phospholipase  motifs, pPLAIIIalpha had a phospholipase A activity on a wide variety of  phospholipids. Overexpression of pPLAIIIalpha in Arabidopsis resulted in a decrease  in many lipid molecular species, but the composition in major lipid classes was  not affected. Fluorescence tagging indicated that pPLAIIIalpha localizes to the  plasma membrane. Although Arabidopsis pplaIIIalpha knockout mutants showed some  phenotypes comparable to other pPLAIIIs, such as reduced trichome length and  increased hypocotyl length, control of seed size and germination were identified  as distinctive pPLAIIIalpha-mediated functions. Expression of some PLD genes was  strongly reduced in the pplaIIIalpha mutants. Overexpression of pPLAIIIalpha caused  increased resistance to turnip crinkle virus, which associated with a 2-fold  higher salicylic acid/jasmonic acid ratio and an increased expression of the  defense gene pathogenesis-related protein1. These results therefore show that  pPLAIIIalpha has functions that overlap with those of other pPLAIIIs but also  distinctive functions, such as the control of seed germination. This study also  provides new insights into the pathways downstream of pPLAIIIalpha.', '2020 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.20.00630', 'ORCID:']

pPLAIIIalpha: !acts on! acyl-lipids 
pPLAIIIalpha: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
pPLAIIIalpha: !affects! trichome length 
pPLAIIIalpha: !affects! hypocotyl length 
pPLAIIIalpha: !controls! seed size 
pPLAIIIalpha: !controls! germination 
pPLAIIIalpha: !regulates! PLD genes 
pPLAIIIalpha: !enhances! resistance to turnip crinkle virus 
pPLAIIIalpha: !increases! salicylic acid/jasmonic acid ratio 
pPLAIIIalpha: !induces! pathogenesis-related protein1