['32868422', 'In higher plants, molecular responses to exogenous hypoxia are driven by group  VII ethylene response factors (ERF-VIIs). These transcriptional regulators  accumulate in the nucleus under hypoxia to activate anaerobic genes but are  destabilized in normoxic conditions through the action of oxygen-sensing plant  cysteine oxidases (PCOs). The PCOs catalyze the reaction of oxygen with the  conserved N-terminal cysteine of ERF-VIIs to form cysteine sulfinic acid,  triggering degradation via the Cys/Arg branch of the N-degron pathway. The PCOs  are therefore a vital component of the plant oxygen signaling system, connecting  environmental stimulus with cellular and physiological response. Rational  manipulation of PCO activity could regulate ERF-VII levels and improve flood  tolerance, but requires detailed structural information. We report crystal  structures of the constitutively expressed PCO4 and PCO5 from Arabidopsis  thaliana to 1.24 and 1.91 A resolution, respectively. The structures reveal that  the PCOs comprise a cupin-like scaffold, which supports a central metal cofactor  coordinated by three histidines. While this overall structure is consistent with  other thiol dioxygenases, closer inspection of the active site indicates that  other catalytic features are not conserved, suggesting that the PCOs may use  divergent mechanisms to oxidize their substrates. Conservative substitution of  two active site residues had dramatic effects on PCO4 function both in vitro and  in vivo, through yeast and plant complementation assays. Collectively, our data  identify key structural elements that are required for PCO activity and provide a  platform for engineering crops with improved hypoxia tolerance.', '2020 Sep 15', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.2000206117', 'ORCID:']

ERF-VIIs: !accumulate in! nucleus 
PCOs: !catalyze reaction of! oxygen 
PCOs: !connect! environmental stimulus 
PCOs: !comprise! cupin-like scaffold 
PCOs: !require! key structural elements 
PCOs: !dramatically affect! PCO4 function 
PCOs: !provide platform for! engineering crops