Isoflavone, a secondary metabolite produced by Glycine max (L.) Merr. (soybean), is valuable for human and plant health. The genetic architecture of soybean isoflavone content remains unclear, however, despite several mapping studies. We generated genomic data for 200 soybean cultivars and 150 recombinant inbred lines (RILs) to localize putative loci associated with soybean seed isoflavone content. Using a genome-wide association study (GWAS), we identified 87 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that were significantly associated with isoflavone concentration. Using linkage mapping, we identified 37 quantitative trait loci (QTLs) underlying the content of four isoflavones found in the RILs. A major locus on chromosome 8 (qISO8-1) was co-located by both the GWAS and linkage mapping. qISO8-1 was fine mapped to a 99.5-kb region, flanked by SSR_08_1651 and SSR_08_1656, in a BC<sub>2</sub> F<sub>5</sub> population. GmMPK1, encoding a mitogen-activated protein kinase, was identified as the causal gene in qISO8-1, and two natural GmMPK1 polymorphisms were significantly associated with isoflavone content. Overexpression of GmMPK1 in soybean hairy roots resulted in increased isoflavone concentrations. Overexpressing GmMPK1 in transgenic soybeans had greater resistance to Phytophthora root rot, suggesting that GmMPK1 might increase soybean resistance to biotic stress by influencing isoflavone content. Our results not only increase our understanding of the genetic architecture of soybean seed isoflavone content, but also provide a framework for the future marker-assisted breeding of high isoflavone content in soybean cultivars.

GmMPK1: !encodes! mitogen-activated protein kinase 
GmMPK1: !associated with! isoflavone concentration 
GmMPK1: !overexpression of! increased isoflavone concentrations 
GmMPK1: !overexpression of! increased resistance to biotic stress 
GWAS: !identified! SNPs associated with isoflavone concentration 
Linkage mapping: !identified! QTLs underlying isoflavone content