To engineer Mo-dependent nitrogenase function in plants, expression of the structural proteins NifD and NifK will be an absolute requirement. Although mitochondria have been established as a suitable eukaryotic environment for biosynthesis of oxygen-sensitive enzymes such as NifH, expression of NifD in this organelle has proven difficult due to cryptic NifD degradation. Here, we describe a solution to this problem. Using molecular and proteomic methods, we found NifD degradation to be a consequence of mitochondrial endoprotease activity at a specific motif within NifD. Focusing on this functionally sensitive region, we designed NifD variants comprising between one and three amino acid substitutions and distinguished several that were resistant to degradation when expressed in both plant and yeast mitochondria. Nitrogenase activity assays of these resistant variants in <i>Escherichia coli</i> identified a subset that retained function, including a single amino acid variant (Y100Q). We found that other naturally occurring NifD proteins containing alternate amino acids at the Y100 position were also less susceptible to degradation. The Y100Q variant also enabled expression of a NifD(Y100Q)-linker-NifK translational polyprotein in plant mitochondria, confirmed by identification of the polyprotein in the soluble fraction of plant extracts. The NifD(Y100Q)-linker-NifK retained function in bacterial nitrogenase assays, demonstrating that this polyprotein permits expression of NifD and NifK in a defined stoichiometry supportive of activity. Our results exemplify how protein design can overcome impediments encountered when expressing synthetic proteins in novel environments. Specifically, these findings outline our progress toward the assembly of the catalytic unit of nitrogenase within mitochondria.

NifD: !degraded by! mitochondrial endoprotease
NifD: !resistant to degradation with! amino acid substitutions
Y100Q: !retains! nitrogenase function
Y100Q: !enables expression of! NifD-linker-NifK polyprotein
NifD-linker-NifK: !retains! nitrogenase function