CaLCuV-based VIGS effectively works in cabbage and contributes to efficient functional genomics research in Brassica crop species. Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS), a posttranscriptional gene silencing method, is an effective technique for analysing the functions of genes in plants. However, no VIGS vectors have been available for Brassica oleracea until now. Here, tobacco rattle virus (TRV), pTYs and cabbage leaf curl virus (CaLCuV) gene-silencing vectors (PCVA/PCVB) were chosen to improve the VIGS system in cabbage using the phytoene desaturase (PDS) gene as an efficient visual indicator of VIGS. We successfully silenced the expression of PDS and observed photobleaching phenomena in cabbage in response to pTYs and CaLCuV, with the latter being more easy to operate and less expensive. The parameters potentially affecting the silencing efficiency of VIGS by CaLCuV in cabbage, including the targeting fragment strategy, inoculation method and incubation temperature, were then compared. The optimized CaLCuV-based VIGS system involves the following: an approximately 500 bp insert sequence, an Agrobacterium OD<sub>600</sub> of 1.0, use of the vacuum osmosis method applied at the bud stage, and an incubation temperature of 22 °C. Using these parameters, we achieved a stable silencing efficiency of 65%. To further test the effectiveness of the system, we selected the Mg-chelatase H subunit (ChlH) gene in cabbage and knocked down its expression, and we observed yellow leaves, as expected. We successfully applied the CaLCuV-based VIGS system to two other representative Brassica crop species, B. rapa and B. nigra, and thus expanded the application scope of this system. Our VIGS system described here will contribute to efficient functional genomics research in Brassica crop species.

CaLCuV-based VIGS: !works in! cabbage 
CaLCuV-based VIGS: !contributes to! functional genomics research 
VIGS: !uses! TRV, pTYs and CaLCuV gene-silencing vectors 
PDS gene: !used as! visual indicator of VIGS 
PDS gene: !silenced by! CaLCuV 
VIGS: !affected by! targeting fragment strategy, inoculation method and incubation temperature 
VIGS: !optimized with! 500 bp insert sequence, Agrobacterium OD<sub>600</sub> of 1.0, vacuum osmosis method applied at bud stage, incubation temperature of 22 °C 
ChlH gene: !knocked down by! CaLCuV-based VIGS system 
CaLCuV-based VIGS system: !applied to! B. rapa and B. nigra