Histone modification genes (HMs) play potential roles in plant growth and development via influencing gene expression and chromatin structure. However, limited information is available about HMs genes in grapes (Vitis vinifera L.). Here, we described detailed genome-wide identification of HMs gene families in grapevine. We identified 117 HMs genes in grapevine and classified these genes into 11 subfamilies based on conserved domains and phylogenetic relationships with Arabidopsis. We described the genes in terms of their chromosomal locations and exon-intron distribution. Further, we investigated the evolutionary history, gene ontology (GO) analysis, and syntenic relationships between grapes and Arabidopsis. According to results 21% HMs genes are the result of duplication (tandem and segmental) events and all the duplicated genes have negative mode of selection. GO analysis predicted the presence of HMs proteins in cytoplasm, nucleus, and intracellular organelles. According to seed development expression profiling, many HMs grapevine genes were differentially expressed in seeded and seedless cultivars, suggesting their roles in seed development. Moreover, we checked the response of HMs genes against powdery mildew infection at different time points. Results have suggested the involvement of some genes in disease resistance regulation mechanism. Furthermore, the expression profiles of HMs genes were analyzed in response to different plant hormones (Abscisic acid, Jasmonic acid, Salicylic acid, and Ethylene) at different time points. All of the genes showed differential expression against one or more hormones. VvHMs genes might have potential roles in grapevine including seed development, disease resistance, and hormonal signaling pathways. Our study provides first detailed genome-wide identification and expression profiling of HMs genes in grapevine.

Gene: !influences! Gene expression
Gene: !affects! Chromatin structure
Gene: !localizes to! Cytoplasm, nucleus, intracellular organelles
Gene: !results from! Duplication events
Gene: !enhances! Seed development
Gene: !regulates! Disease resistance
Gene: !responds to! Plant hormones