Activation of GPX and enhanced NO level play a key role in IBA-mediated enhanced Cd tolerance in young barley roots. Application of exogenous indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) or an IAA precursor improves the tolerance of plants to heavy metals. However, the physiology of these tolerance mechanisms remains largely unknown. Therefore, we studied the priming effect of indole-3-butyric acid (IBA), an IAA precursor, on mild and severe cadmium (Cd) stress-induced responses in roots of young barley seedlings. IBA, similarly to mild Cd stress, significantly increased the glutathione peroxidase (GPX) activity in the apexes of barley roots, which remained elevated after the IBA pretreatment as well. IBA pretreatment-evoked high nitric oxide generation in roots effectively reduced the high superoxide level under the severe Cd stress, leading to less toxic peroxynitrite accumulation accompanied by markedly reduced Cd-induced cell death. On the other hand, the IBA-evoked changes in IAA homeostasis resulted in root growth reorientation from longitudinal elongation to radial swelling. However, the application of an IAA signaling inhibitor, following the activation of defense responses by IBA, was able to promote root growth even at high concentrations of Cd. Based on the results, it can be concluded that the application of IBA, as an effective activator of Cd tolerance mechanisms in young barley roots, and the subsequent use of an IAA signaling inhibitor for the inhibition of root morphogenic responses induced by altered auxin metabolism, results in a high degree of root Cd tolerance, helping it to withstand even the transient exposure to lethal Cd concentration without the absolute inhibition of root growth.

GPX: !activated by! IBA 
NO: !enhanced by! IBA 
Superoxide: !reduced by! NO 
Peroxynitrite: !reduced by! NO 
Cell death: !reduced by! NO 
IAA homeostasis: !altered by! IBA 
Root growth: !reoriented by! IAA 
IBA: !activates! Cd tolerance mechanisms 
IAA signaling inhibitor: !inhibits! root morphogenic responses