The NAC transcription factor ATAF2 suppresses its own transcription via self-promoter binding. ATAF2 genetically interacts with the circadian regulator CCA1 and phytochrome A to modulate seedling photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. ATAF2 (ANAC081) is a NAC (NAM, ATAF and CUC) transcription factor (TF) that participates in the regulation of disease resistance, stress tolerance and hormone metabolism in Arabidopsis thaliana. We previously reported that ATAF2 promotes Arabidopsis hypocotyl growth in a light-dependent manner via transcriptionally suppressing the brassinosteroid (BR)-inactivating cytochrome P450 genes BAS1 (CYP734A1, formerly CYP72B1) and SOB7 (CYP72C1). Assays using low light intensities suggest that the photoreceptor phytochrome A (PHYA) may play a more critical role in ATAF2-regulated photomorphogenesis than phytochrome B (PHYB) and cryptochrome 1 (CRY1). In addition, ATAF2 is also regulated by the circadian clock. The core circadian TF CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1) physically interacts with ATAF2 at the DNA-protein and protein-protein levels, and both differentially suppress BAS1- and SOB7-mediated BR catabolism. In this research, we show that ATAF2 can bind its own promoter as a transcriptional self-repressor. This self-feedback-suppression loop is a typical feature of multiple circadian-regulated genes. Additionally, ATAF2 and CCA1 synergistically suppress seedling photomorphogenesis as reflected by the light-dependent hypocotyl growth analysis of their single and double gene knock-out mutants. Similar fluence-rate response assays using ATAF2 and photoreceptor (PHYB, CRY1 and PHYA) knock-out mutants demonstrate that PHYA is required for ATAF2-regulated photomorphogenesis in a wide range of light intensities. Furthermore, disruption of PHYA can suppress the BR-insensitive hypocotyl-growth phenotype of ATAF2 loss-of-function seedlings in the light, but not in darkness. Collectively, our results provide a genetic interaction synopsis of the circadian-clock-photomorphogenesis-BR integration node involving ATAF2, CCA1 and PHYA.

ATAF2: !suppresses! self-promoter binding
ATAF2: !interacts with! CCA1
ATAF2: !modulates! seedling photomorphogenesis
ATAF2: !transcriptionally suppresses! BAS1 & SOB7
ATAF2: !regulated by! circadian clock
CCA1: !physically interacts with! ATAF2
PHYA: !plays a critical role in! ATAF2-regulated photomorphogenesis
PHYA: !required for! ATAF2-regulated photomorphogenesis
PHYA: !can suppress! BR-insensitive hypocotyl-growth phenotype