Cotton (Gossypium spp.) fiber yield is one of the key target traits, and improved fiber yield has always been thought of as an important objective in the breeding programs and production. Although some studies had been reported for the understanding of genetic bases for cotton yield-related traits, the detected quantitative trait loci (QTL) for the traits is still very limited. To uncover the whole-genome QTL controlling three yield-related traits in upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.), phenotypic traits were investigated under four planting environments and 9244 single-nucleotide polymorphism linkage disequilibrium block (SNPLDB) markers were developed in an association panel consisting of 315 accessions. A total of 53, 70 and 68 significant SNPLDB loci associated with boll number (BN), boll weight (BW) and lint percentage (LP), were respectively detected through a restricted two-stage multi-locus multi-allele genome-wide association study (RTM-GWAS) procedure in multiple environments. The haplotype/allele effects of the significant SNPLDB loci were estimated and the QTL-allele matrices were organized for offering the abbreviated genetic composition of the population. Among the significant SNPLDB loci, six of them were simultaneously identified in two or more single planting environments and were thought of as the stable SNPLDB loci. Additionally, a total of 115 genes were annotated in the nearby regions of the six stable SNPLDB loci, and 16 common potential candidate genes controlling target traits of them were predicted by two RNA-seq data. One of 16 genes (GH_D06G2161) was mainly expressed in the early ovule-development stages, and the stable SNPLDB locus (LDB_19_62926589) was mapped in its promoter region. This study identified the QTL alleles and candidate genes that could provide important insights into the genetic basis of yield-related traits in upland cotton and might facilitate breeding cotton varieties with high yield.

QTL: !associated with! boll number 
QTL: !associated with! boll weight 
QTL: !associated with! lint percentage 
SNPLDB loci: !simultaneously identified in! two or more single planting environments 
SNPLDB loci: !annotated in nearby regions of! six stable SNPLDB loci 
RNA-seq data: !predicted! 16 common potential candidate genes 
GH_D06G2161 gene: !mainly expressed in! early ovule-development stages 
LDB_19_62926589 locus: !mapped in! GH_D06G2161 gene promoter region