GRAS proteins are crucial transcription factors, which are plant-specific and participate in various plant biological processes. Thanks to the rapid progress of the whole genome sequencing technologies, the GRAS gene families in different plants have been broadly explored and studied. However, comprehensive research on the soybean (Glycine max) GRAS gene family is relatively lagging. In this study, 117 Glycine max GRAS genes (GmGRAS) were identified. Further phylogenetic analyses showed that the GmGRAS genes could be categorized into nine gene subfamilies: DELLA, HAM, LAS, LISCL, PAT1, SCL3, SCL4/7, SCR and SHR. Gene structure analyses turned out that the GmGRAS genes lacked introns and were relatively conserved. Conserved domains and motif patterns of the GmGRAS members in the same subfamily or clade exhibited similarities. Notably, the expansion of the GmGRAS gene family was driven both by gene tandem and segmental duplication events. Whereas, segmental duplications took the major role in generating new GmGRAS genes. Moreover, the synteny and evolutionary constraints analyses of the GRAS proteins among soybean and distinct species (two monocots and four dicots) provided more detailed evidence for GmGRAS gene evolution. Cis-element analyses indicated that the GmGRAS genes may be responsive to diverse environmental stresses and regulate distinct biological processes. Besides, the expression patterns of the GmGRAS genes were varied in various tissues, during saline and dehydration stresses and during seed germination processes. We conducted a systematic investigation of the GRAS genes in soybean, which may be valuable in paving the way for future GmGRAS gene studies and soybean breeding.

GRAS proteins: !are crucial transcription factors! plant-specific processes
Glycine max GRAS genes: !were identified! 117 genes
GmGRAS genes: !were categorized into! nine gene subfamilies
GmGRAS genes: !lacked introns and were relatively conserved! gene structure analyses
Expansion of GmGRAS gene family: !was driven by! gene tandem and segmental duplication events
Synteny and evolutionary constraints analyses: !provided evidence for! GmGRAS gene evolution
Cis-element analyses: !indicated that the GmGRAS genes may be responsive to! diverse environmental stresses
Expression patterns of GmGRAS genes: !varied in! various tissues, stresses and seed germination processes