The Arabidopsis thaliana T2 family endoribonuclease RNS2 localizes to the vacuole and functions in rRNA degradation. Loss of RNS2 activity impairs rRNA turnover and leads to constitutive autophagy, a process for degradation of cellular components. Autophagy is normally activated during environmental stress and is important for stress tolerance and homeostasis. Here we show that restoration of cytosolic purine nucleotide levels rescues the constitutive autophagy phenotype of rns2-2 seedlings, whereas inhibition of purine synthesis induces autophagy in wild-type seedlings. rns2-2 seedlings have reduced activity of the target of rapamycin (TOR) kinase complex, a negative regulator of autophagy, and this phenotype is rescued by addition of inosine to increase purine levels. Activation of TOR in rns2-2 by exogenous auxin blocks the enhanced autophagy, indicating a possible involvement of the TOR signaling pathway in the activation of autophagy in the rns2-2 mutant. Our data suggest a model in which loss of rRNA degradation in rns2-2 leads to a reduction in cytoplasmic nucleotide concentrations, which in turn inhibits TOR activity, leading to activation of autophagy to restore homeostasis.

RNS2: !localizes to! vacuole 
RNS2: !functions in! rRNA degradation 
Loss of RNS2 activity: !impairs! rRNA turnover 
Loss of RNS2 activity: !leads to! constitutive autophagy 
Autophagy: !normally activated during! environmental stress 
Autophagy: !important for! stress tolerance and homeostasis 
Restoration of cytosolic purine nucleotide levels: !rescues! constitutive autophagy phenotype 
Inhibition of purine synthesis: !induces! autophagy in wild-type seedlings 
rns2-2 seedlings: !have reduced activity of! target of rapamycin (TOR) kinase complex 
Addition of inosine: !increases! purine levels 
Activation of TOR: !blocks! enhanced autophagy 
TOR signaling pathway: !involvement in! activation of autophagy in the rns2-2 mutant 
Loss of rRNA degradation: !reduces! cytoplasmic nucleotide concentrations 
Reduction in cytoplasmic nucleotide concentrations