Rice aconitase gene OsACO1 is involved in the iron deficiency-signaling pathway for the expression of iron deficiency-inducible genes, either thorough enzyme activity or possible specific RNA binding for post-transcriptional regulation. Iron (Fe) is an essential element for virtually all living organisms. When plants are deficient in Fe, Fe acquisition systems are activated to maintain Fe homeostasis, and this regulation is mainly executed at the gene transcription level. Many molecules responsible for Fe uptake, translocation, and storage in plants have been identified and characterized. However, how plants sense Fe status within cells and then induce a transcriptional response is still unclear. In the present study, we found that knockdown of the OsACO1 gene, which encodes an aconitase in rice, leads to the down-regulation of selected Fe deficiency-inducible genes involved in Fe uptake and translocation in roots, and a decrease in Fe concentration in leaves, even when grown under Fe-sufficient conditions. OsACO1 knockdown plants showed a delayed transcriptional response to Fe deficiency compared to wild-type plants. In contrast, overexpression of OsACO1 resulted in the opposite effects. These results suggest that OsACO1 is situated upstream of the Fe deficiency-signaling pathway. Furthermore, we found that the OsACO1 protein potentially has RNA-binding activity. In vitro screening of RNA interactions with OsACO1 revealed that RNA potentially forms a unique stem-loop structure that interacts with OsACO1 via a conserved GGUGG motif within the loop structure. These results suggest that OsACO1 regulate Fe deficiency response either thorough enzyme activity catalyzing isomerization of citrate, or specific RNA binding for post-transcriptional regulation.

OsACO1: !affects! Fe deficiency-signaling pathway
OsACO1: !localizes to! roots
OsACO1: !interacts with! Fe deficiency-inducible genes
OsACO1: !enhances! Fe concentration in leaves
OsACO1: !represses! transcriptional response to Fe deficiency
OsACO1: !synthesizes! isomerization of citrate
OsACO1: !binds to! RNA stem-loop structure