This work provides the first system-wide datasets concerning metabolic changes in calcium-treated fruits, which reveal that exogenously applied calcium may specifically reprogram sweet cherry development and ripening physiognomy. Calcium modulates a wide range of plant developmental processes; however, the regulation of fruit ripening by calcium remains largely uncharacterized. In this study, transcriptome, proteome and metabolome profiling was used to document the responses of sweet cherry fruit to external calcium application (0.5% CaCl<sub>2</sub>) at 15, 27 and 37 days after full blossom. Endogenous calcium loading in fruit across development following external calcium feeding was accompanied by a reduction in respiration rate. Calcium treatment strongly impaired water-induced fruit cracking tested by two different assays, and this effect depended on the fruit size, water temperature and light/dark conditions. Substantial changes in the levels of numerous polar/non-polar primary and secondary metabolites, including malic acid, glucose, cysteine, epicatechin and neochlorogenic acid were noticed in fruits exposed to calcium. At the onset of ripening, we identified various calcium-affected genes, including those involved in ubiquitin and cysteine signaling, that had not been associated previously with calcium function in fruit biology. Calcium specifically increased the abundance of a significant number of proteins that classified as oxidoreductases, transferases, hydrolases, lyases, and ligases. The overview of temporal changes in gene expression and corresponding protein abundance provided by interlinked analysis revealed that oxidative phosphorylation, hypersensitive response, DNA repair, stomata closure, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, and proton-pump activity were mainly affected by calcium. This report provides the fullest characterization of expression patterns in calcium-responsive genes, proteins and metabolites currently available in fruit ripening and will serve as a blueprint for future biological endeavors.

Calcium: !represses! Respiration rate
Calcium: !inhibits! Water-induced fruit cracking
Calcium: !alters! Levels of metabolites
Calcium: !affects! Genes involved in ubiquitin and cysteine signaling
Calcium: !increases! Abundance of proteins
Calcium: !modulates! Oxidative phosphorylation
Calcium: !influences! Hypersensitive response
Calcium: !regulates! DNA repair
Calcium: !controls! Stomata closure
Calcium: !impacts! Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites
Calcium: !affects! Proton-pump activity