Soil microorganisms play an important role in enhancing soil fertility and plant health. Nitroxin is a bio-fertilizer that is a combination of Azospirilium and Azotobacter rhizobacteria. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) and plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria can enhance biotic and abiotic stress tolerance in plants, whereas little is known regarding their roles in sorghum (<i>Sorghum bicolor</i> L.) growth under drought stress conditions. Therefore, this experiment was conducted to investigate the inoculation of grain sorghum with the bio-fertilizers of Nitroxin and <i>Glomus mosseae</i> effects on some physiological and biochemical traits and yield of grain sorghum under drought stress conditions in the region of Saravan, Iran, in 2017 and 2018. The results of this experiment showed that severe and moderate drought stress conditions decreased the amounts of grain protein percentage, auxin (IAA) content, root colonization, grain yield, and protein yield of grain, whereas grain starch percentage, the activity of catalase (CAT), peroxidase (POD) and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) enzymes and content of total carotenoid, total anthocyanin, total flavonoid, electrolyte leakage, and malondialdehyde (MDA) were increased. Inoculation of sorghum plants with bio-fertilizers improved these traits (except starch content, electrolyte leakage, and MDA) under drought stress conditions as well as non-stress conditions. As a result, grain yield and protein yield of sorghum decreased by 43.77 and 43.99%, respectively, under severe drought stress conditions but co-inoculation with Nitroxin and AMF under severe drought stress conditions increased grain yield and protein yield of sorghum by 27 and 19.63%, respectively, compared to non-application of these bio-fertilizers. Thus, Nitroxin and AMF can be recommended for profitable sorghum production under drought stress conditions.

Nitroxin: !enhances! Grain yield 
Nitroxin: !enhances! Protein yield 
AMF: !enhances! Grain yield 
AMF: !enhances! Protein yield 
Drought stress: !decreases! Grain yield 
Drought stress: !decreases! Protein yield 
Drought stress: !increases! Starch content 
Drought stress: !increases! Electrolyte leakage 
Drought stress: !increases! MDA