To systematically analyze mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase gene families and their expression profiles in sugarcane (Saccharum spp. hybrids; Sh) under diverse biotic and abiotic stresses, we identified 15 ShMAPKs, 6 ShMAPKKs and 16 ShMAPKKKs genes in the sugarcane cultivar R570 genome. These were also confirmed in one S. spontaneum genome and two transcriptome datasets of sugarcane trigged by Acidovorax avenae subsp. avenae (Aaa) and Xanthomonas albilineans (Xa) infections. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that four subgroups were present in each ShMAPK and ShMAPKK family and three sub-families (RAF, MEKK and ZIK) presented in the ShMAPKKK family. Conserved protein motif and gene structure analyses supported the evolutionary relationships of the three families inferred from the phylogenetic analysis. All of the ShMAPK, ShMAPKK and ShMAPKKK genes identified in Saccharum spp. R570 were distributed on chromosomes 1-7 and 9-10. RNA-seq and qRT-PCR analyses indicated that ShMAPK07 and ShMAPKKK02 were defense-responsive genes in sugarcane challenged by both Aaa and Xa stimuli, while some genes were upregulated specifically by Aaa and Xa infection. Additionally, ShMAPK05 acted as a negative regulator under drought and salinity stress, but served as a positive regulator under salicylic acid (SA) treatment. ShMAPK07 plays a positive role under drought stress, but a negative role under SA treatment. ShMAPKKK01 was negatively modulated by both salinity stress and SA treatment, whereas ShMAPKKK06 was positively regulated by both of the two stress stimuli. Our results suggest that members of MAPK cascade gene families regulate adverse stress responses through multiple signal transduction pathways in sugarcane.

ShMAPKs: !identified in! Sugarcane cultivar R570
ShMAPKKs: !identified in! Sugarcane cultivar R570
ShMAPKKKs: !identified in! Sugarcane cultivar R570
ShMAPK07: !responsive to! Aaa and Xa infection
ShMAPK05: !regulates! Drought and salinity stress
ShMAPK07: !regulates! Drought stress
ShMAPKKK01: !regulates! Salinity stress and SA treatment
ShMAPKKK06: !regulates! Salinity stress and SA treatment