Glucosinolates (GSs) are sulfur-containing secondary metabolites characteristic of cruciferous plants [1, 2]. Their breakdown products, isothiocyanates (ITCs), are released following tissue disruption by insect feeding or other mechanical damages [3, 4]. ITCs repel and are toxic to generalist herbivores, while specialist herbivores utilize the volatile ITCs as key signals for localizing host plants [5, 6]. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying detection of ITCs remain open. Here, we report that in the diamondback moth Plutella xylostella, a crucifer specialist, ITCs indeed drive the host preference for Arabidopsis thaliana, and the two olfactory receptors Or35 and Or49 are essential for this behavior. By performing gene expression analyses, we identified 12 (out of 59 in total) female-biased Ors, suggesting their possible involvement in oviposition choice. By ectopically expressing these Ors in Xenopus oocytes and screening their responses with 49 odors (including 13 ITCs, 25 general plant volatiles, and 11 sex pheromone components), we found that Or35 and Or49 responded specifically to three ITCs (iberverin, 4-pentenyl ITC, and phenylethyl ITC). The same ITCs also exhibited highest activity in electroantennogram recordings with female antennae and were the strongest oviposition stimulants. Knocking out either Or35 or Or49 via CRISPR-Cas9 resulted in a reduced oviposition preference for the ITCs, while double Or knockout females lost their ITC preference completely and were unable to choose between wild-type A. thaliana and a conspecific ITC knockout plant. We hence conclude that the ITC-based oviposition preference of the diamondback moth for its host A. thaliana is governed by the cooperation of two highly specific olfactory receptors.

Glucosinolates: !breakdown to! Isothiocyanates 
Isothiocyanates: !repel and are toxic to! Generalist herbivores 
Isothiocyanates: !serve as key signals for! Specialist herbivores 
Olfactory receptors Or35 and Or49: !essential for! Host preference 
Or35 and Or49: !respond to! ITCs 
ITCs: !highest activity in! Electroantennogram recordings 
ITCs: !strongest oviposition stimulants for! Diamondback moth 
Knocking out Or35 or Or49: !reduces oviposition preference for! ITCs 
Double Or knockout females: !lose ITC preference completely and! Unable to choose between wild-type A. thaliana and a conspecific ITC knockout plant