Transcriptome analysis of maize embryogenic callus and somatic embryos reveals associated genes reprogramming, hormone signaling pathways and transcriptional regulation involved in somatic embryogenesis in maize. Somatic embryos are widely utilized in propagation and genetic engineering of crop plants. In our laboratory, an elite maize inbred line Y423 that could generate intact somatic embryos was obtained and applied to genetic transformation. To enhance our understanding of regulatory mechanisms during maize somatic embryogenesis, we used RNA-based sequencing (RNA-seq) to characterize the transcriptome of immature embryo (IE), embryogenic callus (EC) and somatic embryo (SE) from maize inbred line Y423. The number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in three pairwise comparisons (IE-vs-EC, IE-vs-SE and EC-vs-SE) was 5767, 7084 and 1065, respectively. The expression patterns of DEGs were separated into eight major clusters. Somatic embryogenesis associated genes were mainly grouped into cluster A or B with an expression trend toward up-regulation during dedifferentiation. GO annotation and KEGG pathway analysis revealed that DEGs were implicated in plant hormone signal transduction, stress response and metabolic process. Among the differentially expressed transcription factors, the most frequently represented families were associated with the common stress response or related to cell differentiation, embryogenic patterning and embryonic maturation processes. Genes include hormone response/transduction and stress response, as well as several transcription factors were discussed in this study, which may be potential candidates for further analyses regarding their roles in somatic embryogenesis. Furthermore, the temporal expression patterns of candidate genes were analyzed to reveal their roles in somatic embryogenesis. This transcriptomic data provide insights into future functional studies, which will facilitate further dissections of the molecular mechanisms that control maize somatic embryogenesis.

Transcriptome: !reveals! Somatic embryogenesis associated genes 
Somatic embryos: !utilized in! Propagation and genetic engineering of crop plants 
DEGs: !implicated in! Plant hormone signal transduction, stress response and metabolic process 
Hormone response/transduction: !associated with! Common stress response 
Transcription factors: !related to! Cell differentiation, embryogenic patterning and embryonic maturation processes