Salt stress is one of the most damaging abiotic stresses in production of Upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum). Upland cotton is defined as a medium salt-tolerant crop. Salinity hinders root development, shoots growth, and reduces the fiber quality. Our previous study verified a GhCIPK6a gene response to salt stress in G. hirsutum. The homologs of GhCIPK6a were analyzed in A<sub>2</sub> (G. arboreum), D<sub>5</sub> (G. raimondii), and AD<sub>1</sub> (G. hirsutum) genomes. GhCIPK6a localized to the vacuole and cell membrane. The GhCBL1-GhCIPK6a and GhCBL8-GhCIPK6a complexes localized to the nucleus and cytomembrane. Overexpression of GhCIPK6a enhanced expression levels of co-expressed genes induced by salt stress, which scavenged ROS and involved in MAPK signaling pathways verified by RNA-seq analysis. Water absorption capacity and cell membrane stability of seeds from GhCIPK6a overexpressed lines was higher than that of wild-type seeds during imbibed germination stage. The seed germination rates and seedling field emergence percentages of GhCIPK6a overexpressed lines were higher than that of control line under salt stress. Moreover, overexpressing of GhCIPK6a in cotton increased lint percentage, and fiber length uniformity under salt stress. We verified the function of GhCIPK6a by transformation and RNA-seq analysis. GhCIPK6a overexpressed lines exhibited higher tolerance to abiotic stresses, which functioned by involving in ROS scavenging and MAPK pathways. Therefore, GhCIPK6a has the potential for cotton breeding to improve stress-tolerance.

GhCIPK6a: !localizes to! vacuole and cell membrane 
GhCBL1-GhCIPK6a: !localizes to! nucleus and cytomembrane 
GhCIPK6a: !enhances! expression levels of co-expressed genes 
GhCIPK6a: !scavenges! ROS 
GhCIPK6a: !involves in! MAPK signaling pathways 
GhCIPK6a: !increases! water absorption capacity and cell membrane stability 
GhCIPK6a: !improves! seed germination rates and seedling field emergence percentages 
GhCIPK6a: !increases! lint percentage and fiber length uniformity 
GhCIPK6a: !functions by! involving in ROS scavenging and MAPK pathways