New plant breeding techniques (NPBTs) aim to overcome traditional breeding limits for fruit tree species, in order to obtain new varieties with improved organoleptic traits and resistance to biotic and abiotic stress, and to maintain fruit quality achieved over centuries by (clonal) selection. Knowledge on the gene(s) controlling a specific trait is essential for the use of NPBTs, such as genome editing and cisgenesis. In the framework of the international scientific community working on fruit tree species, including citrus, NPBTs have mainly been applied to address pathogen threats. Citrus could take advantage of NPBTs because of its complex species biology (seedlessness, apomixis, high heterozygosity, and long juvenility phase) and aptitude for <i>in vitro</i> manipulation. To our knowledge, genome editing in citrus <i>via</i> transgenesis has successful for induced resistance to Citrus bacterial canker in sweet orange and grapefruit using the resistance gene CsLOB1. In the future, NPBTs will also be used to improve fruit traits, making them healthier. The regeneration of plants following the application of NPBTs is a bottleneck, making it necessary to optimize the efficiency of current protocols. The strengths and weaknesses of using explants from young <i>in vitro</i> plantlets, and from mature plants, will be discussed. Other major issues addressed in this review are related to the requirement for marker-free systems and shortening the long juvenility phase. This review aims to summarize methods and approaches available in the literature that are suitable to citrus, focusing on the principles observed before the use of NPBTs.

NPBTs: !aim to! overcome traditional breeding limits 
NPBTs: !applied to! address pathogen threats 
Citrus: !has complex species biology! seedlessness, apomixis, high heterozygosity, and long juvenility phase 
CsLOB1: !induces resistance to! Citrus bacterial canker 
NPBTs: !used to! improve fruit traits 
Regeneration: !bottleneck for! NPBTs 
Young plantlets: !suitable explants for! NPBTs 
Mature plants: !suitable explants for! NPBTs 
Marker-free systems: !requirement for! NPBTs 
Long juvenility phase: !shortened by! NPBTs