The plasma membrane (PM) is possibly the most diverse biological membrane of plant cells; it separates and guards the cell against its external environment. It has an extremely complex structure comprising a mosaic of lipids and proteins. The PM lipids are responsible for maintaining fluidity, permeability and integrity of the membrane and also influence the functioning of membrane proteins. However, the PM is the primary target of environmental stress, which affects its composition, conformation and properties, thereby disturbing the cellular homeostasis. Maintenance of integrity and fluidity of the PM is a prerequisite for ensuring the survival of plants during adverse environmental conditions. The ability of plants to remodel membrane lipid and protein composition plays a crucial role in adaptation towards varying abiotic environmental cues, including high or low temperature, drought, salinity and heavy metals stress. The dynamic changes in lipid composition affect the functioning of membrane transporters and ultimately regulate the physical properties of the membrane. Plant membrane-transport systems play a significant role in stress adaptation by cooperating with the membrane lipidome to maintain the membrane integrity under stressful conditions. The present review provides a holistic view of stress responses and adaptations in plants, especially the changes in the lipidome and proteome of PM under individual or combined abiotic stresses, which cause alterations in the activity of membrane transporters and modifies the fluidity of the PM. The tools to study the varying lipidome and proteome of the PM are also discussed.

PM: !separates and guards! cell 
PM: !maintains! fluidity 
PM: !influences! functioning of membrane proteins 
environmental stress: !affects! PM composition 
lipids: !maintain! permeability and integrity of membrane 
lipids: !influence! functioning of membrane proteins 
plants: !remodel! membrane lipid and protein composition 
membrane transporters: !regulate! physical properties of membrane 
membrane transporters: !cooperate with! membrane lipidome 
stress adaptation: !modifies! fluidity of PM