Panama disease (Fusarium wilt disease) caused by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense race 4 (FOC) severely threatens banana (Musa spp.) production worldwide. Intercropping of banana with Allium plants has shown a potential to reduce Panama disease. In this study, six cultivars of Chinese chive (Allium tuberosum Rottler) were selected to compare their differences in antifungal activity and active compounds. Three cultivars Duokang Fujiu 11, Fujiuhuang 2, and Duokang Sijiqing with higher levels of antifungal compounds were further used for intercropping with banana in the pots and field to compare their effects on growth and disease incidence of banana.The six cultivars showed significant differences in antifungal activity against FOC mycelia growth in both leaf volatiles and aqueous leachates. The aqueous leachates displayed stronger antifungal activity than the volatiles. FJH cultivar showed the best inhibitory effect among all six cultivars. Contents of three main antifungal compounds dipropyl trisulfide (DPT), dimethyl trisulfide (DMT), and 2-methyl-2-pentenal (MP) in volatiles and aqueous leachates varied considerably among cultivars. Pot and field experiments showed that intercropping with three selected Chinese chive cultivars significantly improved banana vegetative growth, increased photosynthetic characteristics and yield but decreased disease incidence of Panama disease.Our results indicate that intercropping with Chinese chive shows potential to reduce banana Panama disease and selection of appropriate cultivars is vital for effective disease control.

FOC: !causes! Panama disease 
Allium plants: !reduces! Panama disease 
Duokang Fujiu 11, Fujiuhuang 2, and Duokang Sijiqing: !show higher levels of! antifungal compounds 
FJH cultivar: !has best inhibitory effect among! six cultivars 
DPT, DMT, and MP: !vary among! cultivars 
intercropping with Chinese chive: !improves! banana vegetative growth 
intercropping with Chinese chive: !increases! photosynthetic characteristics and yield 
intercropping with Chinese chive: !decreases! disease incidence of Panama disease