Rhizobacteria containing 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid-deaminase (ACC-deaminase) and exopolysaccharides (EPS) activity are important to induce stress tolerance in plants. The present study was conducted to screen and characterize plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) with ACC-deaminase and EPS-producing activity for improving maize growth under drought stress. Eighty-five rhizobacterial strains were isolated from the rain-fed areas, among those 69 isolates were able to utilize ACC and 31 strains were found positive for EPS production. These strains containing ACC-deaminase and/or EPS-producing activity were subjected to drought tolerance assay by inducing water stress in media using polyethylene glycol 6000. Based on results of the drought tolerance bioassay, 12 most prominent strains were selected to evaluate their growth-promoting abilities in maize under water-stressed conditions by conducting jar trial. The impact of strains on maize growth parameters was variable. Strains with co-existence of ACC-deaminase and EPS-producing activity showed comparatively better results than those with either ACC-deaminase or EPS-producing activity only. These strains were also significantly better in improving the plant physiological parameters including photosynthesis rate, stomatal conductance, vapor pressure, water-use efficiency and transpiration rate. The strain D<sub>3</sub> with co-existence of ACC-deaminase and EPS-producing activity was significantly better in colonizing maize roots, improving plant growth and physiological parameters. The strain was named as Bacillus velezensis strain D<sub>3</sub> (accession number MT367633) as confirmed through results of 16S rRNA partial gene sequencing. It is concluded that the strains with co-existence of ACC-deaminase and EPS-producing activity could be better suited for improving crop growth and physiology under drought stress.

Rhizobacteria: !contains! ACC-deaminase 
Rhizobacteria: !produces! EPS 
Rhizobacteria: !induces! Stress tolerance 
Rhizobacteria: !improves! Maize growth 
Rhizobacteria: !enhances! Plant physiological parameters 
Strain D<sub>3</sub>: !colonizes! Maize roots 
Strain D<sub>3</sub>: !improves! Plant growth and physiology