Mitochondrial processes are implicated in plant response to biotic stress caused by viruses, actinomyces, bacteria and pests, but their function in defense against fungal invasion remains unclear. Here, we investigated the role and regulation of mitochondrial alternative oxidase (AOX) in response to black spot disease caused by the hemibiotrophic fungus Marssonina brunnea in poplar. M. brunnea inoculation induced the transcription of the AOX1a gene in the mitochondrial electron transport chain and of jasmonic acid (JA) and ethylene (ET) biosynthetic genes, with the accumulation of these phytohormones in poplar leaf, while inhibiting the transcript amount of the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase gene (COX6b) and genes related to salicylic acid (SA). Enhanced AOX reduced poplar susceptibility to M. brunnea with a higher ATP/ADP ratio while the repressed AOX caused the reverse effect. Exogenous JA and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC, a biosynthetic precursor of ET) inhibited the transcript amount of COX6b and consequently increased the ratio of AOX pathway to total respiration. Furthermore, the transcription of CYS C1 and CYS D1 genes catalyzing cyanide metabolism was induced, while the cysteine (CYS) substrate levels reduced upon M. brunnea inoculation; exogenous JA and ACC mimicked the effect of M. brunnea infection on cysteine. Exogenous SA enhanced, while JA and ACC reduced, poplar susceptibility to M. brunnea. Moreover, inhibiting AOX completely prohibited JA- and ET-increased tolerance to M. brunnea in poplar. These observations indicate that the JA- and ET-induced mitochondrial AOX pathway triggers defense against M. brunnea in poplar. This effect probably involves cyanide. These findings deepen our understanding of plant-pathogenic fungi interactions.

AOX1a gene: !induces! JA and ET biosynthetic genes
M. brunnea: !inhibits! COX6b and SA genes
AOX: !reduces! poplar susceptibility to M. brunnea
JA and ACC: !inhibit! COX6b
CYS C1 and CYS D1 genes: !induced by! M. brunnea inoculation
CYS substrate levels: !reduced by! M. brunnea inoculation
SA: !enhances! poplar susceptibility to M. brunnea
JA and ACC: !reduce! poplar susceptibility to M. brunnea
AOX: !triggers! defense against M. brunnea in poplar