This study investigated the alleviation effects of spraying phytohormones on the physiological characteristics and yield of sweet potato under drought stress during the early vine development and storage root bulking stage, respectively. The endogenous hormone contents, photosynthetic fluorescence indexes, photosynthetic products transfer allocation (based on <sup>13</sup>C labeling method), and yield of sweet potato were studied by spraying water, 6-benzylaminopurine (6-BA), abscisic acid (ABA), and combined with the two exogenous hormones under artificial dry shed and dry pond. Results indicated that the yield was increased by spraying 6-BA or ABA separately in comparison with the control treatment under drought stress, and the alleviation effects of spraying 6-BA at the early stage were better than at the storage root bulking stage, while spraying ABA at the storage root bulking stage was better than at the early stage. The sweet potato yield increased when sprayed with 6-BA, especially at the early vine development stage, and sweet potato yield was further enhanced by the addition of ABA. When sprayed together, exogenous 6-BA and ABA increased plant shoot and storage root biomass, as well as leaf area and yield, at both stages. The combination of exogenous 6-BA and ABA also increased shoot <sup>13</sup>C accumulation at the early vine development stage and storage root <sup>13</sup>C accumulation at the storage root bulking stage, in comparison with 6-BA or ABA alone under drought stress. Spraying exogenous hormones under drought stress increased the endogenous hormone contents, enhanced carbon metabolism enzyme activities, improved the photosynthetic fluorescence characteristics of leaves, and regulated the source-sink balance, all of which alleviated the yield reduction caused by drought stress. Application of the combination of 6-AB and ABA yielded better results than that of the 6-BA or ABA alone.

6-BA: !increases! Yield 
ABA: !increases! Yield 
6-BA: !enhances! Carbon Metabolism Enzyme Activity 
ABA: !enhances! Carbon Metabolism Enzyme Activity 
6-BA: !improves! Photosynthetic Fluorescence Characteristics 
ABA: !improves! Photosynthetic Fluorescence Characteristics 
6-BA: !regulates! Source-Sink Balance 
ABA: !regulates! Source-Sink Balance 
6-BA: !combined with! ABA 
ABA: !combined with! 6-BA