Transgenic technology in Indian mustard has expedited crop improvement programs. Further, there is a need to optimize gene editing protocols and find out the suitable target genes to harvest the benefits of gene editing technology in this important edible oilseed crop. Brassica juncea is an economically and industrially important oilseed crop being grown mainly in India and in some parts of Canada, Russia, China and Australia. Besides being consumed as edible oil, it also has numerous applications in food and paint industry. However, its overall production and productivity are being hampered by a number of biotic and abiotic stress factors. Further, its oil and seedmeal quality needs to be improved for increasing food as well as feed value. However, the lack of resistant crossable germplasm or varieties necessitated the use of genetic engineering interventions in Indian mustard crop improvement. A number of genes conferring resistance to biotic stresses including lectins for aphids' control, chitinase, glucanase and osmotin for disease control and for abiotic stresses, CODA, LEA and ion antiporter genes have been transferred to Indian mustard. Both antisense and RNAi technologies have been employed for improving oil and seedmeal quality. Efforts have been made to improve the phytoremediation potential of this crop through genetic engineering approach. The deployment of barnase/barstar gene system for developing male sterile and restorer lines has really expedited hybrid development programs in Indian mustard. Further, there is a need to optimize gene editing protocols and to find out suitable target genes for gene editing in this crop. In this review paper, authors have attempted to review various genetic transformation efforts carried out in Indian mustard for its improvement to combat biotic and abiotic stress challenges, quality improvement and hybrid development.

Transgenic technology: !expedites! Crop improvement
Lectins: !control! Aphids
Chitinase/Glucanase/Osmotin: !combat! Disease
CODA/LEA/Ion antiporter: !combat! Abiotic stress
Antisense/RNAi: !improve! Oil/Seedmeal quality
Barnase/Barstar: !expedite! Hybrid development