The jasmonic acid (JA) signaling pathway is one of the primary mechanisms that allow plants to respond to a variety of biotic and abiotic stressors. Within this pathway, the JAZ repressor proteins and the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor MYC3 play a critical role. JA is a volatile organic compound with an essential role in plant immunity. The increase in the concentration of JA leads to the decoupling of the JAZ repressor proteins and the bHLH transcription factor MYC3 causing the induction of genes of interest. The primary goal of this study was to identify the molecular basis of JAZ-MYC coupling. For this purpose, we modeled and validated 12 JAZ-MYC3 3D <i>in silico</i> structures and developed a molecular dynamics/machine learning pipeline to obtain two outcomes. First, we calculated the average free binding energy of JAZ-MYC3 complexes, which was predicted to be -10.94 +/-2.67 kJ/mol. Second, we predicted which ones should be the interface residues that make the predominant contribution to the free energy of binding (molecular hotspots). The predicted protein hotspots matched a conserved linear motif SL••FL•••R, which may have a crucial role during MYC3 recognition of JAZ proteins. As a proof of concept, we tested, both <i>in silico</i> and <i>in vitro</i>, the importance of this motif on PEAPOD (PPD) proteins, which also belong to the TIFY protein family, like the JAZ proteins, but cannot bind to MYC3. By mutating these proteins to match the SL••FL•••R motif, we could force PPDs to bind the MYC3 transcription factor. Taken together, modeling protein-protein interactions and using machine learning will help to find essential motifs and molecular mechanisms in the JA pathway.

JA: !induces! JAZ repressor proteins 
JAZ repressor proteins: !interact with! bHLH transcription factor MYC3 
JA: !increases concentration of! JAZ repressor proteins 
JAZ repressor proteins: !decouple from! bHLH transcription factor MYC3 
JAZ-MYC3: !predicted to have! average free binding energy of -10.94 +/-2.67 kJ/mol 
JAZ-MYC3: !predicted to have! interface residues that make predominant contribution to free energy of binding 
SL••FL•••R: !predicted to be! crucial role during MYC3 recognition of JAZ proteins 
PPD proteins: !mutated to match! SL••FL•••R motif 
PPD proteins: !forced to bind! MYC3 transcription factor