The absorption of Photosynthetically Active Radiation (PAR) by different foliar pigments defines the amount of energy available for photosynthesis and also the need for photoprotection. Both characteristics reveal essential information about productivity, development, and stress acclimation of plants. Here we present an approach for the estimation of the efficiency by three foliar pigment groups (chlorophylls, carotenoids, and anthocyanins) at capturing light, via the absorption coefficient derived from leaf reflectance spectra. The absorption coefficient (and hence light capture efficiency) of the pigment is quantitatively related to the ratio of light absorbed by each pigment group over the total amount of light absorbed by the leaf. The proposed approach allows discerning the contribution of pigment groups to the overall light absorption, despite the strong interference by other pigments with overlapping absorption spectra. For photosynthetic pigments, like chlorophylls, this is indicative of the energy captured for photosynthesis and hence of potential plant productivity. For photoprotective pigments, like anthocyanins or secondary carotenoids, it gives information about the spectral ranges where their optical screening works best and their screening capacity. In addition, the approach allows the selection of optimal spectral bands where different pigments operate. Such information improves our understanding of the phenological, physiological and photosynthetic dynamics of plants over space and through time, useful for developing better monitoring and management strategies.

PAR: !defines! energy available for photosynthesis
leaf reflectance spectra: !derive! absorption coefficient
absorption coefficient: !quantitatively relates to! light absorbed by pigment group
pigment groups: !contribute to! overall light absorption
chlorophylls: !indicative of! energy captured for photosynthesis
anthocyanins/secondary carotenoids: !gives information about! spectral ranges where optical screening works best
optimal spectral bands: !allows selection of! different pigments