Climate change is causing increasingly widespread, frequent, and intense wildfires across the western United States. Many geomorphic effects of wildfire are relatively well studied, yet sediment transport models remain unable to account for the rapid transport of sediment released from behind incinerated vegetation, which can fuel catastrophic debris flows. This oversight reflects the fundamental inability of local, continuum-based models to capture the long-distance particle motions characteristic of steeplands. Probabilistic, particle-based nonlocal models may address this deficiency, but empirical data are needed to constrain their representation of particle motion in real landscapes. Here we present data from field experiments validating a generalized Lomax model for particle travel distance distributions. The model parameters provide a physically intuitive mathematical framework for describing the transition from light- to heavy-tailed distributions along a continuum of behavior as particle size increases and slopes get steeper and/or smoother. We show that burned slopes are measurably smoother than vegetated slopes, leading to 1) lower rates of experimental particle disentrainment and 2) runaway motion that produces the heavy-tailed travel distances often associated with nonlocal transport. Our results reveal that surface roughness is a key control on steepland sediment transport, particularly after wildfire when smoother surfaces may result in the preferential delivery of coarse material to channel networks that initiate debris flows. By providing a first-order framework relating the statistics of particle motion to measurable surface characteristics, the Lomax model both advances the development of nonlocal sediment transport theory and reveals insights on hillslope transport mechanics.

Surface roughness: !controls! particle motion 
Particle size: !increases with! smoother surfaces 
Fire: !creates! smoother surfaces 
Coarse material: !delivered to! channel networks 
Lomax model: !relates! particle motion to surface characteristics