To copy with highly heterogeneous light environment, plants can regulate photosynthesis locally and systemically, thus, maximizing the photosynthesis of individual plants. Therefore, we speculated that local weak light may induce the improvement of photosynthesis in adjacent illuminated leaves in plants. In order to test this hypothesis, maize seedlings were partially shaded, and gas exchange, chlorophyll a fluorescence and biochemical analysis were carefully assessed. It was shown that local shading exacerbated the declines in the photosynthetic rates, chlorophyll contents, electron transport and carbon assimilation-related enzyme activities in shaded leaves as plants growth progressed. While, the decreases of these parameters in adjacent illuminated leaves of shaded plants were considerably alleviated compared to the corresponding leaves of control plants. Obviously, the photosynthesis in adjacent illuminated leaves in shaded plants was improved by local shading, and the improvement in adjacent lower leaves was larger than that in adjacent upper ones. As growth progressed, local shading induced higher abscisic acid contents in shaded leaves, but it alleviated the increase in the abscisic acid contents in adjacent leaves in shaded plants. Moreover, the difference in sugar content between shaded leaves and adjacent illuminated ones was gradually increased. Consequently, local weak light suppressed the photosynthesis in shaded leaves, while it markedly improved the photosynthesis of adjacent illuminated ones. Sugar gradient between shaded leaves and adjacent illuminated ones might play a key role in photosynthetic regulation of adjacent illuminated leaves.

local weak light: !induces! improvement of photosynthesis in adjacent illuminated leaves
local shading: !exacerbates! declines in photosynthetic rates, chlorophyll contents, electron transport and carbon assimilation-related enzyme activities in shaded leaves
local shading: !alleviates! increases in abscisic acid contents in adjacent leaves in shaded plants
sugar gradient: !plays a key role in! photosynthetic regulation of adjacent illuminated leaves