Genome wide association studies allowed prediction of 17 candidate genes for association with nitrogen use efficiency. Novel information obtained may provide better understanding of genomic controls underlying germplasm variations for this trait in Indian mustard. Nitrogen use efficiency (NUE) of Indian mustard (Brassica juncea (L.) Czern & Coss.) is low and most breeding efforts to combine NUE with crop performance have not succeeded. Underlying genetics also remain unexplored. We tested 92 SNP-genotyped inbred lines for yield component traits, N uptake efficiency (NUPEFF), nitrogen utilization efficiency (NUTEFF), nitrogen harvest index (NHI) and NUE for two years at two nitrogen doses (N<sub>o</sub> without added N and N<sub>100</sub> added @100 kg/ha). Genotypes IC-2489-88, M-633, MCP-632, HUJM 1080, GR-325 and DJ-65 recorded high NUE at low N. These also showed improved crop performance under high N. One determinate mustard genotype DJ-113 DT-3 revealed maximum NUTEFF. Genome wide association studies (GWAS) facilitated recognition of 17 quantitative trait loci (QTLs). Environment specificity was high. B-genome chromosomes (B02, B03, B05, B07 and B08) harbored many useful loci. We also used regional association mapping (RAM) to supplement results from GWAS. Annotation of the genomic regions around peak SNPs helped to predict several gene candidates for root architecture, N uptake, assimilation and remobilization. CAT9 (At1g05940) was consistently envisaged for both NUE and NUPEFF. Major N transporter genes, NRT1.8 and NRT3.1 were predicted for explaining variation for NUTEFF and NUPEFF, respectively. Most significant amino acid transporter gene, AAP1 appeared associated with NUE under limited N conditions. All these candidates were predicted in the regions of high linkage disequilibrium. Sequence information of the predicted candidate genes will permit development of molecular markers to aid breeding for high NUE.

Genome wide association studies: !predicted! 17 QTLs 
QTLs: !harbored! useful loci 
Regional association mapping: !supplemented! GWAS results 
Annotation: !predicted! gene candidates 
CAT9: !associated with! NUE & NUPEFF 
NRT1.8: !associated with! NUTEFF 
NRT3.1: !associated with! NUPEFF 
AAP1: !associated with! NUE under limited N