GbMYBR1, a new type of R2R3-MYB repressor from Ginkgo biloba, displayed pleiotropic effects on plant growth, phenylpropanoid accumulation, by regulating multiple related genes at different levels. Ginkgo biloba is a typical gymnosperm that has been thriving on earth for millions of years. MYB transcription factors (TFs) play important roles in diverse processes in plants. However, the role of MYBs remains largely unknown in Ginkgo. Here, an MYB TF gene from Ginkgo, designated as GbMYBR1, was found to act as a repressor in multiple processes. GbMYBR1 was mainly expressed in the leaves of Ginkgo. Over-expression of GbMYBR1 in Arabidopsis thaliana led to growth retardation, decreases in lignin content, reduced trichome density, and remarkable reduction in anthocyanin and flavonol contents in leaves. Proanthocyanidin content was decreased in the seeds of transgenic Arabidopsis, which led to light-brown seed color. Both qPCR and transcriptome sequencing analyses demonstrated that the transcript levels of multiple genes related to phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, trichome formation, and pathogen resistance were down-regulated in the transgenic Arabidopsis. In particular, we found that GbMYBR1 directly interacts with the bHLH cofactor GL3 as revealed by yeast two-hybrid assays. Our work indicated that GbMYBR1 has pleiotropic effects on plant growth, phenylpropanoid accumulation, and trichome development, mediated by interaction with GL3 or direct suppression of key pathway genes. Thus, GbMYBR1 represents a novel type of R2R3 MYB repressor.

GbMYBR1: !regulates! multiple related genes
GbMYBR1: !expresses in! leaves of Ginkgo
GbMYBR1: !leads to! growth retardation
GbMYBR1: !reduces! lignin content
GbMYBR1: !decreases! trichome density
GbMYBR1: !reduces! anthocyanin and flavonol contents
GbMYBR1: !decreases! proanthocyanidin content
GbMYBR1: !down-regulates! transcript levels of multiple genes
GbMYBR1: !interacts with! bHLH cofactor GL3
GbMYBR1: !mediates! plant growth, phenylpropanoid accumulation, and trichome development