Plant bioregulators play an important role in managing oxidative stress tolerance in plants. Utilizing their ability in stress sensitive crops through genetic engineering will be a meaningful approach to manage food production under the threat of climate change. Exploitation of the plant defense system against oxidative stress to engineer tolerant plants in the climate change scenario is a sustainable and meaningful strategy. Plant bioregulators (PBRs), which are important biotic factors, are known to play a vital role not only in the development of plants, but also in inducing tolerance in plants against various environmental extremes. These bioregulators include auxins, gibberellins, cytokinins, abscisic acid, brassinosteroids, polyamines, strigolactones, and ascorbic acid and provide protection against the oxidative stress-associated reactive oxygen species through modulation or activation of a plant's antioxidant system. Therefore, exploitation of their functioning and accumulation is of considerable significance for the development of plants more tolerant of harsh environmental conditions in order to tackle the issue of food security under the threat of climate change. Therefore, this review summarizes a new line of evidence that how PBRs act as inducers of oxidative stress resistance in plants and how they could be modulated in transgenic crops via introgression of genes. Reactive oxygen species production during oxidative stress events and their neutralization through an efficient antioxidants system is comprehensively detailed. Further, the use of exogenously applied PBRs in the induction of oxidative stress resistance is discussed. Recent advances in engineering transgenic plants with modified PBR gene expression to exploit the plant defense system against oxidative stress are discussed from an agricultural perspective.

PBRs: !induce! Oxidative Stress Resistance 
PBRs: !modulate! Plant's Antioxidant System 
Exogenously Applied PBRs: !induce! Oxidative Stress Resistance 
Transgenic Plants: !engineer with! Modified PBR Gene Expression