Characterization of anther and ovule developmental programs and expression analyses of stage-specific floral marker genes in Gossypium hirsutum allowed to build a comprehensive portrait of cotton flower development before fiber initiation. Gossypium hirsutum is the most important cotton species that is cultivated worldwide. Although cotton reproductive development is important for fiber production, since fiber is formed on the epidermis of mature ovules, cotton floral development remains poorly understood. Therefore, this work aims to characterize the cotton floral morphoanatomy by performing a detailed description of anther and ovule developmental programs and identifying stage-specific floral marker genes in G. hirsutum. Using light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy, we analyzed anther and ovule development during 11 stages of flower development. To better characterize the ovule development in cotton, we performed histochemical analyses to evaluate the accumulation of phenolic compounds, pectin, and sugar in ovule tissues. After identification of major hallmarks of floral development, three key stages were established in G. hirsutum floral development: in stage 1 (early-EF), sepal, petal, and stamen primordia were observed; in stage 2 (intermediate-IF), primordial ovules and anthers are present, and the differentiating archesporial cells were observed, marking the beginning of microsporogenesis; and in stage 6 (late-LF), flower buds presented initial anther tapetum degeneration and microspore were released from the tetrad, and nucellus and both inner and outer integuments are developing. We used transcriptome data of cotton EF, IF and LF stages to identify floral marker genes and evaluated their expression by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). Twelve marker genes were preferentially expressed in a stage-specific manner, including the putative homologs for AtLEAFY, AtAPETALA 3, AtAGAMOUS-LIKE 19 and AtMALE STERILITY 1, which are crucial for several aspects of reproductive development, such as flower organogenesis and anther and petal development. We also evaluated the expression profile of B-class MADS-box genes in G. hirsutum floral transcriptome (EF, IF, and LF). In addition, we performed a comparative analysis of developmental programs between Arabidopsis thaliana and G. hirsutum that considered major morphoanatomical and molecular processes of flower, anther, and ovule development. Our findings provide the first detailed analysis of cotton flower development.

Gossypium hirsutum: !develops! flower
AtLEAFY: !affects! flower organogenesis
AtAPETALA 3: !affects! anther and petal development
AtAGAMOUS-LIKE 19: !affects! reproductive development
AtMALE STERILITY 1: !affects! reproductive development
B-class MADS-box genes: !expressed in! G. hirsutum floral transcriptome