Proteome remodeling is a fundamental adaptive response, and proteins in complexes and functionally related proteins are often co-expressed. Using a deep sampling strategy we define core proteomes of Arabidopsis thaliana tissues with around 10 000 proteins per tissue, and absolutely quantify (copy numbers per cell) nearly 16 000 proteins throughout the plant lifecycle. A proteome-wide survey of global post-translational modification revealed amino acid exchanges pointing to potential conservation of translational infidelity in eukaryotes. Correlation analysis of protein abundance uncovered potentially new tissue- and age-specific roles of entire signaling modules regulating transcription in photosynthesis, seed development, and senescence and abscission. Among others, the data suggest a potential function of RD26 and other NAC transcription factors in seed development related to desiccation tolerance as well as a possible function of cysteine-rich receptor-like kinases (CRKs) as ROS sensors in senescence. All of the components of ribosome biogenesis factor (RBF) complexes were found to be co-expressed in a tissue- and age-specific manner, indicating functional promiscuity in the assembly of these less-studied protein complexes in Arabidopsis.Furthermore, we characterized detailed proteome remodeling in basal immunity by treating Arabidopsis seeldings with flg22. Through simultaneously monitoring phytohormone and transcript changes upon flg22 treatment, we obtained strong evidence of suppression of jasmonate (JA) and JA-isoleucine (JA-Ile) levels by deconjugation and hydroxylation by IAA-ALA RESISTANT3 (IAR3) and JASMONATE-INDUCED OXYGENASE 2 (JOX2), respectively, under the control of JASMONATE INSENSITIVE 1 (MYC2), suggesting an unrecognized role of a new JA regulatory switch in pattern-triggered immunity. Taken together, the datasets generated in this study present extensive coverage of the Arabidopsis proteome in various biological scenarios, providing a rich resource available to the whole plant science community.

RBF: !co-expressed in! tissue- and age-specific manner
IAR3: !suppresses! JA and JA-Ile levels
JOX2: !suppresses! JA-Ile levels
MYC2: !controls! IAR3 and JOX2