The plasticity of growth and development in response to environmental changes is one of the essential aspects of plant behavior. Cytokinins play an important role as signaling molecules in the long-distance communication between organs in systemic growth regulation in response to nitrogen. The spatial distribution of the expression sites of cytokinin biosynthesis genes leads to structural differences in the molecular species transported through the xylem and phloem, giving root-borne trans-hydroxylated cytokinins, namely trans-zeatin (tZ) type, a specialized efficacy in regulating shoot growth. Furthermore, root-to-shoot translocation via the xylem, tZ, and its precursor, the tZ riboside, controls different sets of shoot growth traits to fine-tune shoot growth in response to nitrogen availability. In addition to nitrogen, photosynthetically generated sugars positively regulate de novo cytokinin biosynthesis in the roots, and contribute to plant growth under elevated CO<sub>2</sub> conditions. In shoot-to-root signaling, cytokinins also play a role in the regulation of nutrient acquisition and root system growth in cooperation with other types of signaling molecules, such as C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDE DOWNSTREAMs. As cytokinin is a key regulator for the maintenance of shoot apical meristem, deepening our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of cytokinin biosynthesis and transport in response to nitrogen is important not only for basic comprehension of plant growth, but also to ensure the stability of agricultural production.

Cytokinin: !plays role in! long-distance communication 
Cytokinin: !regulates! shoot growth 
Cytokinin: !positively regulates! de novo biosynthesis 
Cytokinin: !cooperates with! C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDE DOWNSTREAMs 
Nitrogen: !affects! spatial distribution of expression sites 
Nitrogen: !controls! different sets of shoot growth traits 
Sugars: !positively regulate! de novo cytokinin biosynthesis 
CO<sub>2</sub>: !contributes to! plant growth