The wide-scale production of renewable fuels from lignocellulosic feedstocks continues to be hampered by the natural recalcitrance of biomass. Therefore, there is a need to develop robust and reliable methods to characterize and quantify components that contribute to this recalcitrance. In this study, we utilized a method that incorporates pyrolysis with successive gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (Py-GC/MS) to assess lignification in cell suspension cultures. This method was compared with other standard techniques such as acid-catalyzed hydrolysis, acetyl bromide lignin determination, and nitrobenzene oxidation for quantification of cell wall bound phenolic compounds. We found that Py-GC/MS can be conducted with about 250 µg of tissue sample and provides biologically relevant data, which constitutes a substantial advantage when compared to the 50-300 mg of tissue needed for the other methods. We show that when combined with multivariate statistical analyses, Py-GC/MS can distinguish cell wall components of switchgrass (<i>Panicum virgatum</i>) suspension cultures before and after inducing lignification. The deposition of lignin precursors on uninduced cell walls included predominantly guaiacyl-based units, 71% ferulic acid, and 5.3% p-coumaric acid. Formation of the primary and partial secondary cell wall was supported by the respective ~15× and ~1.7× increases in syringyl-based and guaiacyl-based precursors, respectively, in the induced cells. Ferulic acid was decreased by half after induction. These results provide the proof-of-concept for quick and reliable cell wall compositional analyses using Py-GC/MS and could be targeted for either translational genomics or for fundamental studies focused on understanding the molecular and physiological mechanisms regulating plant cell wall production and biomass recalcitrance.

Py-GC/MS: !quantifies! Cell wall bound phenolic compounds 
Py-GC/MS: !distinguishes! Cell wall components of switchgrass 
Induced cells: !increase in! Syringyl-based precursors 
Induced cells: !increase in! Guaiacyl-based precursors 
Induced cells: !decrease in! Ferulic acid