In general, genes promoting IAA, CTK GA and ethylene biosynthesis were upregulated, while genes participating in ABA, chlorophyll and starch biosynthesis pathways performed opposite tendency during etiolation. Etiolation as a method for rejuvenation plays an important role in the vegetative propagation of woody plants. However, the molecular mechanism of etiolated shoot development remains unclear. In this study, we investigated changes at different etiolation stages of Juglans regia. The histology and transcriptome of J. regia were analysed using etiolated stems, which were treated in darkness for 30, 60, 90 days. The results showed that the ratios of pith (Pi) diameter/stem diameter (D), cortex (Co) width/D, and phloem (Ph) width/D increased, while the ratio of xylem (Xy) width/D decreased after etiolation, and the difference in these ratios between etiolated stems and the control was more significant at 60 days than 90 days. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were significantly enriched in pathways such as plant hormone biosynthesis and signal transduction, chlorophyll biosynthesis and degradation, and starch and sucrose metabolism. The difference in the contents of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), abscisic acid (ABA), sugar and chlorophyll between etiolated stems and the control increased with increasing treatment duration; in contrast, the concentrations of gibberellin (GA), zeatin (ZT), and starch, as well as the difference between the etiolated stems and control were lowest at 60 days among the three stages. On the whole, the positive effect of etiolation on the rejuvenation of walnut stems changed as the treatment period increased. The present investigation lays a foundation for future studies on the effect of etiolation on rejuvenation and for promoting the efficiency of vegetative propagation.

Gene: !affects! Plant hormone biosynthesis
Gene: !affects! Chlorophyll biosynthesis
Gene: !affects! Starch and sucrose metabolism
Gene: !upregulates! IAA biosynthesis
Gene: !upregulates! CTK GA biosynthesis
Gene: !upregulates! Ethylene biosynthesis
Gene: !downregulates! ABA biosynthesis
Gene: !downregulates! Chlorophyll biosynthesis
Gene: !downregulates! Starch biosynthesis