Brassica napus L. is one of the most important oil crops in the world. However, climate-change-induced environmental stresses negatively impact on its yield and quality. Cuticular waxes are known to protect plants from various abiotic/biotic stresses. Dissecting the genetic and biochemical basis underlying cuticular waxes is important to breed cultivars with improved stress tolerance. Here a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 192 B. napus cultivars and inbred lines was used to identify single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with leaf waxes. A total of 202 SNPs was found to be significantly associated with 31 wax traits including total wax coverage and the amounts of wax classes and wax compounds. Next, epidermal peels from leaves of both high-wax load (HW) and low-wax load (LW) lines were isolated and used to analyze transcript profiles of all GWAS-identified genes. Consequently, 147 SNPs were revealed to have differential expressions between HW and LW lines, among which 344 SNP corresponding genes exhibited up-regulated while 448 exhibited down-regulated expressions in LW when compared to those in HW. According to the gene annotation information, some differentially expressed genes were classified into plant acyl lipid metabolism, including fatty acid-related pathways, wax and cutin biosynthesis pathway and wax secretion. Some genes involved in cell wall formation and stress responses have also been identified. Combination of GWAS with transcriptomic analysis revealed a number of directly or indirectly wax-related genes and their associated SNPs. These results could provide clues for further validation of SNPs for marker-assisted breeding and provide new insights into the genetic control of wax biosynthesis and improving stress tolerance of B. napus.

SNP: !associated with! wax traits 
GWAS: !identifies! SNPs 
HW/LW lines: !compared to analyze! transcript profiles 
SNPs: !differentially expressed between! HW/LW lines 
genes: !classified into! plant acyl lipid metabolism 
genes: !involved in! cell wall formation 
genes: !involved in! stress responses 
GWAS/transcriptomic analysis: !reveals! wax-related genes