The ability for plant growth to be optimized, either in the light or dark, depends on the intricate balance between cell division and differentiation in specialized regions called meristems. When Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) seedlings are grown in the dark, hypocotyl elongation is promoted, whereas root growth is greatly reduced as a result of changes in hormone transport and a reduction in meristematic cell proliferation. Previous work showed that the microtubule-associated protein CLASP sustains root apical meristem size by influencing microtubule organization and by modulating the brassinosteroid signaling pathway. Here, we investigated whether CLASP is involved in light-dependent root growth promotion, since dark-grown seedlings have reduced root apical meristem activity, as observed in the <i>clasp-1</i> null mutant. We showed that CLASP protein levels were greatly reduced in the root tips of dark-grown seedlings, which could be reversed by exposing plants to light. We confirmed that removing seedlings from the light led to a discernible shift in microtubule organization from bundled arrays, which are prominent in dividing cells, to transverse orientations typically observed in cells that have exited the meristem. Brassinosteroid receptors and auxin transporters, both of which are sustained by CLASP, were largely degraded in the dark. Interestingly, we found that despite the lack of protein, <i>CLASP</i> transcript levels were higher in dark-grown root tips. Together, these findings uncover a mechanism that sustains meristem homeostasis through CLASP, and they advance our understanding of how roots modulate their growth according to the amount of light and nutrients perceived by the plant.

CLASP: !sustains! root apical meristem size 
microtubule-associated protein CLASP: !influences! microtubule organization 
CLASP: !modulates! brassinosteroid signaling pathway 
CLASP protein levels: !reduced in! root tips of dark-grown seedlings 
light: !reverses! reduction in CLASP protein levels 
bundled arrays: !prominent in! dividing cells 
transverse orientations: !observed in! cells that have exited the meristem 
brassinosteroid receptors: !sustained by! CLASP 
auxin transporters: !sustained by! CLASP 
CLASP transcript levels: !higher in! dark-grown root tips