Forisomes are protein bodies known exclusively from sieve elements of legumes. Forisomes contribute to the regulation of phloem transport due to their unique Ca2+-controlled, reversible swelling. The assembly of forisomes from sieve element occlusion (SEO) protein monomers in developing sieve elements and the mechanism(s) of Ca2+-dependent forisome contractility are poorly understood because the amino acid sequences of SEO proteins lack conventional protein-protein interaction and Ca2+-binding motifs. We selected amino acids potentially responsible for forisome-specific functions by analyzing SEO protein sequences in comparison to those of the widely distributed SEO-related (SEOR), or SEOR proteins. SEOR proteins resemble SEO proteins closely but lack any Ca2+ responsiveness. We exchanged identified candidate residues by directed mutagenesis of the Medicago truncatula SEO1 gene, expressed the mutated genes in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and studied the structural and functional phenotypes of the forisome-like bodies that formed in the transgenic cells. We identified three aspartate residues critical for Ca2+ responsiveness and two more that were required for forisome-like bodies to assemble. The phenotypes observed further suggested that Ca2+-controlled and pH-inducible swelling effects in forisome-like bodies proceeded by different yet interacting mechanisms. Finally, we observed a previously unknown surface striation in native forisomes and in recombinant forisome-like bodies that could serve as an indicator of successful forisome assembly. To conclude, this study defines a promising path to the elucidation of the so-far elusive molecular mechanisms of forisome assembly and Ca2+-dependent contractility.

Forisomes: !contribute to! phloem transport regulation
SEOR proteins: !resemble! SEO proteins
SEO1 gene: !exchanged by! directed mutagenesis
mutated genes: !expressed in! yeast
candidate residues: !identified by! analyzing sequences
three aspartate residues: !critical for! Ca2+ responsiveness
two more residues: !required for! forisome-like bodies assembly
Ca2+-controlled and pH-inducible swelling effects: !proceed by! different yet interacting mechanisms
surface striation: !observed in! native forisomes and recombinant forisome-like bodies