WRKY group transcription factors of model plants and major crops are confirmed to play essential roles in stress responses, senescence, secondary metabolism processes and hormone signal transduction. Previous studies have identified 81 HbWRKY genes from Hevea brasiliensis (the Pará rubber tree), but the functions of HbWRKYs in response to abiotic stresses and leaf senescence are unclear. In this study, one novel group IIc WRKY transcription factor named HbWRKY82 was identified and characterized as a stress-associated WRKY in rubber tree. Transient expression and transcriptional activation analyses indicated that HbWRKY82 encoded a nuclear protein and functioned as a transcription activator. The transcription levels of HbWRKY82 were induced by exogenous Ethrel (ET) (ethylene releaser) and abscisic acid (ABA) stimulations, down-regulated in tapping panel dryness rubber trees, and also exhibits significant decrease during the progression of leaf senescence. Overexpression of HbWRKY82 in Arabidopsis improved the tolerance to dehydration and salinity, and decreased the sensitivity to exogenous ABA. Moreover, real-time quantitative PCR analysis demonstrated that HbWRKY82 regulated the transcriptional expression of several stress-responsive genes (DREB1A, ERD10, HKT1, P5CS, RD22, RD29B, SKOR), leaf senescence marker genes (EIN3, WRKY53, NAP), ROS-related genes (RbohD, CSD1, CSD2, FSD3) and hormone signaling genes (EIN3, ABF3, ABF4). Collectively, our findings suggested that HbWRKY82 might function as an important transcriptional regulator in ET- and ABA-mediated leaf senescence and abiotic stress responses, and also be involved in tapping panel dryness, latex flow and regeneration processes of rubber trees via participating in the ET and reactive oxygen species signaling pathways.

HbWRKY82: !enhances! tolerance to dehydration and salinity
HbWRKY82: !induces! transcription of stress-responsive genes
HbWRKY82: !regulates! leaf senescence marker genes
HbWRKY82: !mediates! ET and ABA signaling pathways
HbWRKY82: !represses! sensitivity to exogenous ABA
HbWRKY82: !controls! ROS-related genes
HbWRKY82: !modulates! hormone signaling genes