A 3-ketoacyl-CoA synthase involved in biosynthesis of very long chain fatty acids and cuticular wax plays a vital role in aerial organ development in M. truncatula. Cuticular wax is composed of very long chain fatty acids and their derivatives. Defects in cuticular wax often result in organ fusion, but little is known about the role of cuticular wax in compound leaf and flower development in Medicago truncatula. In this study, through an extensive screen of a Tnt1 retrotransposon insertion population in M. truncatula, we identified four mutant lines, named wrinkled flower and leaf (wfl) for their phenotype. The phenotype of the wfl mutants is caused by a Tnt1 insertion in Medtr3g105550, encoding 3-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KCS), which functions as a rate-limiting enzyme in very long chain fatty acid elongation. Reverse transcription-quantitative PCR showed that WFL was broadly expressed in aerial organs of the wild type, such as leaves, floral organs, and the shoot apical meristem, but was expressed at lower levels in roots. In situ hybridization showed a similar expression pattern, mainly detecting the WFL transcript in epidermal cells of the shoot apical meristem, leaf primordia, and floral organs. The wfl mutant leaves showed sparser epicuticular wax crystals on the surface and increased water permeability compared with wild type. Further analysis showed that in wfl leaves, the percentage of C20:0, C22:0, and C24:0 fatty acids was significantly increased, the amount of cuticular wax was markedly reduced, and wax constituents were altered compared to the wild type. The reduced formation of cuticular wax and wax composition changes on the leaf surface might lead to the developmental defects observed in the wfl mutants. These findings suggest that WFL plays a key role in cuticular wax formation and in the late stage of leaf and flower development in M. truncatula.

KCS: !synthesizes! very long chain fatty acids 
KCS: !affects! cuticular wax formation 
cuticular wax: !affects! organ fusion 
cuticular wax: !affects! leaf and flower development 
WFL: !localizes to! aerial organs 
WFL: !represses! water permeability 
WFL: !enhances! C20:0, C22:0, and C24:0 fatty acids 
WFL: !reduces! amount of cuticular wax