Early cytokinin activity and late abscisic acid dynamics during wheat kernel development correspond to cultivars with higher yield potential. Cytokinins represent prime targets for marker development for wheat breeding programs. Two major phytohormone groups, abscisic acid (ABA) and cytokinins (CKs), are of crucial importance for seed development. Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) yield is, to a high degree, determined during the milk and dough stages of kernel development. Therefore, understanding the hormonal regulation of these early growth stages is fundamental for crop-improvement programs of this important cereal. Here, we profiled ABA and 25 CK metabolites (including active forms, precursors and inactive conjugates) during kernel development in five field-grown wheat cultivars. The levels of ABA and profiles of CK forms varied greatly among the tested cultivars and kernel stages suggesting that several types of CK metabolites are involved in spatiotemporal regulation of kernel development. The seed yield potential was associated with the elevated levels of active CK levels (tZ, cZ). Interestingly, the increased kernel cZ levels were followed by higher ABA production, suggesting there is an interaction between these two phytohormones. Furthermore, we analyzed the expression patterns of representatives of the four main CK metabolic gene families. The unique transcriptional patterns of the IPT (biosynthesis) and ZOG (reversible inactivation) gene family members (GFMs) in the high and low yield cultivars additionally indicate that there is a significant association between CK metabolism and yield potential in wheat. Based on these results, we suggest that both CK metabolites and their associated genes, can serve as important, early markers of yield performance in modern wheat breeding programs.

ABA: !corresponds to! higher yield potential
CKs: !regulate! kernel development
CKs: !associated with! yield potential
tZ/cZ: !elevated in! high yield cultivars
ABA: !followed by! increased cZ levels
CKs: !interact with! ABA
IPT/ZOG GFMs: !uniquely expressed in! high/low yield cultivars