['33048399', 'Heat stress occurring at reproductive stages can result in significant and  permanent damage to crop yields. However, previous genetic studies in  understanding heat stress response and signaling were performed mostly on  seedling and plants at early vegetative stages. Here we identify, using a  developmentally defined, gain-of-function genetic screen with approximately  18 000 Arabidopsis thaliana activation-tagged lines, a mutant that maintained  productive seed set post-severe heat stress during flowering. Genome walking  indicated this phenotype was caused by the insertion of 35S enhancers adjacent to  a nuclear localized transcription factor AtMYB68. Subsequent overexpression  analysis confirmed that AtMYB68 was responsible for the reproductive heat  tolerance of the mutant. Furthermore, these transgenic Arabidopsis plants  exhibited enhanced abscisic acid sensitivity at and post-germination, reduced  transpirational water loss during a drought treatment, and enhanced seed yield  under combined heat and drought stress during flowering. Ectopic expression of  AtMYB68 in Brassica napus driven either by 35S or by heat-inducible promoter  recapitulated the enhanced reproductive heat stress and drought tolerance  phenotypes observed in the transgenic Arabidopsis. The improvement to heat stress  is likely due to enhanced pollen viability observed in the transgenic plants.  More importantly, the transgenic canola showed significant yield advantages over  the non-transgenic controls in multiple locations, multiple season field trials  under various drought and heat stress conditions. Together these results suggest  that AtMYB68 regulate plant stress tolerance at the most important yield  determining stage of plant development, and is an effective target for crop yield  protection under current global climate volatility.', '2020 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.15019', 'Wan']

AtMYB68: !localizes to! nucleus 
AtMYB68: !enhances! reproductive heat tolerance 
AtMYB68: !enhances! abscisic acid sensitivity 
AtMYB68: !reduces! transpirational water loss 
AtMYB68: !enhances! seed yield under combined heat and drought stress 
AtMYB68: !enhances! pollen viability 
AtMYB68: !improves! crop yield protection