Cotton is a major fiber plant, which provides raw materials for clothing, protecting humans from the harsh environment of cold or hot weathers, enriching the culture and custom of human societies. Due to its importance, the diploid and tetraploid genomes of different cotton plants have been repeatedly sequenced to obtain their complete and fine genome sequences. These valuable genome data sets revealed the evolutionary past of the cotton plants, which were recursively affected by polyploidization, with a decaploidization contributing to the formation of the genus <i>Gossypium</i>, and a neo-tetraploidization contributing to the formation of nowadays widely cultivated cotton plants. Post-polyploidization genome instability resulted in numerous structural changes of the genomes, such as gene loss, DNA inversion and translocation, illegitimate recombination, and accumulation of repetitive sequences, and functional innovation accompanied by elevated evolutionary rates of genes. Many these changes have been asymmetric between subgnomes of the tetraploid cottons, rendering their divergent profiles of biological regulation and function. The availability of whole-genome sequences has now paved the way to identify and clone functional genes, e.g., those relating to fiber development, and to enhance breeding efforts to cultivate cottons to produce high-yield and high-quality fibers, and to resist environmental and biological stress.

Polyploidization: !affects! Cotton genomes
Gene loss: !accompanies! Post-polyploidization genome instability
DNA inversion: !accompanies! Post-polyploidization genome instability
Translocation: !accompanies! Post-polyploidization genome instability
Illegitimate recombination: !accompanies! Post-polyploidization genome instability
Accumulation of repetitive sequences: !accompanies! Post-polyploidization genome instability
Functional innovation: !accompanies! Elevated evolutionary rates of genes
Whole-genome sequences: !pave the way to! Identify and clone functional genes
Fiber development: !relates to! Functional genes