Leaf size and shape, which affect light capture, and chlorophyll content are important factors affecting photosynthetic efficiency. Genetic variation of these components significantly affects yield potential and seed quality. Identification of the genetic basis for these traits and the relationship between them is of great practical significance for achieving ideal plant architecture and high photosynthetic efficiency for improved yield. Here, we undertook a large-scale linkage mapping study using three mapping populations to determine the genetic interplay between soybean leaf-related traits and chlorophyll content across two environments. Correlation analysis revealed a significant negative correlation between leaf size and shape, while both traits were positively correlated with chlorophyll content. This phenotypic relationship was verified across the three mapping populations as determined by principal component analysis, suggesting that these traits are under the control of complex and interrelated genetic components. The QTLs for leaf-related traits and chlorophyll are partly shared, which further supports the close genetic relationship between the two traits. The largest-effect major loci, q20, was stably identified across all population and environments and harbored the narrow leaflet gene Gm-JAG1 (Ln/ln), which is a key regulator of leaflet shape in soybean. Our results uncover several major QTLs (q4-1, q4-2, q11, q13, q18 and q20) and its candidate genes specific or common to leaf-related traits and chlorophyll, and also show a complex epistatic interaction between the two traits. The SNP markers closely linked to these valuable QTLs could be used for molecular design breeding with improved plant architecture, photosynthetic capacity and even yield.

Leaf size: !correlates with! Chlorophyll content
Leaf shape: !correlates with! Chlorophyll content
Gm-JAG1 (Ln/ln): !regulates! Leaflet shape
QTLs: !shared between! Leaf-related traits and chlorophyll
SNP markers: !linked to! Valuable QTLs