F-actin and myosin XI play important roles in plant organelle movement. A few myosin XI genes in the genome of Arabidopsis are mainly expressed in mature pollen, which suggests that they may play a crucial role in pollen germination and pollen tube tip growth. In this study, a genetic complementation assay was conducted in a myosin xi-c (myo11c1) myosin xi-e (myo11c2) double mutant, and fluorescence labeling combined with microscopic observation was applied. We found that myosin XI-E (Myo11C2)-green fluorescent protein (GFP) restored the slow pollen tube growth and seed deficiency phenotypes of the myo11c1 myo11c2 double mutant and Myo11C2-GFP partially colocalized with mitochondria, peroxisomes and Golgi stacks. Furthermore, decreased mitochondrial movement and subapical accumulation were detected in myo11c1 myo11c2 double mutant pollen tubes. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments showed that the fluorescence recoveries of GFP-RabA4d and AtPRK1-GFP at the pollen tube tip of the myo11c1 myo11c2 double mutant were lower than those of the wild type were after photobleaching. These results suggest that Myo11C2 may be associated with mitochondria, peroxisomes and Golgi stacks, and play a crucial role in organelle movement and apical accumulation of secretory vesicles in pollen tubes of Arabidopsis thaliana.

F-actin: !plays important role in! plant organelle movement
myosin XI: !plays important role in! plant organelle movement
myosin XI genes: !mainly expressed in! mature pollen
myosin XI-E (Myo11C2)-green fluorescent protein (GFP): !restores! slow pollen tube growth and seed deficiency phenotypes
Myo11C2-GFP: !partially colocalizes with! mitochondria, peroxisomes and Golgi stacks
myo11c1 myo11c2 double mutant pollen tubes: !decreased mitochondrial movement and subapical accumulation!
GFP-RabA4d and AtPRK1-GFP: !lower fluorescence recoveries at! pollen tube tip of the myo11c1 myo11c2 double mutant
Myo11C2: !associated with! mitochondria, peroxisomes and Golgi stacks
Myo11C2: !plays crucial role in! organelle movement and apical accumulation of secretory vesicles in pollen tubes