Condensing enzymes catalyze the committed reaction of fatty acid elongation and determine the chain length of fatty acids accepted and produced by the elongation complex. While necessary for the elongation of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), identified plant condensing enzymes cannot efficiently produce VLCFAs longer than 28 carbons, which are precursors for the most abundant cuticular waxes of most plant species that have been surveyed. The eceriferum2 (cer2) mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana has a severe wax-deficient phenotype and specifically lacks waxes longer than 28 carbons, but the CER2 protein does not share sequence similarity with condensing enzymes. Instead, CER2 is homologous to BAHD acyltransferases. Heterologous expression in yeast previously demonstrated that CER2, and a small clade of BAHD acyltransferases with high sequence identity to CER2, can extend the chain-length specificity of the condensing enzyme CER6. This biochemical function is distinct from that of the broader BAHD acyltransferase family. The product specificity and physiological functions of individual CER2-LIKE proteins are unique. Here, we demonstrate that CER2 physically interacts with the fatty acid elongase. We cloned chimeric CER2-LIKE proteins and expressed these in yeast cells to identify the features that define the substrate specificities of CER2-LIKEs. We generated homology-based structural models to compare CER2-LIKEs and BAHD acyltransferases. In addition, based on the current phylogenetic analysis of the CER2-LIKE clade, we describe two further Arabidopsis CER2-LIKE genes, CER2-LIKE3 and CER2-LIKE4. We used yeast expression and mutant analysis to characterize these genes. Collectively, these results expand our knowledge of the functions of CER2-LIKEs, the BAHD acyltransferase family and cuticular wax metabolism.

CER2: !interacts with! fatty acid elongase
CER2: !enhances! chain-length specificity of CER6
CER2: !synthesizes! waxes longer than 28 carbons
CER2-LIKE3: !synthesizes! waxes longer than 28 carbons
CER2-LIKE4: !synthesizes! waxes longer than 28 carbons