Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are the most widely distributed mycorrhizal fungi, which can form mycorrhizal symbionts with plant roots and enhance plant stress resistance by regulating host metabolic activities. In this paper, the RNA sequencing and ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) technologies were used to study the transcriptome and metabolite profiles of the roots of continuously cropped soybeans that were infected with F. mosseae and F. oxysporum. The objective was to explore the effects of F. mosseae treatment on soybean root rot infected with F. oxysporum. According to the transcriptome profiles, 24,285 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, and the expression of genes encoding phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL), trans-cinnamate monooxygenase (CYP73A), cinnamyl-CoA reductase (CCR), chalcone isomerase (CHI) and coffee-coenzyme o-methyltransferase were upregulated after being infected with F. oxysporum; these changes were key to the induction of the soybean's defence response. The metabolite results showed that daidzein and 7,4-dihydroxy, 6-methoxy isoflavone (glycine), which are involved in the isoflavone metabolic pathway, were upregulated after the roots were inoculated with F. mosseae. In addition, a substantial alteration in the abundance of amino acids, phenolic and terpene metabolites all led to the synthesis of defence compounds. An integrated analysis of the metabolic and transcriptomic data revealed that substantial alterations in the abundance of most of the intermediate metabolites and enzymes changed substantially under pathogen infection. These changes included the isoflavonoid biosynthesis pathway, which suggests that isoflavonoid biosynthesis plays an important role in the soybean root response. The results showed that F. mosseae could alleviate the root rot caused by continuous cropping. The increased activity of some disease-resistant genes and disease-resistant metabolites may partly account for the ability of the plants to resist diseases. This study provides new insights into the molecular mechanism by which AMF alleviates soybean root rot, which is important in agriculture.

F. mosseae: !alleviates! root rot
PAL: !upregulated! by F. oxysporum
CYP73A: !upregulated! by F. oxysporum
CCR: !upregulated! by F. oxysporum
CHI: !upregulated! by F. oxysporum
coffee-coenzyme o-methyltransferase: !upregulated! by F. oxysporum
daidzein: !upregulated! by F. mosseae
7,4-dihydroxy, 6-methoxy isoflavone (glycine): !upregulated! by F. mosseae
amino acids: !altered in abundance! by pathogen infection
phenolic metabolites: !altered in abundance! by pathogen infection
terpene metabolites: !altered in abundance! by pathogen infection
isoflavonoid biosynthesis pathway: !plays important role! in soybean root response