Plants experience different abiotic/biotic stresses, which trigger their molecular machinery to cope with them. Besides general mechanisms prompted by many stresses, specific mechanisms have been introduced to optimize the response to individual threats. However, these key mechanisms are difficult to identify. Here, we introduce an in-depth species-specific transcriptomic analysis and conduct an extensive meta-analysis of the responses to related species to gain more knowledge about plant responses. The spider mite Tetranychus urticae was used as the individual species, several arthropod herbivores as the related species for meta-analysis, and Arabidopsis thaliana plants as the common host. The analysis of the transcriptomic data showed typical common responses to herbivory, such as jasmonate signaling or glucosinolate biosynthesis. Also, a specific set of genes likely involved in the particularities of the Arabidopsis-spider mite interaction was discovered. The new findings have determined a prominent role in this interaction of the jasmonate-induced pathways leading to the biosynthesis of anthocyanins and tocopherols. Therefore, tandem individual/general transcriptomic profiling has been revealed as an effective method to identify novel relevant processes and specificities in the plant response to environmental stresses.

Plants: !experience! abiotic/biotic stresses 
Stresses: !trigger! molecular machinery 
Tetranychus urticae: !used as! individual species 
Arthropod herbivores: !used as! related species 
Arabidopsis thaliana: !used as! common host 
Jasmonate signaling: !involved in! plant response to herbivory 
Glucosinolate biosynthesis: !involved in! plant response to herbivory 
Jasmonate-induced pathways: !prominent role in! Arabidopsis-spider mite interaction 
Biosynthesis of anthocyanins: !involved in! Arabidopsis-spider mite interaction 
Biosynthesis of tocopherols: !involved in! Arabidopsis-spider mite interaction 
Individual/general transcriptomic profiling: !revealed as! effective method