Senescence is the final stage of leaf development which is accompanied by highly coordinated and complicated reprogramming of gene expression. Genetic manipulation of leaf senescence in major crops including wheat has been shown to be able to increase stress tolerance and grain yield. NAC(No apical meristem (NAM), ATAF1/2, and cup-shaped cotyledon (CUC)) transcription factors (TFs) play important roles in regulating gene expression changes during leaf senescence and in response to abiotic stresses. Here, we report the characterization of TaSNAC11-4B (Uniprot: A0A1D5XI64), a wheat NAC family member that acts as a functional homolog of AtNAP, a key regulator of leaf senescence in Arabidopsis. The expression of <i>TaSNAC11-4B</i> was up-regulated with the progression of leaf senescence, in response to abscisic acid (ABA) and drought treatments in wheat. Ectopic expression of <i>TaSNAC11-4B</i> in Arabidopsis promoted ROS accumulation and significantly accelerated age-dependent as well as drought- and ABA-induced leaf senescence. Results from transcriptional activity assays indicated that the TaSNAC11-4B protein displayed transcriptional activation activities that are dependent on its C terminus. Furthermore, qRT-PCR and dual-Luciferase assay results suggested that TaSNAC11-4B could positively regulate the expression of <i>AtrbohD</i> and <i>AtrbohF</i>, which encode catalytic subunits of the ROS-producing NADPH oxidase. Further analysis of TaSNAC11-4B in wheat senescence and the potential application of this gene in manipulating leaf senescence with the purpose of yield increase and stress tolerance is discussed.

TaSNAC11-4B: !up-regulates! leaf senescence 
TaSNAC11-4B: !promotes! ROS accumulation 
TaSNAC11-4B: !accelerates! age-dependent senescence 
TaSNAC11-4B: !accelerates! drought-induced senescence 
TaSNAC11-4B: !accelerates! ABA-induced senescence 
TaSNAC11-4B: !activates! transcription 
TaSNAC11-4B: !positively regulates! AtrbohD 
TaSNAC11-4B: !positively regulates! AtrbohF