Sugar beet (Beta vulgaris subsp. vulgaris) is an economically important crop that provides nearly one third of the global sugar production. The beet cyst nematode (BCN), Heterodera schachtii, causes major yield losses in sugar beet and other crops worldwide. The most effective and economic approach to control this nematode is growing tolerant or resistant cultivars. To identify candidate genes involved in susceptibility and resistance, the transcriptome of sugar beet and BCN in compatible and incompatible interactions at two time points was studied using mRNA-seq. In the susceptible cultivar, most defense-related genes were induced at 4 dai while suppressed at 10 dai but in the resistant cultivar Nemakill, induction of genes involved in the plant defense response was observed at both time points. In the compatible interaction, alterations in phytohormone-related genes were detected. The effect of exogenous application of Methyl Jasmonate and ET-generator ethephon on susceptible plants was therefore investigated and the results revealed significant reduction in plant susceptibility. Genes putatively involved in the resistance of Nemakill were identified, such as genes involved in phenylpropanoid pathway and genes encoding CYSTM domain-containing proteins, F-box proteins, chitinase, galactono-1,4-lactone dehydrogenase and CASP-like protein. Also, the transcriptome of the BCN was analyzed in infected root samples and several novel potential nematode effector genes were found. Our data provides detailed insights into the plant and nematode transcriptional changes occurring during compatible and incompatible interactions between sugar beet and BCN. Many important genes playing potential roles in susceptibility or resistance of sugar beet against BCN, as well as some BCN effectors with a potential role as avr proteins were identified. In addition, our findings indicate the effective role of jasmonate and ethylene in enhancing sugar beet defense response against BCN. This research provides new molecular insights into the plant-nematode interactions that can be used to design novel management strategies against BCN.

Sugar beet: !provides! nearly one third of global sugar production
BCN: !causes! major yield losses in sugar beet
defense-related genes: !induced! at 4 dai in susceptible cultivar
defense-related genes: !suppressed! at 10 dai in susceptible cultivar
defense-related genes: !induced! at both time points in resistant cultivar
phytohormone-related genes: !altered! in compatible interaction
Methyl Jasmonate and ET-generator ethephon: !reduce! plant susceptibility
phenylpropanoid pathway genes: !involved in! resistance of Nemakill
CYSTM domain-containing proteins, F-box proteins, chitinase, galactono-1,4-lactone dehydrogenase and CASP-like protein: !involved in! resistance of Nemakill
BCN: !produces! novel potential nematode effector genes
jasmonate and ethylene: !enhance! sugar beet defense response against BCN