Fruits are complex organs that are spatially regulated during development. Limited phenotyping capacity at cell and tissue levels is one of the main obstacles to our understanding of the coordinated regulation of the processes involved in fruit growth and quality. In this study, the spatial evolution of biophysical and metabolic traits of peach and apple fruit was investigated during fruit development. In parallel, the multi-exponential relaxation times and apparent microporosity were assessed by quantitative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The aim was to identify the possible relationships between MRI parameters and variations in the structure and composition of fruit tissues during development so that transverse relaxation could be proposed as a biomarker for the assessment of the structural and functional evolution of fruit tissues during growth. The study provides species-specific data on developmental and spatial variations in density, cell number and size distribution, insoluble and soluble compound accumulation and osmotic and water potential in the fruit mesocarp. Magnetic resonance imaging was able to capture tissue evolution and the development of pericarp heterogeneity by accessing information on cell expansion, water status and distribution at cell level, and microporosity. Changes in vacuole-related transverse relaxation rates were mostly explained by cell/vacuole size. The impact of cell solute composition, microporosity and membrane permeability on relaxation times is also discussed. The results demonstrate the usefulness of MRI as a tool to phenotype fruits and to access important physiological data during development, including information on spatial variability.

MRI: !captures! tissue evolution
MRI: !accesses! information on cell expansion
MRI: !explains! changes in transverse relaxation rates
cell/vacuole size: !affects! transverse relaxation rates
cell solute composition: !impacts! relaxation times
microporosity: !impacts! relaxation times
membrane permeability: !impacts! relaxation times