Calmodulin (CaM) and calmodulin-like (CML) proteins are primary calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>) sensors and are involved in the regulation of plant development and stress responses by converting calcium signals into transcriptional responses, protein phosphorylation, or metabolic changes. However, the characterization and expression profiling of CaM/CML genes in Brassica napus remain limited. The present study reports that 25 BnaCaM and 168 BnaCML genes were identified in B. napus. The phylogenetics, gene structures, gene motifs, gene chromosomal locations, syntenic and Ka/Ks analysis, promoter cis-acting elements, and expression characteristics in various organs and under abiotic stress were evaluated. The phylogenetic results revealed a total of 11 subgroups, including one unique clade of CaMs distinct from CMLs. Most of group I (CaM), II, III, and X members are intron rich, while members from the other seven groups are intron-less. The majority of CaM/CML proteins have four EF-hands. Syntenic analysis showed that 91.3 % orthologous CaM/CML gene pairs between B. rapa and B. oleracea were retained as homologous gene pairs in B. napus. Ka/Ks analysis indicated that the majority of BnaCaM/CML experienced purifying selection. Expression analysis showed that BnaCaMs genes are highly and ubiquitously expressed in all of the organs and tissues examined, while distinct BnaCMLs are expressed specifically in particular organs and tissues. In total, 129 BnaCaM/CML were induced by abiotic stress and phytohormones. BnaCMLs from group IV, VI, VIII, and X were strongly induced by freezing treatment, but were not or just slightly induced by chilling treatment. The present study is the first to analyze the CaM/CML gene family in B. napus, which is useful for understanding the functions of the BnaCaM/CML in modulating plant responses to abiotic stress, especially freezing stress.

Calmodulin (CaM): !converts! calcium signals 
calmodulin-like (CML): !converts! calcium signals 
BnaCaM/CML: !retained as! homologous gene pairs 
BnaCaM/CML: !experienced! purifying selection 
BnaCaMs: !highly and ubiquitously expressed in! organs and tissues 
BnaCMLs: !specifically expressed in! particular organs and tissues 
BnaCMLs: !strongly induced by! freezing treatment