Cotton genotypes displayed similar volatile organic compound (VOC) profiles, but major differences in terpenoid aldehyde (TA) content. The differences in VOC production were minor among genotypes, but these differences are crucial for boll weevil attraction. Weevils did not display any preference in feeding behaviour towards cotton genotypes, suggesting physiological adaptation to cope with cotton chemical defence mechanisms. Plant cultivar selection for resistance to herbivore pests is an effective, environmentally safe and inexpensive method to implement in integrated pest management programmes. In this study, we evaluated seven cotton genotypes with respect to the production of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and non-volatile compounds [terpenoid aldehydes (TAs)], and the attraction and feeding preference of adult boll weevils. Chemical analyses of VOCs from BRS-293, BRS-Rubi, CNPA TB-15, CNPA TB-85, CNPA TB-90, Delta Opal, and Empire Glandless showed that there were few qualitative and quantitative differences across the range of genotypes. In contrast, major differences in TA content were observed, with CNPA TB-15 and CNPA TB-85 producing higher levels of TAs compared to the other genotypes. Our results showed that boll weevil attraction to cotton genotypes varied, suggesting that the ratios and quantities of emitted cotton VOCs are important for host location. However, boll weevil feeding behaviour was neither positively nor negatively influenced by the terpenoid content (non-volatile compounds) of cotton genotypes. The results in this study suggest that boll weevils have adapted physiologically to cope with cotton chemical defence mechanisms.

Cotton genotypes: !display! VOC profiles
VOCs: !differ among! genotypes
VOCs: !influence! boll weevil attraction
Boll weevils: !show no preference in! feeding behaviour
Terpenoid aldehydes (TAs): !differ among! cotton genotypes
TAs: !do not influence! boll weevil feeding behaviour
Boll weevils: !physiologically adapt to! cope with cotton chemical defence mechanisms