Pepper mild mottle virus (PMMoV) is a member in the genus Tobamovirus and infects mainly solanaceous plants. However, the mechanism of virus-host interactions remains unclear. To explore the responses of pepper plants to PMMoV infection, we analyzed the transcriptomic changes in pepper plants after PMMoV infection using a high-throughput RNA sequencing approach and explored the roles of host autophagy in regulating PMMoV infection. A total of 197 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were obtained after PMMoV infection, including 172 significantly up-regulated genes and 25 down-regulated genes. The Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses revealed that most up-regulated DEGs were involved in plant abiotic and biotic stresses. Further analyses showed the expressions of multiple autophagy-related genes (ATGs) were increased after PMMoV infection in pepper and Nicotiana benthamiana plants. Through confocal microscopy and transmission electron microscopy, we have found that PMMoV infection in plant can induce autophagy, evidenced by the increased number of GFP-ATG8a fluorescent punctate and the appearance of double membrane autophagic structures in cells of N. benthamiana. Additionally, inhibition of autophagy significantly increased PMMoV RNA accumulation and aggravated systemic PMMoV symptoms through autophagy inhibitor (3-MA and E64d) treatment and silencing of NbATG expressions by a Tobacco rattle virus-induced gene silencing assays. These results indicated that autophagy played a positive role in plant resistance to PMMoV infection. Taken together, our results provide a transcriptomic insight into pepper responding to PMMoV infection and reveal that autophagy induced by PMMoV infection has an antiviral role in regulating PMMoV infection. These results also help us to better understand the mechanism controlling PMMoV infection in plants and to develop better strategies for breeding projects for virus-resistant crops.

PMMoV: !induces! Autophagy 
Autophagy: !regulates! PMMoV infection 
DEGs: !involved in! Plant abiotic and biotic stresses 
ATGs: !increased after! PMMoV infection 
GFP-ATG8a: !detected by! Confocal microscopy 
3-MA/E64d: !inhibits! Autophagy 
NbATG: !silenced by! TRV-induced gene silencing