Fine-tuning of nutrient uptake and response is indispensable for maintenance of nutrient homeostasis in plants, but the details of underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated. NITRATE-INDUCIBLE GARP-TYPE TRANSCRIPTIONAL REPRESSOR 1 (NIGT1) family proteins are plant-specific transcriptional repressors that function as an important hub in the nutrient signaling network associated with the acquisition and use of nitrogen and phosphorus. Here, by yeast two-hybrid assays, bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays, and biochemical analysis with recombinant proteins, we show that Arabidopsis NIGT1 family proteins form a dimer via the interaction mediated by a coiled-coil domain (CCD) in their N-terminal regions. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays defined that the NIGT1 dimer binds to two different motifs, 5'-GAATATTC-3' and 5'-GATTC-N38-GAATC-3', in target gene promoters. Unlike the dimer of wild-type NIGT1 family proteins, a mutant variant that could not dimerize due to amino acid substitutions within the CCD had lower specificity and affinity to DNA, thereby losing the ability to precisely regulate the expression of target genes. Thus, expressing the wild-type and mutant NIGT1 proteins in the nigt1 quadruple mutant differently modified NIGT1-regulated gene expression and responses towards nitrate and phosphate. These results suggest that the CCD-mediated dimerization confers dual mode DNA recognition to NIGT1 family proteins, which is necessary to make proper controls of their target genes and nutrient responses. Intriguingly, two 5'-GATTC-3' sequences are present in face-to-face orientation within the 5'-GATTC-N38-GAATC-3' sequence or its complementary one, while two 5'-ATTC-3' sequences are present in back-to-back orientation within the 5'-GAATATTC-3' or its complementary one. This finding suggests a unique mode of DNA binding by NIGT1 family proteins and may provide a hint as to why target sequences for some transcription factors cannot be clearly determined.

NIGT1: !interacts with! CCD 
NIGT1: !binds to! 5'-GAATATTC-3' 
NIGT1: !binds to! 5'-GATTC-N38-GAATC-3' 
NIGT1: !regulates! target gene expression 
NIGT1: !modifies! nutrient responses 
Wild-type NIGT1: !has higher! specificity and affinity 
Mutant NIGT1: !has lower! specificity and affinity