Malonyl-CoA:flavonoid acyltransferases (MaTs) modify isoflavones, but only a few have been characterized for activity and assigned to specific physiological processes. Legume roots exude isoflavone malonates into the rhizosphere, where they are hydrolyzed into isoflavone aglycones. Soybean GmMaT2 was highly expressed in seeds, root hairs, and nodules. GmMaT2 and GmMaT4 recombinant enzymes used isoflavone 7-O-glucosides as acceptors and malonyl-CoA as an acyl donor to generate isoflavone glucoside malonates. GmMaT2 had higher activity towards isoflavone glucosides than GmMaT4. Overexpression in hairy roots of GmMaT2 and GmMaT4 produced more malonyldaidzin, malonylgenistin, and malonylglycitin, and resulted in more nodules than control. However, only GmMaT2 knockdown (KD) hairy roots showed reduced levels of malonyldaidzin, malonylgenistin, and malonylglycitin, and, likewise, reduced nodule numbers. These were consistent with the up-regulation of only GmMaT2 by rhizobial infection, and higher expression levels of early nodulation genes in GmMaT2- and GmMaT4-overexpressing roots, but lower only in GmMaT2-KD roots compared with control roots. Higher malonyl isoflavonoid levels in transgenic hairy roots were associated with higher levels of isoflavones in root exudates and more nodules, and vice versa. We suggest that GmMaT2 participates in soybean nodulation by catalyzing isoflavone malonylation and affecting malonyl isoflavone secretion for activation of Nod factor and nodulation.

GmMaT2: !modifies! isoflavones
GmMaT2: !highly expressed in! seeds, root hairs, and nodules
GmMaT2: !uses! isoflavone 7-O-glucosides as acceptors and malonyl-CoA as an acyl donor
GmMaT2: !overexpression of! produces more malonyldaidzin, malonylgenistin, and malonylglycitin
GmMaT2: !knockdown of! reduces levels of malonyldaidzin, malonylgenistin, and malonylglycitin
GmMaT2: !up-regulation of! by rhizobial infection
GmMaT2: !participates in! soybean nodulation
GmMaT2: !affects! malonyl isoflavone secretion for activation of Nod factor and nodulation