The prevalence and recurrence of whole-genome duplication in plants and its major role in evolution have been well recognized. Despite great efforts, many aspects of genome evolution, particularly the temporal progression of genomic responses to allopolyploidy and the underlying mechanisms, remain poorly understood. The rice genus Oryza consists of both recently formed and older allopolyploid species, representing an attractive system for studying the genome evolution after allopolyploidy. In this study, through screening BAC libraries and sequencing and annotating the targeted BAC clones, we generated orthologous genomic sequences surrounding the DEP1 locus, a major grain yield QTL in cultivated rice, from four Oryza polyploids of various ages and their likely diploid genome donors or close relatives. Based on sequenced DEP1 region and published data from three other genomic regions, we investigated the temporal evolutionary dynamics of four polyploid genomes at both genetic and expression levels. In the recently formed BBCC polyploid, Oryza minuta, genome dominance was not observed and its short-term responses to allopolyploidy are mainly manifested as a high proportion of homoeologous gene pairs showing unequal expression. This could partly be explained by parental legacy, rewiring of divergent regulatory networks and epigenetic modulation. Moreover, we detected an ongoing diploidization process in this genus, and suggest that the expression divergence driven by changes of selective constraint probably plays a big role in the long-term diploidization. These findings add novel insights into our understanding of genome evolution after allopolyploidy, and could facilitate crop improvements through hybridization and polyploidization.

Oryza: !consists of! recently formed and older allopolyploid species
allopolyploidy: !leads to! genome evolution
DEP1 locus: !surrounded by! orthologous genomic sequences
BBCC polyploid: !exhibits! unequal expression of homoeologous gene pairs
parental legacy: !contributes to! unequal expression
rewiring of regulatory networks: !contributes to! unequal expression
epigenetic modulation: !contributes to! unequal expression
diploidization process: !ongoing in! Oryza genus
expression divergence: !driven by! changes of selective constraint