Light is a main environmental factor that determines leaf microclimate within the vine, as well as its photosynthesis and carbohydrate metabolism. This study aimed to examine the relationships between photosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, and the expression of related genes in leaves of grapevine grown under different radiation regimes. During the 2014/2015 growing season, an experiment was conducted on a Malbec vineyard (Vitis vinifera L.) in which four radiation exposure treatments were established on the leaves: (1) East, (2) West, (3) Sun, and (4) Shade (i.e., reduction in light intensity). Diurnal dynamics of photosynthesis and non-structural carbohydrates were measured and leaf export rates were calculated. Transcript profiles of leaf sugar transporters (VvHT1, VvHT3, VvSUC27), a sucrose phosphate synthase enzyme (VvSPS), and invertases (VvGIN1, VvCWI) were also examined. We showed that East and Sun leaves had higher daily photosynthetic and export rates than West leaves, which was mainly explained by the environmental conditions (air and leaf temperature, VPD<sub>leaf-air</sub> ) and leaf water status. Shade leaves accumulated less starch and soluble sugars than exposed leaves, which correlated with a higher expression of hexose transporters and invertases. The hypotheses that these sugars in Shade leaves would play a role as signaling molecules and/or have increased sink strength and phloem unloading are discussed. These results allow us to understand the physiological and molecular behavior of leaves exposed to different radiation regimes, which can be used to design appropriate vineyard management practices.

Light: !determines! Leaf microclimate 
Light: !affects! Photosynthesis 
Light: !affects! Carbohydrate metabolism 
VvHT1, VvHT3, VvSUC27: !transport! Sugars 
VvSPS: !synthesizes! Sucrose phosphate 
VvGIN1, VvCWI: !invert! Sugars 
East, Sun leaves: !have higher! Photosynthetic rates 
Shade leaves: !accumulate less! Starch and soluble sugars 
Hexose transporters, invertases: !express more! In Shade leaves