The central dogma (CD) of molecular biology is the transfer of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein. Major CD processes governing genetic flow include the cell cycle, DNA replication, chromosome packaging, epigenetic changes, transcription, posttranscriptional alterations, translation, and posttranslational modifications. The CD processes are tightly regulated in plants to maintain genetic integrity throughout the life cycle and to pass genetic materials to next generation. Engineering of various CD processes involved in gene regulation will accelerate crop improvement to feed the growing world population. CRISPR technology enables programmable editing of CD processes to alter DNA, RNA, or protein, which would have been impossible in the past. Here, an overview of recent advancements in CRISPR tool development and CRISPR-based CD modulations that expedite basic and applied plant research is provided. Furthermore, CRISPR applications in major thriving areas of research, such as gene discovery (allele mining and cryptic gene activation), introgression (de novo domestication and haploid induction), and application of desired traits beneficial to farmers or consumers (biotic/abiotic stress-resilient crops, plant cell factories, and delayed senescence), are described. Finally, the global regulatory policies, challenges, and prospects for CRISPR-mediated crop improvement are discussed.

DNA: !transfers to! RNA 
RNA: !transfers to! Protein 
Cell Cycle: !regulates! Genetic Flow 
DNA Replication: !regulates! Genetic Flow 
Chromosome Packaging: !regulates! Genetic Flow 
Epigenetic Changes: !regulates! Genetic Flow 
Transcription: !regulates! Genetic Flow 
Posttranscriptional Alterations: !regulates! Genetic Flow 
Translation: !regulates! Genetic Flow 
Posttranslational Modifications: !regulates! Genetic Flow 
CRISPR Technology: !enables! Programmable Editing 
CRISPR Tool Development: !accelerates! Crop Improvement 
Allele Mining: !discovers! Genes 
Cryptic Gene Activation: !discovers! Genes 
De Novo Domestication: !introgresses! Traits 
Haploid Induction: !introgresses! Traits 
Biotic/Abiotic Stress-Resilient Crops: !applies! Desired Traits 
Plant Cell Factories: !applies! Desired Traits 
Delayed Sen