The MYB, one of the largest transcription factor families in plants, is related to various biological processes. For an example, the R2R3-MYB family plays an important role in regulation of primary and secondary metabolism, plant growth and development, and responses to hormones and stresses. However, functional studies on the poplar R2R3-MYB genes are limited. In this study, we identified 207 poplar R2R3-MYB genes that are unevenly distributed on the 19 chromosomes of poplar, followed by characterization of their conserved domains. On the basis of phylogenetic analysis, these genes can be divided into 23 groups. Evidence from synteny analyses indicated that the poplar R2R3-MYB gene family is featured by tandem and segmental duplication events. On the basis of RNA-Seq data, we investigated salt responsive genes and explored their expression patterns. Furthermore, we cloned the <i>PsnMYB108</i> gene from poplar, which is significantly up-regulated in roots and leaves in response to salt stress. To validate its function, we developed transgenic tobacco plants that over-express the <i>PsnMYB108</i> gene. It appears that the transgenic lines are more tolerant to salt stress than the wild type does. Evidence from physiological analyses demonstrated that over-expression of <i>PsnMYB108</i> may improve tobacco salt stress tolerance by increasing the reactive oxygen species scavenging ability and the accumulation of proline. These results laid the foundation for future analysis and functional studies of poplar R2R3-MYB family members, and revealed that <i>PsnMYB108</i> plays an important role in improving plant salt stress tolerance.

R2R3-MYB family: !plays role in! regulation of primary and secondary metabolism, plant growth and development, and responses to hormones and stresses
207 poplar R2R3-MYB genes: !unevenly distributed on! 19 chromosomes of poplar
RNA-Seq data: !investigated! salt responsive genes
PsnMYB108 gene: !significantly up-regulated in! roots and leaves in response to salt stress
PsnMYB108 gene: !over-expression of! improves tobacco salt stress tolerance
PsnMYB108 gene: !plays important role in! improving plant salt stress tolerance