Amid apprehension of global climate change, crop plants are inevitably confronted with a myriad of abiotic stress factors during their growth that inflicts a serious threat to their development and overall productivity. These abiotic stresses comprise extreme temperature, pH, high saline soil, and drought stress. Among different abiotic stresses, drought is considered the most calamitous stressor with its serious impact on the crops' yield stability. The development of climate-resilient crops that withstands reduced water availability is a major focus of the scientific fraternity to ensure the food security of the sharply increasing population. Numerous studies aim to recognize the key regulators of molecular and biochemical processes associated with drought stress tolerance response. A few potential candidates are now considered as promising targets for crop improvement. Transcription factors act as a key regulatory switch controlling the gene expression of diverse biological processes and, eventually, the metabolic processes. Understanding the role and regulation of the transcription factors will facilitate the crop improvement strategies intending to develop and deliver agronomically-superior crops. Therefore, in this review, we have emphasized the molecular avenues of the transcription factors that can be exploited to engineer drought tolerance potential in crop plants. We have discussed the molecular role of several transcription factors, such as basic leucine zipper (bZIP), dehydration responsive element binding (DREB), DNA binding with one finger (DOF), heat shock factor (HSF), MYB, NAC, TEOSINTE BRANCHED1/CYCLOIDEA/PCF (TCP), and WRKY. We have also highlighted candidate transcription factors that can be used for the development of drought-tolerant crops.

bZIP: !regulates! gene expression
DREB: !regulates! gene expression
DOF: !regulates! gene expression
HSF: !regulates! gene expression
MYB: !regulates! gene expression
NAC: !regulates! gene expression
TCP: !regulates! gene expression
WRKY: !regulates! gene expression