Abiotic stresses, such as drought and salinity, adversely affect rice production and cause a severe threat to food security. Conventional crop breeding techniques alone are inadequate for achieving drought stress tolerance in crop plants. Using transgenic technology, incremental improvements in tolerance to drought and salinity have been successfully attained via manipulation of gene(s) in several crop species. However, achieving the goal via pyramiding multiple genes from the same or different tolerance mechanisms has received little attention. Pyramiding of multiple genes can be achieved either through breeding, by using marker-assisted selection, or by genetic engineering through molecular stacking co-transformation or re-transformation. Transgene stacking into a single locus has added advantages over breeding or re-transformation since the former assures co-inheritance of genes, contributing to more effective tolerance in transgenic plants for generations. Drought, being a polygenic trait, the potential candidate genes for gene stacking are those contributing to cellular detoxification, osmolyte accumulation, antioxidant machinery, and signaling pathways. Since cellular dehydration is inbuilt in salinity stress, manipulation of these genes results in improving tolerance to salinity along with drought in most of the cases. In this review, attempts have been made to provide a critical assessment of transgenic plants developed through transgene stacking and approaches to achieve the same. Identification and functional validation of more such candidate genes is needed for research programs targeting the gene stacking for developing crop plants with high precision in the shortest possible time to ensure sustainable crop productivity under marginal lands.

drought: !affects! rice production
transgenic technology: !increases! tolerance to drought and salinity
pyramiding: !achieves! multiple genes from same/different tolerance mechanisms
transgene stacking: !assures! co-inheritance of genes
polygenic trait: !requires! manipulation of cellular detoxification, osmolyte accumulation, antioxidant machinery, and signaling pathways
salinity stress: !improves! tolerance to salinity along with drought