The genus Ligusticum consists of approximately 60 species distributed in the Northern Hemisphere. It is one of the most taxonomically difficult taxa within Apiaceae, largely due to the varied morphological characteristics. To investigate the plastome evolution and phylogenetic relationships of Ligusticum, we determined the complete plastome sequences of eight Ligusticum species using a de novo assembly approach. Through a comprehensive comparative analysis, we found that the eight plastomes were similar in terms of repeat sequence, SSR, codon usage, and RNA editing site. However, compared with the other seven species, L. delavayi exhibited striking differences in genome size, gene number, IR/SC borders, and sequence identity. Most of the genes remained under the purifying selection, whereas four genes showed relaxed selection, namely ccsA, rpoA, ycf1, and ycf2. Non-monophyly of Ligusticum species was inferred from the plastomes and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences phylogenetic analyses. The plastome tree and ITS tree produced incongruent tree topologies, which may be attributed to the hybridization and incomplete lineage sorting. Our study highlighted the advantage of plastome with mass informative sites in resolving phylogenetic relationships. Moreover, combined with the previous studies, we considered that the current taxonomy system of Ligusticum needs to be improved and revised. In summary, our study provides new insights into the plastome evolution, phylogeny, and taxonomy of Ligusticum species.

Ligusticum: !consists of! 60 species 
plastome: !determined for! 8 Ligusticum species 
repeat sequence: !similar in! 8 plastomes 
SSR: !similar in! 8 plastomes 
codon usage: !similar in! 8 plastomes 
RNA editing site: !similar in! 8 plastomes 
L. delavayi: !differs from! other 7 species 
ccsA, rpoA, ycf1, ycf2: !show relaxed selection! 
plastome tree: !incongruent with! ITS tree 
plastome: !advantageous in! resolving phylogenetic relationships 
taxonomy system: !needs to be improved and revised!