Soil is a complex matrix where biotic and abiotic components establish a still unclear network involving bacteria, fungi, archaea, protists, protozoa, and roots that are in constant communication with each other. Understanding these interactions has recently focused on metagenomics, metatranscriptomics and less on metaproteomics studies. Metaproteomic allows total extraction of intracellular and extracellular proteins from soil samples, providing a complete picture of the physiological and functional state of the "soil community". The advancement of high-performance mass spectrometry technologies was more rapid than the development of ad hoc extraction techniques for soil proteins. The protein extraction from environmental samples is biased due to interfering substances and the lower amount of proteins in comparison to cell cultures. Soil sample preparation and extraction methodology are crucial steps to obtain high-quality resolution and yields of proteins. This review focuses on the several soil protein extraction protocols to date to highlight the methodological challenges and critical issues for the application of proteomics to soil samples. This review concludes that improvements in soil protein extraction, together with the employment of ad hoc metagenome database, may enhance the identification of proteins with low abundance or from non-dominant populations and increase our capacity to predict functional changes in soil.

Soil: !contains! Bacteria 
Soil: !contains! Fungi 
Soil: !contains! Archaea 
Soil: !contains! Protists 
Soil: !contains! Protozoa 
Soil: !contains! Roots 
Metaproteomics: !allows extraction of! Intracellular proteins 
Metaproteomics: !allows extraction of! Extracellular proteins 
High-performance mass spectrometry: !advanced more rapidly than! Ad hoc extraction techniques 
Protein extraction: !biased due to! Interfering substances 
Protein extraction: !biased due to! Lower amount of proteins 
Soil sample preparation: !crucial step for! High-quality resolution 
Soil sample extraction: !crucial step for! High yields of proteins 
Ad hoc metagenome database: !may enhance! Identification of proteins