Enhanced glutathione content improves lateral root development by positively regulating the transcripts of root development genes responsive to glutathione treatment, thereby increasing the overall productivity of rice plants. Glutathione is primarily known as a cellular antioxidant molecule, but its role in lateral root development in rice plants has not been elucidated. Here, we have investigated its role in lateral root development of rice Oryza sativa L. Exogenous glutathione (GSH) promoted both the number and length of lateral roots in rice, and the GSH biosynthesis inhibitor buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) significantly reduced these parameters, compared to untreated plants. The inhibition by BSO was reversed with exogenous GSH. Transcript profiling by RNA-seq revealed that expression of the transcription factor genes DREB and ERF and the hormone-related genes AOS, LOX, JAZ, and SAUR were significantly downregulated in the BSO-treated plants and, in contrast, upregulated in plants treated with GSH and with GSH and BSO together. We generated OsGS-overexpressing transgenic plants in which the transgene is controlled by the abiotic-stress-inducible OsRab21 promoter to study the effect of endogenously increased GSH levels. In cold stress, transgenic rice plants enhanced stress tolerance and lateral root development by maintaining redox homeostasis and improving upregulating the expression of transcription factors and hormone-related genes involved in lateral root development. We observed improved root growth of OsGS-overexpressing plants in paddy fields compared to the wild-type controls. These traits may have alleviated transplanting stress during early growth in the field and accounted for the increased productivity. These results provide information and perspectives on the role of GSH in gene expression, lateral root development, and grain yield in rice.

GSH: !enhances! lateral root development
BSO: !inhibits! lateral root development
GSH: !upregulates! transcription factor genes
GSH: !upregulates! hormone-related genes
OsGS: !improves! stress tolerance
OsGS: !improves! root growth
OsGS: !increases! productivity