Inorganic phosphate (Pi) is an essential macronutrient required for many fundamental processes in plants, including photosynthesis and respiration, as well as nucleic acid, protein, and membrane phospholipid synthesis. The huge use of Pi-containing fertilizers in agriculture demonstrates that the soluble Pi levels of most soils are suboptimal for crop growth. This review explores recent advances concerning the understanding of adaptive metabolic processes that plants have evolved to alleviate the negative impact of nutritional Pi deficiency. Plant Pi starvation responses arise from complex signaling pathways that integrate altered gene expression with post-transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms. The resultant remodeling of the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome enhances the efficiency of root Pi acquisition from the soil, as well as the use of assimilated Pi throughout the plant. We emphasize how the up-regulation of high-affinity Pi transporters and intra- and extracellular Pi scavenging and recycling enzymes, organic acid anion efflux, membrane remodeling, and the remarkable flexibility of plant metabolism and bioenergetics contribute to the survival of Pi-deficient plants. This research field is enabling the development of a broad range of innovative and promising strategies for engineering phosphorus-efficient crops. Such cultivars are urgently needed to reduce inputs of unsustainable and non-renewable Pi fertilizers for maximum agronomic benefit and long-term global food security and ecosystem preservation.

Pi: !essential for! Photosynthesis, respiration, nucleic acid, protein, and membrane phospholipid synthesis
Signaling pathways: !integrate! Altered gene expression with post-transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms
High-affinity Pi transporters: !up-regulate! Root Pi acquisition from soil
Intra- and extracellular Pi scavenging and recycling enzymes: !enhance! Use of assimilated Pi throughout plant
Organic acid anion efflux: !contribute to! Survival of Pi-deficient plants