Most of the heavy metals (HMs), and metals/metalloids are released into the nature either by natural phenomenon or anthropogenic activities. Being sessile organisms, plants are constantly exposed to HMs in the environment. The metal non-hyperaccumulating plants are susceptible to excess metal concentrations. They tend to sequester metals in their root vacuoles by forming complexes with metal ligands, as a detoxification strategy. In contrast, the metal-hyperaccumulating plants have adaptive intrinsic regulatory mechanisms to hyperaccumulate or sequester excess amounts of HMs into their above-ground tissues rather than accumulating them in roots. They have unique abilities to successfully carry out normal physiological functions without showing any visible stress symptoms unlike metal non-hyperaccumulators. The unique abilities of accumulating excess metals in hyperaccumulators partly owes to constitutive overexpression of metal transporters and ability to quickly translocate HMs from root to shoot. Various metal ligands also play key roles in metal hyperaccumulating plants. These metal hyperaccumulating plants can be used in metal contaminated sites to clean-up soils. Exploiting the knowledge of natural populations of metal hyperaccumulators complemented with cutting-edge biotechnological tools can be useful in the future. The present review highlights the recent developments in physiological and molecular mechanisms of metal accumulation of hyperaccumulator plants in the lights of metal ligands and transporters. The contrasting mechanisms of metal accumulation between hyperaccumulators and non-hyperaccumulators are thoroughly compared. Moreover, uses of different metal hyperaccumulators for phytoremediation purposes are also discussed in detail.

metal: !accumulated by! hyperaccumulators
metal: !sequestered by! non-hyperaccumulators
transporters: !overexpressed in! hyperaccumulators
metal ligands: !play key role in! hyperaccumulators
hyperaccumulators: !used for! phytoremediation