['33221412', 'Plants are vulnerable to heat stress, especially during reproductive development.  The heat shock response (HSR) in the cytosol and nucleus, as well as the unfolded  protein response (UPR) in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), are two mechanisms that  enable plants to survive heat stress. Excessive heat or ER stresses lead to cell  death when the UPR cannot repair stress damage, but the means by which cell  survival or death is determined remains unclear. In this study, we used a  genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify that a cluster of five  Immune-associated nucleotide-binding protein (IAN) genes (IAN2 to IAN6) is  responsible for variation in heat tolerance at the reproductive stage in  Arabidopsis thaliana. These IAN genes have both unique and overlapping functions  in the negative regulation of heat tolerance, and their loss of function singly  or in combination confers increased heat tolerance, measured by a lower number of  barren siliques and a higher seedling survival rate under heat. The loss of rice  IAN1 gene function also leads to enhanced heat tolerance, suggesting a conserved  function of plant IANs. Transcriptome analysis revealed enhanced expression of  HSR and UPR genes, as well as reduced cell death, under heat and ER stress in the  mutant of IAN6, a major effect member in Arabidopsis. Furthermore, the IAN  proteins were found to promote cell death induced by heat stress, ER stress, and  cell death-inducing molecules. Thus, the Arabidopsis IAN genes repress heat  tolerance, probably through the HSR and UPR and by enhancing the cell death  pathway. The IAN2 to IAN6 proteins are partially localized to the ER, suggesting  a direct role in the UPR and UPR-mediated cell death. In addition, a natural IAN6  variant from more heat-tolerant Arabidopsis accessions confers greater heat  tolerance and induces less cell death compared with the natural variant from less  heat-tolerant accessions. The heat-tolerant IAN6 variant is associated with a  higher maximum temperature of the warmest month at its collection sites compared  with the heat-sensitive variant. Taken together, these results reveal an  important role of Arabidopsis IAN2 to IAN6 genes in the regulation of the HSR,  UPR, and cell death, and suggest that their natural variations have adaptive  functions in heat tolerance.', '2021 Feb 1', 'Mol Plant', '10.1016/j.molp.2020.11.010', 'Hua']

IAN genes: !regulate! HSR 
IAN genes: !regulate! UPR 
IAN genes: !enhance! cell death 
IAN genes: !localize to! ER 
IAN6: !promotes! cell death 
IAN6 variant: !confers! heat tolerance 
IAN6 variant: !associated with! maximum temperature