Viruses are infectious pathogens, and plant virus epidemics can have devastating consequences to crop yield and quality. Sugarcane mosaic virus (SCMV, belonging to family Potyviridae) is one of the leading pathogens that affect the sugarcane crop every year. To combat the pathogens' attack, plants generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) as the first line of defense whose sophisticated balance is achieved through well-organized antioxidant scavenging pathways. In this study, we investigated the changes occurring at the transcriptomic level of ROS associated and ROS detoxification pathways of SCMV resistant (B-48) and susceptible (Badila) sugarcane genotypes, using Saccharum spontaneum L. genome assembly as a reference genome. Transcriptomic data highlighted the significant upregulation of ROS producing genes such as NADH oxidase, malate dehydrogenase and flavin-binding monooxygenase, in Badila genotype after SCMV pathogenicity. To scavenge the ROS, the Badila genotype illustrated a substantial enhancement of antioxidants i.e. glutathione s-transferase (GST), as compared to its resistant counterpart. GST is supposed to be a key indicator of pathogen attacks on the plant. A remarkably lower GST expression in B-48, as compared to Badila, indicated the development of resistance in this genotype. Additionally, we characterized the critical transcription factors (TFs) involved in endowing resistance to B-48. Among these, WRKY, AP2, NAC, bZIP, and bHLH showed enhanced expression in the B-48 genotype. Our results also confirmed the linkage of transcriptomic data with the enzymatic and qPCR data. The estimation of enzymatic activities for superoxide dismutase, catalase, ascorbate peroxidase, and phenylalanine ammonia-lyase supported the transcriptomic data and evinced higher resistance in B-48 genotype. The current study supported the efficiency of the B-48 genotype under SCMV infection. Moreover, comparative transcriptomic data has been presented to highlight the role of significant transcription factors conferring resistance to this genotype. This study provides an in-depth knowledge of the expression profiling of defense mechanisms in sugarcane.

NADH oxidase: !upregulates! ROS 
malate dehydrogenase: !upregulates! ROS 
flavin-binding monooxygenase: !upregulates! ROS 
GST: !enhances! antioxidants 
WRKY: !enhances! resistance 
AP2: !enhances! resistance 
NAC: !enhances! resistance 
bZIP: !enhances! resistance 
bHLH: !enhances! resistance 
superoxide dismutase: !increases! activity 
catalase: !increases! activity 
ascorbate peroxidase: !increases! activity 
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase: !increases! activity