Starch synthesis is an elaborate process employing several isoforms of starch synthases (SSs), starch branching enzymes (SBEs) and debranching enzymes (DBEs). In cereals, some starch biosynthetic enzymes can form heteromeric complexes whose assembly is controlled by protein phosphorylation. Previous studies suggested that SSIIa forms a trimeric complex with SBEIIb, SSI, in which SBEIIb is phosphorylated. This study investigates the post-translational modification of SSIIa, and its interactions with SSI and SBEIIb in maize amyloplast stroma. SSIIa, immunopurified and shown to be free from other soluble starch synthases, was shown to be readily phosphorylated, affecting V<sub>max</sub> but with minor effects on substrate K<sub>d</sub> and K<sub>m</sub> values, resulting in a 12-fold increase in activity compared with the dephosphorylated enzyme. This ATP-dependent stimulation of activity was associated with interaction with SBEIIb, suggesting that the availability of glucan branching limits SSIIa and is enhanced by physical interaction of the two enzymes. Immunoblotting of maize amyloplast extracts following non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis identified multiple bands of SSIIa, the electrophoretic mobilities of which were markedly altered by conditions that affected protein phosphorylation, including protein kinase inhibitors. Separation of heteromeric enzyme complexes by GPC, following alteration of protein phosphorylation states, indicated that such complexes are stable and may partition into larger and smaller complexes. The results suggest a dual role for protein phosphorylation in promoting association and dissociation of SSIIa-containing heteromeric enzyme complexes in the maize amyloplast stroma, providing new insights into the regulation of starch biosynthesis in plants.

SSIIa: !interacts with! SBEIIb
SSIIa: !phosphorylated by! ATP
SSIIa: !forms complex with! SSI, SBEIIb
SSIIa: !stabilized by! phosphorylation
SSIIa: !dissociated by! protein kinase inhibitors