In crops there are quantitative trait loci (QTLs) in which some of the causal quantitative trait genes (QTGs) have not been functionally characterized even in the model plant Arabidopsis. We propose an approach to delineate QTGs in rapeseed by coordinating expression of genes located within QTLs and known orthologs related to traits from Arabidopsis. Using this method in developing siliques 15 d after pollination in 71 lines of rapeseed, we established an acyl-lipid metabolism co-expression network with 21 modules composed of 270 known acyl-lipid genes and 3503 new genes. The core module harbored 76 known genes involved in fatty acid and triacylglycerol biosynthesis and 671 new genes involved in sucrose transport, carbon metabolism, amino acid metabolism, seed storage protein processes, seed maturation, and phytohormone metabolism. Moreover, the core module closely associated with the modules of photosynthesis and carbon metabolism. From the co-expression network, we selected 12 hub genes to identify their putative Arabidopsis orthologs. These putative orthologs were functionally analysed using Arabidopsis knockout and overexpression lines. Four knockout mutants exhibited lower seed oil content, while the seed oil content in 10 overexpression lines was significantly increased. Therefore, combining gene co-expression network analysis and QTL mapping, this study provides new insights into the detection of QTGs and into acyl-lipid metabolism in rapeseed.

QTLs: !contain! QTGs 
QTGs: !characterized by! expression of genes 
expression of genes: !coordinated with! known orthologs 
known orthologs: !related to! traits from Arabidopsis 
acyl-lipid metabolism network: !composed of! 270 known acyl-lipid genes and 3503 new genes 
core module: !harbors! 76 known genes and 671 new genes 
core module: !associated with! modules of photosynthesis and carbon metabolism 
hub genes: !selected to! identify putative Arabidopsis orthologs 
putative orthologs: !functionally analysed using! Arabidopsis knockout and overexpression lines 
knockout mutants: !exhibit! lower seed oil content 
overexpression lines: !increase! seed oil content