The stress responses of plant compete for resources with growth and development. Resource allocations among these processes may have been optimized in plants adapted to natural habitats. Here, nitrogen (N) allocations were compared in leaves of Arabidopsis and Chorispora bungeana, a cryophyte with strong freezing tolerance. The results showed that the two species differed not only in N partitions among N forms and allocations among leaves, but also in their responses to cold stress. Interestingly, leaf protein contents were enhanced in C. bungeana while reduced in Arabidopsis, though the N allocations to leaves were reduced in both plants upon cold stress. Profoundly, when grown at warm temperature, contents of total free amino acids (FAAs) in leaves of C. bungeana were 6-11 times higher than those in Arabidopsis. In contrast, cold treatment induced FAAs accumulation in leaves of Arabidopsis without having significant effect in any leaf of C. bungeana. Considerable discrepancy was also found between the two species in the expressions of nitrate transporter genes and the activities of nitrate assimilation enzymes. Correlation and network analysis showed that most NPFs were clustered in a single network module and had loose relations with protein synthesis in Arabidopsis, while they were distributed in different modules in a decentralized network in C. bungeana. Therefore, our results reveal that C. bungeana may have optimized its N allocation strategy by producing and storing amino acids as efficient N reserve and adopting a decentralized network for N utilization, which may equip the plant with powerful capabilities for environmental adaptions.

N: !allocated differently in! Arabidopsis & C. bungeana
Protein: !enhanced in! C. bungeana & !reduced in! Arabidopsis
FAAs: !accumulated in! Arabidopsis & !not affected in! C. bungeana
Nitrate transporter genes: !expressed differently in! Arabidopsis & C. bungeana
Nitrate assimilation enzymes: !activated differently in! Arabidopsis & C. bungeana
NPFs: !clustered in single module in! Arabidopsis & !distributed in different modules in! C. bungeana