Through a combination of physiological, pharmacological, molecular and targeted metabolomics approaches, we showed that retention of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) seed dormancy levels induced by low and high seed development temperatures during post-desiccation phases is associated with modulation of gibberellin (GA) level and seed responsiveness to abscisic acid (ABA) and GA via expression of TaABI5 and TaGAMYB, respectively. Dormancy retention during imbibition, however, is associated with modulations of both ABA level and responsiveness via expression of specific ABA metabolism (TaNCED2 and TaCYP707A1) and signalling (TaPYL2, TaSnRK2, TaABI3, TaABI4 and TaABI5) genes, and alterations of GA levels and responsiveness through expression of specific GA biosynthesis (TaGA20ox1, TaGA20ox2 and TaGA3ox2) and signalling (TaGID1 and TaGID2) genes, respectively. Expression patterns of GA signalling genes, TaRHT1 and TaGAMYB, lacked positive correlation with that of GA regulated genes and dormancy level observed in seeds developed at the two temperatures, implying their regulation at post-transcriptional level. Our results overall implicate that a shift in ABA/GA balance underlies retention of dormancy levels induced by seed development temperature during post-desiccation and imbibition phases. Consistently, genes regulated by ABA and GA during imbibition overlapped with those differentially expressed between imbibed seeds developed at the two temperatures and mediate different biological functions.

TaABI5: !modulates! GA level and seed responsiveness to ABA and GA
TaNCED2: !modulates! ABA level
TaCYP707A1: !modulates! seed responsiveness to ABA
TaPYL2: !modulates! ABA signalling
TaSnRK2: !modulates! ABA signalling
TaABI3: !modulates! ABA signalling
TaABI4: !modulates! ABA signalling
TaABI5: !modulates! ABA signalling
TaGA20ox1: !modulates! GA levels
TaGA20ox2: !modulates! GA levels
TaGA3ox2: !modulates! GA levels
TaGID1: !modulates! GA signalling
TaGID2: !modulates! GA signalling
TaRHT1: !modulates! GA signalling
TaGAMYB: !modulates! GA signalling