Methyl jasmonate promotes the synthesis of rosmarinic acid in Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge and Salvia castanea f. tomentosa Stib, and it promotes the latter more strongly. Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge (SMB) is a traditional Chinese medicinal material, its water-soluble phenolic acid component rosmarinic acid has very important medicinal value. Salvia castanea f. tomentosa Stib (SCT) mainly distributed in Nyingchi, Tibet. Its pharmacological effects are similar to SMB, but its rosmarinic acid is significantly higher than the former. Methyl jasmonate (MJ) as an inducer can induce the synthesis of phenolic acids in SMB and SCT. However, the role of MJ on rosmarinic acid in SMB is controversial. Therefore, this study used SMB and SCT hair root as an experimental material and MJ as a variable. On one hand, exploring the controversial reports in SMB; on the other hand, comparing the differences in the mechanism of action of MJ on the phenolic acids in SMB and SCT. The content of related metabolites and the expression of key genes in the synthesis pathway of rosmarinic acid was analyzed by <sup>1</sup>H-NMR combined with qRT-PCR technology. Our research has reached the following conclusions: first of all, MJ promotes the accumulation of rosmarinic acid and related phenolic acids in the metabolic pathways of SMB and SCT. After MJ treatment, the content of related components and gene expression are increased. Second, compared to SMB, SCT has a stronger response to MJ. It is speculated that the different responses of secondary metabolism-related genes to MJ may lead to different metabolic responses of salvianolic acid between the two.

Methyl jasmonate: !promotes synthesis of! rosmarinic acid 
Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge: !responds to! Methyl jasmonate 
Salvia castanea f. tomentosa Stib: !responds more strongly to! Methyl jasmonate 
Methyl jasmonate: !induces synthesis of! phenolic acids 
Metabolic pathways: !increase content of! related components 
Metabolic pathways: !increase expression of! key genes