Drought is one of the most important constraints on the growth and productivity of many crops, including sorghum. However, as a primary sensing organ, the plant root response to drought has not been well documented at the proteomic level. In the present study, we compared physiological alteration and differential accumulation of proteins in the roots of sorghum (<i>Sorghum bicolor</i>) inbred line BT×623 response to Polyethylene Glycol (PEG)-induced drought stress at the seedling stage. Drought stress (up to 24 h after PEG treatment) resulted in increased accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and subsequent lipid peroxidation. The proline content was increased in drought-stressed plants. The physiological mechanism of sorghum root response to drought was attributed to the elimination of harmful free radicals and to the alleviation of oxidative stress via the synergistic action of antioxidant enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase, peroxidase, and polyphenol oxidase. The high-resolution proteome map demonstrated significant variations in about 65 protein spots detected on Coomassie Brilliant Blue-stained 2-DE gels. Of these, 52 protein spots were identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-TOF MS) representing 49 unique proteins; the levels of 43 protein spots were increased, and 22 were decreased under drought condition. The proteins identified in this study are involved in a variety of cellular functions, including carbohydrate and energy metabolism, antioxidant and defense response, protein synthesis/processing/degradation, transcriptional regulation, amino acid biosynthesis, and nitrogen metabolism, which contribute jointly to the molecular mechanism of outstanding drought tolerance in sorghum plants. Analysis of protein expression patterns and physiological analysis revealed that proteins associated with changes in energy usage; osmotic adjustment; ROS scavenging; and protein synthesis, processing, and proteolysis play important roles in maintaining root growth under drought stress. This study provides new insight for better understanding of the molecular basis of drought stress responses, aiming to improve plant drought tolerance for enhanced yield.

Drought: !increases! ROS 
ROS: !causes! Lipid Peroxidation 
Antioxidant Enzymes: !alleviate! Oxidative Stress 
Proteins: !vary in! Accumulation 
Proteins: !involved in! Cellular Functions 
Energy Usage: !changes! Under Drought Stress 
Osmotic Adjustment: !maintains! Root Growth