Grape buds and leaves are directly associated with the physiology and metabolic activities of the plant, which is monitored by epigenetic modifications induced by environment and endogenous factors. Methylation is one of the epigenetic regulators that could be involved in DNA levels and affect gene expression in response to stimuli. Therefore, changes of gene expression profile in leaves and bud through inhibitors of DNA methylation provide a deep understanding of epigenetic effects in regulatory networks. In this study, we carried out a transcriptome analysis of 'Kyoho' buds and leaves under 5-azacytidine (5-azaC) exposure and screened a large number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs). GO and KEGG annotations showed that they are mainly involved in photosynthesis, flavonoid synthesis, glutathione metabolism, and other metabolic processes. Functional enrichment analysis also provided a holistic perspective on the transcriptome profile when 5-azaC bound to methyltransferase and induced demethylation. Enrichment analysis of transcription factors (TFs) also showed that the MYB, C2H2, and bHLH families are involved in the regulation of responsive genes under epigenetic changes. Furthermore, hormone-related genes have also undergone significant changes, especially gibberellin (GA) and abscisic acid (ABA)-related genes that responded to bud germination. We also used protein-protein interaction network to determine hub proteins in response to demethylation. These findings provide new insights into the establishment of molecular regulatory networks according to how methylation as an epigenetic modification alters transcriptome patterns in bud and leaves of grape.

Methylation: !affects! Gene expression
5-azacytidine: !induces! Demethylation
GO/KEGG: !annotates! DEGs
Functional enrichment: !provides perspective on! Transcriptome profile
MYB/C2H2/bHLH: !regulate! Responsive genes
GA/ABA: !respond to! Bud germination
Protein-protein interaction: !determines! Hub proteins