Crop tolerance to multiple abiotic stresses has long been pursued as a Holy Grail in plant breeding efforts that target crop adaptation to tropical soils. On tropical, acidic soils, aluminum (Al) toxicity, low phosphorus (P) availability and drought stress are the major limitations to yield stability. Molecular breeding based on a small suite of pleiotropic genes, particularly those with moderate to major phenotypic effects, could help circumvent the need for complex breeding designs and large population sizes aimed at selecting transgressive progeny accumulating favorable alleles controlling polygenic traits. The underlying question is twofold: do common tolerance mechanisms to Al toxicity, P deficiency and drought exist? And if they do, will they be useful in a plant breeding program that targets stress-prone environments. The selective environments in tropical regions are such that multiple, co-existing regulatory networks may drive the fixation of either distinctly different or a smaller number of pleiotropic abiotic stress tolerance genes. Recent studies suggest that genes contributing to crop adaptation to acidic soils, such as the major Arabidopsis Al tolerance protein, AtALMT1, which encodes an aluminum-activated root malate transporter, may influence both Al tolerance and P acquisition via changes in root system morphology and architecture. However, <i>trans</i>-acting elements such as transcription factors (TFs) may be the best option for pleiotropic control of multiple abiotic stress genes, due to their small and often multiple binding sequences in the genome. One such example is the C2H2-type zinc finger, AtSTOP1, which is a transcriptional regulator of a number of Arabidopsis Al tolerance genes, including <i>AtMATE</i> and <i>AtALMT1</i>, and has been shown to activate <i>AtALMT1</i>, not only in response to Al but also low soil P. The large WRKY family of transcription factors are also known to affect a broad spectrum of phenotypes, some of which are related to acidic soil abiotic stress responses. Hence, we focus here on signaling proteins such as TFs and protein kinases to identify, from the literature, evidence for unifying regulatory networks controlling Al tolerance, P efficiency and, also possibly drought tolerance. Particular emphasis will be given to modification of root system morphology and architecture, which could be an important physiological "hub" leading to crop adaptation to multiple soil-based abiotic stress factors.

AtALMT1: !encodes! aluminum-activated root malate transporter 
AtSTOP1: !regulates! AtMATE and AtALMT1 
AtSTOP1: !activates! AtALMT1 
WRKY family: !affects! broad spectrum of phenotypes 
Signaling proteins: !identify! evidence for unifying regulatory networks 
Root system morphology/architecture: !leads to! crop adaptation to multiple soil-based abiotic stress factors