The tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle is one of the most important metabolic pathways in nature. Oxygenic photoautotrophic bacteria, cyanobacteria, have an unusual TCA cycle. The TCA cycle in cyanobacteria contains two unique enzymes that are not part of the TCA cycle in other organisms. In recent years, sustainable metabolite production from carbon dioxide using cyanobacteria has been looked at as a means to reduce the environmental burden of this gas. Among cyanobacteria, the unicellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Synechocystis 6803) is an optimal host for sustainable metabolite production. Recently, metabolite production using the TCA cycle in Synechocystis 6803 has been carried out. Previous studies revealed that the branch point of the oxidative and reductive TCA cycles, oxaloacetate metabolism, plays a key role in metabolite production. However, the biochemical mechanisms regulating oxaloacetate metabolism in Synechocystis 6803 are poorly understood. Concentrations of oxaloacetate in Synechocystis 6803 are extremely low, such that in vivo analysis of oxaloacetate metabolism does not seem realistic. Therefore, using purified enzymes, we reconstituted oxaloacetate metabolism in Synechocystis 6803 in vitro to reveal the regulatory mechanisms involved. Reconstitution of oxaloacetate metabolism revealed that pH, Mg<sup>2+</sup> and phosphoenolpyruvate are important factors affecting the conversion of oxaloacetate in the TCA cycle. Biochemical analyses of the enzymes involved in oxaloacetate metabolism in this and previous studies revealed the biochemical mechanisms underlying the effects of these factors on oxaloacetate conversion. In addition, we clarified the function of two l-malate dehydrogenase isozymes in oxaloacetate metabolism. These findings serve as a basis for various applications of the cyanobacterial TCA cycle.

pH: !affects! oxaloacetate conversion 
Mg<sup>2+</sup>: !affects! oxaloacetate conversion 
phosphoenolpyruvate: !affects! oxaloacetate conversion 
l-malate dehydrogenase isozymes: !regulate! oxaloacetate metabolism