The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters belong to a large protein family predominantly present in diverse species. ABC transporters are driven by ATP hydrolysis and can act as exporters as well as importers. These proteins are localized in the membranes of chloroplasts, mitochondria, peroxisomes and vacuoles. ABC proteins are involved in regulating diverse biological processes in plants, such as growth, development, uptake of nutrients, tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses, tolerance to metal toxicity, stomatal closure, shape and size of grains, protection of pollens, transport of phytohormones, etc. In mitochondria and chloroplast, the iron metabolism and its transport across the membrane are mediated by ABC transporters. Tonoplast-localized ABC transporters are involved in internal detoxification of metal ion; thus protecting against the DNA impairment and maintaining cell growth. ABC transporters are involved in the transport of secondary metabolites inside the cells. Microorganisms also engage a large number of ABC transporters to import and expel substrates decisive for their pathogenesis. ABC transporters also suppress the seed embryonic growth until favorable conditions come. This review aims at giving insights on ABC transporters, their evolution, structure, functions and roles in different biological processes for helping the terrestrial plants to survive under adverse environmental conditions. These specialized plant membrane transporters ensure a sustainable economic yield and high-quality products, especially under unfavorable conditions of growth. These transporters can be suitably manipulated to develop 'Plants for the Future'.

ABC transporters: !localize to! membranes 
ABC transporters: !regulate! growth, development, uptake of nutrients, tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses 
ABC transporters: !mediate! iron metabolism and transport 
ABC transporters: !transport! secondary metabolites 
ABC transporters: !import/expel! substrates 
ABC transporters: !suppress! seed embryonic growth