LC-MS based metabolomics approach revealed that putative metabolites other than flavonoids may significantly contribute to the sexual compatibility reactions in Prunus armeniaca. Possible mechanisms on related microtubule-stabilizing effects are provided. Identification of metabolites playing crucial roles in sexual incompatibility reactions in apricot (Prunus armeniaca L.) was the aim of the study. Metabolic fingerprints of self-compatible and self-incompatible apricot pistils were created using liquid chromatography coupled to time-of-flight mass spectrometry followed by untargeted compound search. Multivariate statistical analysis revealed 15 significant differential compounds among the total of 4006 and 1005 aligned metabolites in positive and negative ion modes, respectively. Total explained variance of 89.55% in principal component analysis (PCA) indicated high quality of differential expression analysis. The statistical analysis showed significant differences between genotypes and pollination time as well, which demonstrated high performance of the metabolic fingerprinting and revealed the presence of metabolites with significant influence on the self-incompatibility reactions. Finally, polyketide-based macrolides similar to peloruside A and a hydroxy sphingosine derivative are suggested to be significant differential metabolites in the experiment. These results indicate a strategy of pollen tubes to protect microtubules and avoid growth arrest involved in sexual incompatibility reactions of apricot.

Prunus armeniaca: !revealed by! LC-MS based metabolomics
Metabolites: !contribute to! sexual compatibility reactions
Metabolic fingerprints: !created using! liquid chromatography coupled to time-of-flight mass spectrometry
Multivariate statistical analysis: !revealed! 15 significant differential compounds
PCA: !showed! high quality of differential expression analysis
Genotypes and pollination time: !demonstrated! high performance of the metabolic fingerprinting
Polyketide-based macrolides: !suggested to be! significant differential metabolites
Pollen tubes: !protect! microtubules