Plant resilience to oxidative stress possibly operates through the restoration of intracellular redox milieu and the activity of various posttranslationally modified proteins. Among various modes of redox regulation operative in plants cys oxPTMs are brought about by the activity of reactive oxygen species (ROS), reactive nitrogen species (RNS), and hydrogen peroxide. Cysteine oxPTMs are capable of transducing ROS-mediated long-distance hormone signaling (ABA, JA, SA) in plants. S-sulphenylation is an intermediary modification en route to other oxidative states of cysteine. <i>In silico</i> analysis have revealed evolutionary conservation of certain S-sulphenylated proteins across human and plants. Further analysis of protein sulphenylation in plants should be extended to the functional follow-up studies followed by site-specific characterization and case-by-case validation of protein activity. The repertoire of physiological methods (fluorescent conjugates (dimedone) and yeast AP-1 (YAP1)-based genetic probes) in the recent past has been successful in the detection of sulphenylated proteins and other cysteine-based modifications in plants. In view of a better understanding of the sulfur-based redoxome it is necessary to update our timely progress on the methodological advancements for the detection of cysteine-based oxPTM. This substantiative information can extend our investigations on plant-environment interaction thus improving crop manipulation strategies. The simulation-based computational approach has emerged as a new method to determine the directive mechanism of cysteine oxidation in plants. Thus, sulfenome analysis in various plant systems might reflect as a pinnacle of plant redox biology in the future.

ROS: !affects! S-sulphenylation 
RNS: !affects! S-sulphenylation 
H2O2: !affects! S-sulphenylation 
ABA: !transduces! ROS-mediated long-distance hormone signaling 
JA: !transduces! ROS-mediated long-distance hormone signaling 
SA: !transduces! ROS-mediated long-distance hormone signaling 
In silico: !reveals! evolutionary conservation of certain S-sulphenylated proteins 
Fluorescent conjugates: !detects! sulphenylated proteins 
Yeast AP-1: !detects! sulphenylated proteins 
Simulation-based computational approach: !determines! directive mechanism of cysteine oxidation