In plants, next to the secondary messengers lies an array of signal relaying molecules among which Calmodulins convey the unequivocal alarms of calcium influxes to Calmodulin-Binding Transcription Activators (CAMTA). Upon reception, CAMTA transcription factors decode the calcium signatures by transcribing the genes corresponding to the specific stimulus, thus have direct/indirect engagement in the complex signalling crosstalk. CAMTA transcription factors make an important contribution to the genome of all eukaryotes, including plants, from Brassica napus (18) to Carica papaya (2), the number of CAMTA genes varies across the plant species, however they exhibit a similar evolutionarily conserved domain organization including a DNA-Binding Domain (CG-1), a Transcription Factor Immunoglobulin Binding Domain (TIG), a Calmodulin-Binding Domain (CaMBD/IQ) and several Ankyrin repeats. The regulatory region of CAMTA genes possess multiple stress-responsive cis motifs including ABRE, SARE, G-box, W-box, AuXRE, DRE and others. CAMTA TFs in Arabidopsis have been studied extensively, however in other plants (with a few exceptions), the evidence merely bases upon expression analyses. CAMTAs are reported to orchestrate biotic as well as abiotic stresses including those occurring due to water and temperature fluctuations as well as heavy metals, light and salinity. Through CG-1 domain, CAMTA TFs bind the CG-box in the promoter of their target genes and modulate their expression under adverse conditions. Here we present a glimpse of how calcium signatures are coded and decoded and translated into necessary responses. In addition, we have emphasized on exploitation of the multiple-stress responsive nature of CAMTAs in engineering plants with desired traits.

Calmodulins: !convey! calcium influxes 
CAMTA transcription factors: !decode! calcium signatures 
CAMTA transcription factors: !bind! CG-box 
CAMTA transcription factors: !modulate! target gene expression 
CAMTAs: !orchestrate! biotic/abiotic stresses