In flowering plants, sugars act as carbon sources providing energy for developing embryos and seeds. Although most studies focus on carbon metabolism in whole seeds, knowledge about how particular sugars contribute to the developmental transitions during embryogenesis is scarce. To develop a quantitative understanding of how carbon composition changes during embryo development, and to determine how sugar status contributes to final seed or embryo size, we performed metabolic profiling of hand-dissected embryos at late torpedo and mature stages, and dormant seeds, in two <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> accessions with medium [Columbia-0 (Col-0)] and large [Burren-0 (Bur-0)] seed sizes, respectively. Our results show that, in both accessions, metabolite profiles of embryos largely differ from those of dormant seeds. We found that developmental transitions from torpedo to mature embryos, and further to dormant seeds, are associated with major metabolic switches in carbon reserve accumulation. While glucose, sucrose, and starch predominantly accumulated during seed dormancy, fructose levels were strongly elevated in mature embryos. Interestingly, Bur-0 seeds contain larger mature embryos than Col-0 seeds. Fructose and starch were accumulated to significantly higher levels in mature Bur-0 than Col-0 embryos, suggesting that they contribute to the enlarged mature Bur-0 embryos. Furthermore, we found that Bur-0 embryos accumulated a higher level of sucrose compared to hexose sugars and that changes in sucrose metabolism are mediated by sucrose synthase (SUS), with <i>SUS</i> genes acting non-redundantly, and in a tissue-specific manner to utilize sucrose during late embryogenesis.

sugars: !provide energy for! developing embryos and seeds
metabolite profiles: !differ between! embryos and dormant seeds
carbon reserve accumulation: !associated with! metabolic switches
glucose, sucrose, starch: !accumulate during! seed dormancy
fructose: !elevated in! mature embryos
Bur-0 embryos: !larger than! Col-0 embryos
fructose, starch: !accumulated to higher levels in! Bur-0 embryos
sucrose: !higher level of! in Bur-0 embryos
SUS genes: !act non-redundantly to! utilize sucrose