To achieve rapid, accurate, and non-destructive diagnoses of nitrogen deficiency in cold land japonica rice, hyperspectral data were collected from field experiments to investigate the relationship between the nitrogen (N) content and the difference in the spectral reflectance relationship and to establish the hyperspectral reflectance difference inversion model of differences in the N content of rice. In this study, the hyperspectral reflectance difference was used to invert the nitrogen deficiency of rice and provide a method for the implementation of precision fertilization without reducing the yield of chemical fertilizer. For the purpose of constructing the standard N content and standard spectral reflectance the principle of minimum fertilizer application at maximum yield was used as a reference standard, and the acquired rice leaf nitrogen content and leaf spectral reflectance were differenced from the standard N content and standard spectral reflectance to obtain N content. The difference and spectral reflectance differential were then subjected to discrete wavelet multiscale decomposition, successive projections algorithm, principal component analysis, and iteratively retaining informative variables (IRIVs); the results were treated as partial least squares (PLSR), extreme learning machine (ELM), and genetic algorithm-extreme learning machine (GA-ELM). The results of hyperspectral dimensionality reduction were used as input to establish the inverse model of N content differential in japonica rice. The results showed that the GA-ELM inversion model established by discrete wavelet multi-scale decomposition obtained the optimal results in data set modeling and training. Both the R<sup>2</sup> of the training data set and the validation data set were above 0.68, and the root mean square errors (RMSEs) were <0.6 mg/g and were more predictive, stable, and generalizable than the PLSR and ELM predictive models.

N content: !inverted by! hyperspectral reflectance difference 
hyperspectral reflectance difference: !obtained from! N content and leaf spectral reflectance 
discrete wavelet multiscale decomposition: !used to! reduce hyperspectral dimensionality 
successive projections algorithm: !used to! reduce hyperspectral dimensionality 
principal component analysis: !used to! reduce hyperspectral dimensionality 
iteratively retaining informative variables (IRIVs): !used to! reduce hyperspectral dimensionality 
partial least squares (PLSR): !used to! establish inverse model of N content differential 
extreme learning machine (ELM): !used to! establish inverse model of N content differential 
genetic algorithm-extreme learning machine (GA-ELM): !used to! establish inverse model of N content differential