Wheat is a dietary staple consumed worldwide strongly responsible for proteins and carbohydrate population intake. However, wheat production and quality will scarcely fulfill forward demands, which are compounded by high-temperature (HT) events as heatwaves, increasingly common in Portugal. Thus, landraces assume crucial importance as potential reservoirs of useful traits for wheat breeding and may be pre-adapted to extreme environmental conditions. This work evaluates four Portuguese landrace yield and grain composition through attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy, particularly protein content, and their responses to HT treatment mimicking a heatwave. Landraces showed distinct yield traits, especially plant height and first spike grain number, and a similar pattern in FTIR spectra, although revealing differences in grain components' proportions. Comparison between spectra band intensity indicates that Ardito has the highest protein-related peaks, contrary to Magueija, which appears to be the landrace with higher lipid content. In plants submitted to 1 week of HT treatment 10 days after anthesis, the first spike grain size and weight were markedly reduced in all landraces. Additionally, it was observed that a general increase in grain protein content in the four landraces, being the increment observed in Ardito and Grécia, is statistically significant. The comparative assessment of control and HT average FTIR spectra denoted also the occurrence of alterations in grain polysaccharide composition. An integrated assessment of the evaluations performed revealed that Ardito and Magueija landraces presented diverse yield-related characteristics and distinct responses to cope with HT. In fact, the former landrace revealed considerable grain yield diminution along with an increase in grain protein proportion after HT, while the latter showed a significant increase in spikes and grain number, with grain quality detriment. These results reinforce the relevance of scrutinizing old genotype diversity seeking for useful characteristics, particularly considering HT impact on grain production and quality.

Ardito: !increases! Protein
Magueija: !increases! Lipid
HT treatment: !reduces! First spike grain size/weight
Ardito: !diminishes! Grain yield
Magueija: !increases! Spikes/grain number
HT treatment: !increases! Protein content