Eukaryotic cells are complex biological systems that depend on highly connected molecular interaction networks with intrinsically disordered proteins as essential components. Through specific examples, we relate the conformational ensemble nature of intrinsic disorder (ID) in transcription factors to functions in plants. Transcription factors contain large regulatory ID-regions with numerous orphan sequence motifs, representing potential important interaction sites. ID-regions may affect DNA-binding through electrostatic interactions or allosterically as for the bZIP transcription factors, in which the DNA-binding domains also populate ensembles of dynamic transient structures. The flexibility of ID is well-suited for interaction networks requiring efficient molecular adjustments. For example, Radical Induced Cell Death1 depends on ID in transcription factors for its numerous, structurally heterogeneous interactions, and the JAZ:MYC:MED15 regulatory unit depends on protein dynamics, including binding-associated unfolding, for regulation of jasmonate-signaling. Flexibility makes ID-regions excellent targets of posttranslational modifications. For example, the extent of phosphorylation of the NAC transcription factor SOG1 regulates target gene expression and the DNA-damage response, and phosphorylation of the AP2/ERF transcription factor DREB2A acts as a switch enabling heat-regulated degradation. ID-related phase separation is emerging as being important to transcriptional regulation with condensates functioning in storage and inactivation of transcription factors. The applicative potential of ID-regions is apparent, as removal of an ID-region of the AP2/ERF transcription factor WRI1 affects its stability and consequently oil biosynthesis. The highlighted examples show that ID plays essential functional roles in plant biology and has a promising potential in engineering.

ID: !affects! DNA-binding 
ID: !allosterically regulates! bZIP transcription factors 
ID: !enables! efficient molecular adjustments 
ID: !regulates! Radical Induced Cell Death1 
ID: !regulates! JAZ:MYC:MED15 regulatory unit 
ID: !target of! posttranslational modifications 
ID: !regulates! target gene expression 
ID: !regulates! DNA-damage response 
ID: !acts as switch! heat-regulated degradation 
ID: !functions in! storage and inactivation of transcription factors 
ID: !affects! stability of AP2/ERF transcription factor WRI1