The plastomes of E. edulis and E. oleracea revealed several molecular markers useful for genetic studies in natural populations and indicate specific evolutionary features determined by vicariant speciation. Arecaceae is a large and diverse family occurring in tropical and subtropical ecosystems worldwide. E. oleracea is a hyperdominant species of the Amazon forest, while E. edulis is a keystone species of the Atlantic forest. It has reported that E. edulis arose from vicariant speciation after the emergence of the belt barrier of dry environment (Cerrado and Caatinga biomes) between Amazon and Atlantic forests, isolating the E. edulis in the Atlantic forest. We sequenced the complete plastomes of E. edulis and E. oleracea and compared them concerning plastome structure, SSRs, tandem repeats, SNPs, indels, hotspots of nucleotide polymorphism, codon Ka/Ks ratios and RNA editing sites aiming to investigate evolutionary traits possibly affected by distinct environments. Our analyses revealed 303 SNPs, 91 indels, and 82 polymorphic SSRs among both species. Curiously, the narrow correlation among localization of repetitive sequences and indels strongly suggests that replication slippage is involved in plastid DNA mutations in Euterpe. Moreover, most non-synonymous substitutions represent amino acid variants in E. edulis that evolved specifically or in a convergent manner across the palm phylogeny. Amino acid variants observed in several plastid proteins in E. edulis were also identified as positive signatures across palm phylogeny. The higher incidence of specific amino acid changes in plastid genes of E. edulis in comparison with E. oleracea probably configures adaptive genetic variations determined by vicariant speciation. Our data indicate that the environment generates a selective pressure on the plastome making it more adapted to specific conditions.

E. edulis: !arose from! vicariant speciation
E. oleracea: !isolated! E. edulis
SNPs: !identified between! E. edulis and E. oleracea
indels: !correlated with! localization of repetitive sequences
amino acid variants: !observed in! plastid proteins of E. edulis
environment: !generates! selective pressure on plastome