Rehmannia glutinosa production is affected by the replanting disease, which involves autotoxic harm mediated by specific endogenous allelochemicals in root exudates. Many phenolics that act as allelochemical agents are mostly phenylpropanoid products of secondary metabolism in plants. Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) is the first enzyme that catalyses the deamination of l-phenylalanine for entrance into the phenylpropanoid pathway. PAL family genes have been isolated and functionally characterized in many plant species. However, PAL family genes involved in phenolic biosynthesis remain largely uncharacterized in R. glutinosa. Here, we identified and characterized four PAL family genes (RgPAL2 to RgPAL5) in the species whose sequences exhibited highly conserved domains of PALs according to in silico analysis, implying their potential function in phenolic biosynthesis. Overexpression of RgPALs in R. glutinosa enhanced phenolic production, verifying that RgPAL family genes participate in phenolic biosynthesis pathways. Moreover, we found that the release of several allelopathic phenolics from the roots of RgPAL-overexpressing transgenic R. glutinosa increased, implying that the RgPALs positively promote their release. Importantly, under continuous monoculture stress, we found that the RgPAL transgenic plants exhibited more significant autotoxic harm than did non-transgenic (WT) plants by activating the phenolics/phenylpropanoid pathway, indicating that RgPAL family genes function as positive regulators of the replanting disease development in R. glutinosa. This study revealed that RgPAL family genes are involved in the biosynthesis and release of several phenolics and positively control the replanting disease development in R. glutinosa, laying a foundation for further clarification of the molecular mechanisms underlying the disease formation.

RgPALs: !enhance! phenolic production 
RgPALs: !promote release of! allelopathic phenolics 
RgPALs: !positively regulate! replanting disease development