Three types of the glandular trichomes are developed on the flowers and leaves of Millingtonia hortensis. Morphology, cell ultrastructure and content of the volatile compounds are specific to each trichome type. The aim of this study was to characterize the structural and histochemical features of the glandular trichomes (GTs) of two types localized on the different flower parts and leaves in Millingtonia hortensis, as well as to identify the composition of the internal pool of metabolites. The peltate GTs are most common; they are founded on peduncle, calyx, ovary, and leaves. GTs consist of 12-24-cell disk-shaped head and a single-celled neck. The capitate GTs are located on corolla tube and have four to eight-cell head, single-celled neck and a wide multicellular stalk. A series of histochemical reactions and fluorescent microscopy revealed the various substances in the chemical composition of GTs. Acid polysaccharides are predominately identified in the capitate trichomes of the corolla tube and peltate trichomes of calyx, terpenes present in larger quantity in the trichomes of the corolla tube and ovary, whilst phenolic substances prevail in the trichomes of the calyx and ovary. GTs of each type are characterized by specific ultrastructural traits. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) and leucoplasts prevail in the peltate trichomes of peduncle, calyx and ovary; Golgi apparatus is the common organelle in the capitate trichomes of the corolla tube and peltate trichomes of calyx; the huge aggregates of the RER cisterns there are in cytoplasm of all leaf trichomes. Synthesized secretion accumulates in the subcuticular cavity of all GTs except the leaf peltate trichomes. In the trichomes of the leaves secretion is stored in the thick upper cell wall with the wide cutinized layer. For the first time content of the internal pool of metabolites from the flowers and leaves was identified by GC-MS. Seventeen compounds, including alcohols, fatty acid derivatives, monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, and benzenoids were identified. 1-octen 3-ol, 3-carene, methyl salicylate, p-hydroxybenzeneethanol and 1-hydroxy-2,4-di-tertbutyl-benzene were the main compounds of the flower scent. We consider GTs of the reproductive organs in M. hortensis synthesizing acid polysaccharides and volatile compounds as secretory structures attracting of pollinators, whereas the leaf peltate trichomes accumulating predominately non-volatile phenols, protect young vegetative shoots against small herbivorous insects and pathogens.

peltate GTs: !localize to! peduncle, calyx, ovary, leaves
capitate GTs: !localize to! corolla tube
peltate GTs: !contain! acid polysaccharides
capitate GTs: !contain! terpenes
peltate GTs: !contain! phenolic substances
GTs: !synthesize! volatile compounds
GTs: !accumulate! secretion
leaf peltate trichomes: !accumulate! non-volatile phenols
GTs: !attract! pollinators
leaf peltate trichomes: !protect! young vegetative shoots