This report shows detailed characterization of LOX gene family in sorghum and provides new insight of sorghum LOX genes in genetic structure and their roles in plant response to infestation by sugarcane aphids. Lipoxygenases (LOXs) are monomeric, nonheme iron-containing dioxygenases that initiate the fatty acid oxidation pathway creating oxylipins and plant hormone jasmonate both have a key role in plant development and defense. To date, a comprehensive and systematic analysis of sorghum LOXs is still deficient. Thus, we performed a genome-wide analysis of the sorghum LOXs genome and identified nine LOXs genes. Detailed examination of protein sequences and phylogenetic analysis categorized the sorghum LOXs into two subclasses, 9-LOXs (SbLOX1, SbLOX3, SbLOX4, SbLOXm, and SbLOXo), 13-LOXs (SbLOX9, SbLOX5, and SbLOX2), and the unclassified SbLOX8. This classification was further supported by sequence similarity/identity matrix and subcellular localization analysis. The lipoxygenase domains, motifs, and vital amino acids were highly conserved in all sorghum LOX genes. In silico analysis of the promoter region of SbLOXs identified different hormones responsive cis-elements. Furthermore, to explore the roles of sorghum LOXs during sugarcane aphid feeding and exogenous MeJA application, expression analysis was conducted for all the eight LOXs in resistant (Tx2783) and susceptible (Tx7000) sorghum lines, respectively. As detailed in this report, the data generated from both genome-wide identification and expression analysis of lipoxygenase genes suggest the putative functions of two 13-LOXs (SbLOX9 and SbLOX5) and three 9-LOXs (SbLOX1, SbLOX3, and SbLOXo) in biosynthesis of jasmonic acid, green leaf volatiles and death acids, and all of them are involved in defense-related functions in plants. Furthermore, this report represents the first genome-wide analysis of the LOX gene family in sorghum, which will facilitate future studies to characterize the roles of each individual LOXs gene in aphid resistance and defense responses to other stresses.

SbLOX1: !synthesizes! jasmonic acid
SbLOX3: !synthesizes! green leaf volatiles
SbLOXo: !synthesizes! death acids
SbLOX9: !enhances! defense-related functions
SbLOX5: !enhances! defense-related functions
SbLOX2: !enhances! defense-related functions
SbLOX4: !localizes to! subcellular localization
SbLOXm: !localizes to! subcellular localization
SbLOX8: !interacts with! hormones responsive cis-elements