The relative position of domains is critical for enzymatic properties of tau class glutathione S-transferases, and altering the position of linker far away from the active center affects catalytic property. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a family of phase II detoxification enzymes whose main function is to improve plant resistance to stresses. To understand the structural effects of tau class GSTs on their function, using OsGSTU17 as an example, we predicted the residues involved in the interactions between its domains and linker region. We further detected the structural changes in mutants and the corresponding changes in terms of substrate activity and kinetic parameters. Four pairs of residues, including Ala14 and Trp165, Arg20 and Tyr154, Glu74 and Arg98, Asp77 and Met87, forming hydrogen bonds and salt bridges were found to play important roles in maintaining the relative position between the domains and linker region inside the protein. The hydrogen bond between Trp165 and Ala14 affected the structural stability has been demonstrated in our previous study. The mutant R20A lost almost all catalytic activity. Interestingly, the mutant E74A exhibited a significant decrease in activity towards 7-chloro-4-nitrobenzo-2-oxa-1, 3-diazole, 1-chloro-2, 4-dinitrobenzene and 4-nitrobenzyl chloride, while its activity towards substrate cumene hydroperoxide remained unchanged. Compared with other mutants, the mutant D77A exhibited decreased affinity to its substrates and increased activity towards 1-chloro-2, 4-dinitrobenzene and cumene hydroperoxide, but its thermodynamic stability did not change significantly. The relative position of individual domain was critical for enzymatic properties, and the linker which is far away from the active site could change the enzymatic properties of GSTs via altering the relative position of the individual domain. Our results provide insights into the relationship between structure and function of tau class GSTs.

Ala14: !hydrogen bonds with! Trp165
Arg20: !interacts with! Tyr154
Glu74: !forms salt bridge with! Arg98
Asp77: !hydrogen bonds with! Met87
Linker: !affects! Relative Position of Domains 
Relative Position: !influences! Enzymatic Properties