The sequencing and annotations of cotton genomes provide powerful theoretical support to unravel more physiological and functional information. Plant homeodomain (PHD) protein family has been reported to be involved in regulating various biological processes in plants. However, their functional studies have not yet been carried out in cotton. In this study, 108, 55, and 52 PHD genes were identified in G. hirsutum, G. raimondii, and G. arboreum, respectively. A total of 297 PHD genes from three cotton species, Arabidopsis, and rice were divided into five groups. We performed chromosomal location, phylogenetic relationship, gene structure, and conserved domain analysis for GhPHD genes. GhPHD genes were unevenly distributed on each chromosome. However, more GhPHD genes were distributed on At_05, Dt_05, and At_07 chromosomes. GhPHD proteins depicted conserved domains, and GhPHD genes exhibiting similar gene structure were clustered together. Further, whole genome duplication (WGD) analysis indicated that purification selection greatly contributed to the functional maintenance of GhPHD gene family. Expression pattern analysis based on RNA-seq data showed that most GhPHD genes showed clear tissue-specific spatiotemporal expression patterns elucidating the multiple functions of GhPHDs in plant growth and development. Moreover, analysis of cis-acting elements revealed that GhPHDs may respond to a variety of abiotic and phytohormonal stresses. In this regard, some GhPHD genes showed good response against abiotic and phytohormonal stresses. Additionally, co-expression network analysis indicated that GhPHDs are essential for plant growth and development, while GhPHD genes response against abiotic and phytohormonal stresses may help to improve plant tolerance in adverse environmental conditions. This study will provide useful information to facilitate further research related to the vital roles of GhPHD gene family in plant growth and development.

PHD: !involved in! regulating biological processes
GhPHD: !unevenly distributed on! chromosomes
GhPHD: !depicted conserved domains!
GhPHD: !clustered together! by gene structure
WGD: !contributed to! functional maintenance of GhPHD
RNA-seq: !showed tissue-specific expression patterns! for GhPHD
Cis-acting elements: !revealed response to! abiotic and phytohormonal stresses
Co-expression network: !indicated essential roles in! plant growth and development