Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) is a perennial legume extensively planted throughout the world as a high nutritive value livestock forage. Flowering time is an important agronomic trait that contributes to the production of alfalfa hay and seeds. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms of flowering time regulation in alfalfa are not well understood. In this study, an early-flowering alfalfa genotype 80 and a late-flowering alfalfa genotype 195 were characterized for the flowering phenotype. Our analysis revealed that the lower jasmonate (JA) content in new leaves and the downregulation of JA biosynthetic genes (i.e. lipoxygenase, the 12-oxophytodienoate reductase-like protein, and salicylic acid carboxyl methyltransferase) may play essential roles in the early-flowering phenotype of genotype 80. Further research indicated that genes encode pathogenesis-related proteins [e.g. leucine rich repeat (LRR) family proteins, receptor-like proteins, and toll-interleukin-like receptor (TIR)-nucleotide-binding site (NBS)-LRR class proteins] and members of the signaling receptor kinase family [LRR proteins, kinases domain of unknown function 26 (DUF26) and wheat leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase10 (LRK10)-like kinases] are related to early flowering in alfalfa. Additionally, those involved in secondary metabolism (2-oxoglutarate/Fe (II)-dependent dioxygenases and UDP-glycosyltransferase) and the proteasome degradation pathway [really interesting new gene (RING)/U-box superfamily proteins and F-box family proteins] are also related to early flowering in alfalfa. Integrated phenotypical, physiological, and transcriptomic analyses demonstrate that hormone biosynthesis and signaling pathways, pathogenesis-related genes, signaling receptor kinase family genes, secondary metabolism genes, and proteasome degradation pathway genes are responsible for the early flowering phenotype in alfalfa. This will provide new insights into future studies of flowering time in alfalfa and inform genetic improvement strategies for optimizing this important trait.

lipoxygenase: !downregulates! JA biosynthetic genes
LRR family proteins: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa
receptor-like proteins: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa
TIR-NBS-LRR class proteins: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa
DUF26: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa
LRK10-like kinases: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa
2-oxoglutarate/Fe (II)-dependent dioxygenases: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa
UDP-glycosyltransferase: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa
RING/U-box superfamily proteins: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa
F-box family proteins: !related to! early flowering in alfalfa