Comparative chloroplast genomics could shed light on the major evolutionary events that established plastomic diversity among closely related species. The Polypodiaceae family is one of the most species-rich and underexplored groups of extant ferns. It is generally recognized that the plastomes of Polypodiaceae are highly notable in terms of their organizational stability. Hence, no research has yet been conducted on genomic structural variation in the Polypodiaceae. The complete plastome sequences of Neolepisorus fortunei, Neolepisorus ovatus, and Phymatosorus cuspidatus were determined based on next-generation sequencing. Together with published plastomes, a comparative analysis of the fine structure of Polypodiaceae plastomes was carried out. The results indicated that the plastomes of Polypodiaceae are not as conservative as previously assumed. The size of the plastomes varies greatly in the Polypodiaceae, and the large insertion fragments present in the genome could be the main factor affecting the genome length. The plastome of Selliguea yakushimensis exhibits prominent features including not only a large-scale IR expansion exceeding several kb but also a unique inversion. Furthermore, gene contents, SSRs, dispersed repeats, and mutational hotspot regions were identified in the plastomes of the Polypodiaceae. Although dispersed repeats are not abundant in the plastomes of Polypodiaceae, we found that the large insertions that occur in different species are mobile and are always adjacent to repeated hotspot regions. Our results reveal that the plastomes of Polypodiaceae are dynamic molecules, rather than constituting static genomes as previously thought. The dispersed repeats flanking insertion sequences contribute to the repair mechanism induced by double-strand breaks and are probably a major driver of structural evolution in the plastomes of Polypodiaceae.

Polypodiaceae: !exhibit! large-scale IR expansion
Polypodiaceae: !contain! gene contents
Polypodiaceae: !have! SSRs
Polypodiaceae: !include! dispersed repeats
Polypodiaceae: !are adjacent to! mutational hotspot regions
Dispersed repeats: !flank! insertion sequences
Insertion sequences: !repair! double-strand breaks
Double-strand breaks: !drive! structural evolution