Silicon inhibits the growth of Alternaria alternata into sorghum root cells by maintaining their integrity through stimulating biochemical defense reactions rather than by silica-based physical barrier creation. Although the ameliorating effect of silicon (Si) on plant resistance against fungal pathogens has been proven, the mechanism of its action needs to be better understood on a cellular level. The present study explores the effect of Si application in sorghum roots infected with fungus Alternaria alternata under controlled in vitro conditions. Detailed anatomical and cytological observations by both fluorescent and electron microscopy revealed that Si supplementation results in the inhibition of fungal hyphae growth into the protoplast of root cells. An approach of environmental scanning electron microscopy equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy enabling spatial detection of Si even at low concentrations showed that there is no continual solid layer of silica in the root cell walls of the rhizodermis, mesodermis and exodermis physically blocking the fungal growth into the protoplasts. Additionally, biochemical evidence suggests that Si speeds up the onset of activities of phenylpropanoid pathway enzymes phenylalanine ammonia lyase, peroxidases and polyphenol oxidases involved in phenolic compounds production and deposition to plant cell walls. In conclusion, Si alleviates the negative impact of A. alternata infection by limiting hyphae penetration through sorghum root cell walls into protoplasts, thus maintaining their structural and functional integrity. This might occur by triggering plant biochemical defense responses rather than by creating compact Si layer deposits.

Si: !inhibits! A. alternata 
Si: !stimulates! biochemical defense reactions 
phenylpropanoid pathway enzymes: !speed up! onset of activities 
phenylalanine ammonia lyase: !produces! phenolic compounds 
peroxidases: !deposit! phenolic compounds to cell walls 
Si: !limits! hyphae penetration into protoplasts