Heterosis refers to superior traits exhibiting in a hybrid when compared with both parents. Generally, the hybridization between parents can change the expression pattern of some proteins such as non-additive proteins (NAPs) which might lead to heterosis. 'Zhongdan808' (ZD808) and 'Zhongdan909' (ZD909) are excellent maize hybrids in China, however, the heterosis mechanism of them are not clear. Proteomics has been wildly used in many filed, and comparative proteomic analysis of hybrid and its parents is helpful for understanding the mechanism of heterosis in the two maize hybrids. Over 2000 protein groups were quantitatively identified from second seedling leaves of two hybrids and their parents by label-free quantification. Statistical analysis of total identified proteins, differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) and NAPs of the two hybrids revealed that both of them were more similar to their female parents. In addition, most of DAPs were up-regulated and most of NAPs were high parent abundance or above-high parent abundance in ZD808, while in ZD909, most of DAPs were down-regulated and most of NAPs were low parent abundance or below-low parent abundance. Pathway enrichment analysis showed that more of stress response-related NAPs in ZD808 were high parent abundance or above-high parent abundance, and most of PS related NAPs in ZD909 were high parent abundance or above-high parent abundance. Finally, four stress response-related proteins and eight proteins related to PS were verified by PRM, ten of them had significant differences between hybrid and midparent value. Even though every one of the two hybrids were more similar to its female parent at proteome level, the biological basis of heterosis is different in the two maize hybrids. In comparison with their parents, the excellent agronomic traits of hybrid ZD808 is mainly correlated with the high expression levels of some proteins related to stress responses and metabolic functions, while traits of ZD909 is mainly correlated with high expressed proteins related to photosynthesis. Our proteomics results support previous physiological and morphological research and have provided useful information in understanding the reason of valuable agronomic traits.

ZD808: !more similar to! female parent
ZD808: !high expression of! proteins related to stress responses and metabolic functions
ZD909: !more similar to! female parent
ZD909: !high expression of! proteins related to photosynthesis