Black gram [Vigna mungo (L)] seeds are a rich source of digestible protein and dietary fibre, both for human and animal consumption. However, the quality and quantity of the Vigna seeds are severely affected by bruchid beetles during storage. Therefore, analyses of the expression of the bruchid induced transcript dynamics in black gram pods would be helpful to understand the underlying defense mechanism against bruchid oviposition. We used the RNAseq approach to survey the changes in transcript profile in the developing seeds of a moderately resistant cultivar IC-8219 against bruchid oviposition using a susceptible cultivar T-9 as a control. A total of 96,084,600 and 99,532,488 clean reads were generated from eight (4 each) samples of IC-8219 and T-9 cultivar, respectively. Based on the BLASTX search against the NR database, 32,584 CDSs were generated of which 31,817 CDSs were significantly similar to Vigna radiata, a close relative of Vigna mungo. The IC-8219 cultivar had 630 significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of which 304 and 326 genes up and down-regulated, respectively. However, in the T-9 cultivar, only 168 DEGs were identified of which 142 and 26 genes up and down-regulated, respectively. The expression analyses of 10 DEGs by qPCR confirmed the accuracy of the RNA-Seq data. Gene Ontology and KEGG pathway analyses helped us to better understand the role of these DEGs in oviposition mediated defense response of black gram. In both the cultivars, the most significant transcriptomic changes in response to the oviposition were related to the induction of defense response genes, transcription factors, secondary metabolites, enzyme inhibitors, and signal transduction pathways. It appears that the bruchid ovipositioning mediated defense response in black gram is induced by SA signaling pathways and defense genes such as defensin, genes for secondary metabolites, and enzyme inhibitors could be potential candidates for resistance to bruchids. We generated a transcript profile of immature black gram pods upon bruchid ovipositioning by de novo assembly and studied the underlying defense mechanism of a moderately resistant cultivar.

Bruchid oviposition: !induces! defense response genes
Bruchid oviposition: !induces! transcription factors
Bruchid oviposition: !induces! secondary metabolites
Bruchid oviposition: !induces! enzyme inhibitors
Bruchid oviposition: !induces! signal transduction pathways
SA signaling pathways: !regulate! defense genes
defensin: !enhances! resistance to bruchids