NAC transcription factors (TFs) are plant-specific proteins encoded by a large gene family. They play important roles in diverse biological processes, such as plant growth and development, leaf senescence, and responses to biotic or abiotic stresses. Functions of a number of NAC TFs have been identified mainly in model plants. However, very few studies on NAC TFs have been conducted in the fruit tree of kiwifruit. Genome-wide NAC genes were identified and their phylogeny, genomic structure, chromosomal location, synteny relationships, protein properties and conserved motifs were analyzed. In addition, the fruit developmental process was evaluated in a new kiwifruit cultivar of Actinidia eriantha 'Ganlu 1'. And expressions for all those NAC genes were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR method in fruits of 'Ganlu 1' during its developmental process. Our research identified 142 NAC TFs which could be phylogenetically divided into 23 protein subfamilies. The genomic structures of those NAC genes indicated that their exons were between one and ten. Analysis of chromosomal locations suggested that 116 out of 142 NACs distributed on all the 29 kiwifruit chromosomes. In addition, genome-wide gene expression analysis showed that expressions of 125 out of 142 NAC genes could be detected in fruit samples. Our comprehensive study provides novel information on NAC genes and expression patterns in kiwifruit fruit. This research would be helpful for future functional identification of NAC genes involved in kiwifruit fruit development.

NAC TFs: !play important roles in! diverse biological processes 
NAC TFs: !encoded by! a large gene family 
Genome-wide NAC genes: !identified and! their phylogeny analyzed 
Genome-wide NAC genes: !analyzed for! genomic structure, chromosomal location, synteny relationships, protein properties and conserved motifs 
Fruit developmental process: !evaluated in! Actinidia eriantha 'Ganlu 1' 
142 NAC TFs: !phylogenetically divided into! 23 protein subfamilies 
Exons of NAC genes: !ranged from! one to ten 
116 out of 142 NACs: !distributed on! all the 29 kiwifruit chromosomes 
125 out of 142 NAC genes: !detected in! fruit samples