Dwarf bunt, which is caused by Tilletia controversa Kühn, is a soilborne and seedborne disease that occurs worldwide and can lead to 70% or even total losses of wheat crops. However, very little information is available about the histological changes that occur in dwarf bunt-resistant and dwarf bunt-susceptible wheat plants at the tillering stage (Z21). In this study, we used scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy to characterize the histological changes at this stage in resistant and susceptible wheat cultivars infected by T. controversa. Using scanning electron microscopy, the root, stem, and leaf structures of resistant and susceptible cultivars were examined after T. controversa infection. The root epidermal and vascular bundles were more severely damaged in the susceptible T. controversa-infected plants than in the resistant plants. The stem cell and longitudinal sections were much more extensively affected in susceptible plants than in resistant plants after pathogen infection. However, slightly deformed mesophyll cells were observed in the leaves of susceptible plants. With transmission electron microscopy, we found that the cortical bundle cells and the cell contents and nuclei in the roots were more severely affected in the susceptible plants than in the resistant plants; in the stems and leaves, the nuclei, chloroplasts, and mesophyll cells changed significantly in the susceptible plants after fungal infection. Moreover, we found that infected susceptible and resistant plants were affected much more severely at the tillering stage (Z21) than at the seedling growth stage (Z13). Histological changes in the wheat roots, stems and leaves were much more severe in T. controversa-infected susceptible plants than in infected resistant plants at the tillering stage (Z21).

Gene: !affects! Histological changes 
Histological changes: !more severe in! Susceptible plants 
Susceptible plants: !than in! Resistant plants 
Resistant plants: !after infection by! T. controversa