Despite significant limitations of growth medium reuse, a large amount of organic substrate is reused in soilless cultivation of horticultural crops in China. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) can promote nutrient absorption and improve plant tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses. However, the mechanisms governing the effects of AMF on crop growth in organic continuous cropping substrates have not been elucidated. In this study, we showed that the inoculation of AMF in continuous cropping substrates promoted growth and root development, and increased the root and NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME) activity of tomato seedlings. Root transcriptome analysis demonstrated that the plant hormone signal transduction pathway was highly enriched, and 109 genes that positively correlated with the AMF-inoculated plant phenotype were obtained by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), which identified 9 genes related to indole acetic acid (IAA). Importantly, the levels of endogenous IAA in tomato seedlings significantly increased after AMF inoculation. Furthermore, the application of AMF significantly increased the expression levels of NADP-ME1 and NADP-ME2, as well as the activity of NADP-ME, and enhanced the root activity of tomato seedlings in comparison to that observed without inoculation of AMF. However, these effects were blocked in plants treated with 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA), a polar transport inhibitor of IAA. These results suggest that IAA mediates the AMF-promoted tomato growth and expression of NADP-MEs in continuous cropping substrates. The study provides convincing evidence for the reuse of continuous cropping substrates by adding AMF as an amendment.

AMF: !promotes! Nutrient absorption
AMF: !improves! Plant tolerance
AMF: !increases! Root and NADP-ME activity
GSEA: !identifies! 9 genes related to IAA
IAA: !mediates! AMF-promoted tomato growth
IAA: !increases! Endogenous levels in tomato seedlings
NADP-MEs: !enhanced! By AMF application
TIBA: !blocks! Effects of AMF