The nucleotide-binding site-leucine-rich repeat (NBS-LRR) genes are important for plant development and disease resistance. Although genome-wide studies of NBS-encoding genes have been performed in several species, the evolution, structure, expression, and function of these genes remain unknown in radish (Raphanus sativus L.). A recently released draft R. sativus L. reference genome has facilitated the genome-wide identification and characterization of NBS-encoding genes in radish. A total of 225 NBS-encoding genes were identified in the radish genome based on the essential NB-ARC domain through HMM search and Pfam database, with 202 mapped onto nine chromosomes and the remaining 23 localized on different scaffolds. According to a gene structure analysis, we identified 99 NBS-LRR-type genes and 126 partial NBS-encoding genes. Additionally, 80 and 19 genes respectively encoded an N-terminal Toll/interleukin-like domain and a coiled-coil domain. Furthermore, 72% of the 202 NBS-encoding genes were grouped in 48 clusters distributed in 24 crucifer blocks on chromosomes. The U block on chromosomes R02, R04, and R08 had the most NBS-encoding genes (48), followed by the R (24), D (23), E (23), and F (17) blocks. These clusters were mostly homogeneous, containing NBS-encoding genes derived from a recent common ancestor. Tandem (15 events) and segmental (20 events) duplications were revealed in the NBS family. Comparative evolutionary analyses of orthologous genes among Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica rapa, and Brassica oleracea reflected the importance of the NBS-LRR gene family during evolution. Moreover, examinations of cis-elements identified 70 major elements involved in responses to methyl jasmonate, abscisic acid, auxin, and salicylic acid. According to RNA-seq expression analyses, 75 NBS-encoding genes contributed to the resistance of radish to Fusarium wilt. A quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed that RsTNL03 (Rs093020) and RsTNL09 (Rs042580) expression positively regulates radish resistance to Fusarium oxysporum, in contrast to the negative regulatory role for RsTNL06 (Rs053740). The NBS-encoding gene structures, tandem and segmental duplications, synteny, and expression profiles in radish were elucidated for the first time and compared with those of other Brassicaceae family members (A. thaliana, B. oleracea, and B. rapa) to clarify the evolution of the NBS gene family. These results may be useful for functionally characterizing NBS-encoding genes in radish.

NBS-LRR genes: !important for! plant development and disease resistance
NBS-encoding genes: !identified in! radish genome
NBS-LRR-type genes: !identified as! 99
Partial NBS-encoding genes: !identified as! 126
Tandem duplication: !revealed in! NBS family
Orthologous genes: !compared among! Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica rapa, and Brassica oleracea
Cis-elements: !involved in! responses to methyl jasmonate, abscisic acid, auxin, and salicylic acid
RsTNL03 and RsTNL09: !positively regulate! radish resistance to Fusarium oxysporum
RsTNL06: !negatively regulate! radish resistance to Fusarium oxysporum