Runs of homozygosity (ROH) have been widely used to study population history and trait architecture in humans and livestock species, but their application in self-incompatible plants has not been reported. The distributions of ROH in 199 accessions representing Asian pears (45), European pears (109), and interspecific hybrids (45) were investigated using genotyping-by-sequencing in this study. Fruit phenotypes including fruit weight, firmness, Brix, titratable acidity, and flavor volatiles were measured for genotype-phenotype analyses. The average number of ROH and the average total genomic length of ROH were 6 and 11 Mb, respectively, in Asian accessions, and 13 and 30 Mb, respectively, in European accessions. Significant associations between genomic inbreeding coefficients (F<sub>ROH</sub>) and phenotypes were observed for 23 out of 32 traits analyzed. An overlap between ROH islands and significant markers from genome-wide association analyses was observed. Previously published quantitative trait loci for fruit traits and disease resistances also overlapped with some of the ROH islands. A prominent ROH island at the bottom of linkage group 17 overlapped with a recombination-supressed genomic region harboring the self-incompatibility locus. The observed ROH patterns suggested that systematic breeding of European pears would have started earlier than of Asian pears. Our research suggest that F<sub>ROH</sub> would serve as a novel tool for managing inbreeding in gene-banks of self-incompatible plant species. ROH mapping provides a complementary strategy to unravel the genetic architecture of complex traits, and to evaluate differential selection in outbred plants. This seminal work would provide foundation for the ROH research in self-incompatible plants.

Runs of homozygosity: !associated with! Fruit phenotypes 
Genomic inbreeding coefficients: !associated with! Phenotypes 
ROH islands: !overlap with! Significant markers 
Quantitative trait loci: !overlap with! ROH islands 
Recombination-supressed region: !harbors! Self-incompatibility locus 
F<sub>ROH</sub>: !serves as! Novel tool for managing inbreeding