Cotton is a paramount cash crop around the globe. Among all abiotic stresses, drought is a leading cause of cotton growth and yield loss. However, the molecular link between drought stress and vascular growth and development is relatively uncharted. Here, we validated a crucial role of GhWOX4, a transcription factor, modulating drought stress with that of vasculature growth in cotton. Knock-down of GhWOX4 decreased the stem width and severely compromised vascular growth and drought tolerance. Conversely, ectopic expression of GhWOX4 in <i>Arabidopsis</i> enhanced the tolerance to drought stress. Comparative RNAseq analysis revealed auxin responsive protein (AUX/IAA), abscisic acid (ABA), and ethylene were significantly induced. Additionally, MYC-bHLH, WRKY, MYB, homeodomain, and heat-shock transcription factors (HSF) were differentially expressed in control plants as compared to GhWOX4-silenced plants. The promotor zone of GhWOX4 was found congested with plant growth, light, and stress response related cis-elements. differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to stress, water deprivation, and desiccation response were repressed in drought treated GhWOX4-virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) plants as compared to control. Gene ontology (GO) functions related to cell proliferation, light response, fluid transport, and flavonoid biosynthesis were over-induced in TRV: 156-0 h/TRV: 156-1 h (control) in comparison to TRV: VIGS-0 h/TRV: VIGS-1 h (GhWOX4-silenced) plants. This study improves our context for elucidating the pivotal role of GhWOX4 transcription factors (TF), which mediates drought tolerance, plays a decisive role in plant growth and development, and is likely involved in different regulatory pathways in cotton.

GhWOX4: !modulates! drought stress 
GhWOX4: !enhances! drought tolerance 
GhWOX4: !represses! stem width 
GhWOX4: !compromises! vascular growth 
AUX/IAA: !induced by! GhWOX4 
ABA: !induced by! GhWOX4 
Ethylene: !induced by! GhWOX4 
MYC-bHLH: !differentially expressed in! control plants 
WRKY: !differentially expressed in! control plants 
MYB: !differentially expressed in! control plants 
Homeodomain: !differentially expressed in! control plants 
HSF: !differentially expressed in! control plants 
DEGs: !repressed in! GhWOX4-silenced plants 
Cell proliferation: !over-induced in! control plants 
Light response: !over-induced in! control plants 
Fluid transport: !over-induced in! control plants 
Flavonoid biosynthesis: !over-induced in! control plants