Legumes form two types of root organs in response to signals from microbes, namely, nodules and root galls. In the field, these interactions occur concurrently and often interact with each other. The outcomes of these interactions vary and can depend on natural variation in rhizobia and nematode populations in the soil as well as abiotic conditions. While rhizobia are symbionts that contribute fixed nitrogen to their hosts, parasitic root-knot nematodes (RKN) cause galls as feeding structures that consume plant resources without a contribution to the plant. Yet, the two interactions share similarities, including rhizosphere signaling, repression of host defense responses, activation of host cell division, and differentiation, nutrient exchange, and alteration of root architecture. Rhizobia activate changes in defense and development through Nod factor signaling, with additional functions of effector proteins and exopolysaccharides. RKN inject large numbers of protein effectors into plant cells that directly suppress immune signaling and manipulate developmental pathways. This review examines the molecular control of legume interactions with rhizobia and RKN to elucidate shared and distinct mechanisms of these root-microbe interactions. Many of the molecular pathways targeted by both organisms overlap, yet recent discoveries have singled out differences in the spatial control of expression of developmental regulators that may have enabled activation of cortical cell division during nodulation in legumes. The interaction of legumes with symbionts and parasites highlights the importance of a comprehensive view of root-microbe interactions for future crop management and breeding strategies.[Formula: see text] Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !represses! Host defense response
Gene: !activates! Host cell division
Gene: !enhances! Nutrient exchange
Gene: !alters! Root architecture
Rhizobia: !signals! Nod factor
RKN: !injects! Protein effectors