In this study, useful hybrid promoters were developed for efficient ectopic gene expression in monocot and dicot plants, and they hold strong prominence in both transgenic research and biotech industries. This study deals with developing novel synthetic promoters derived from Rice Tungro Bacilliform Virus (RTBV) and Mirabilis Mosaic Virus (MMV). Despite numerous availability, there is a severe scarcity of promoters universally suitable for monocot and dicot plants. Here, eight chimeric promoter constructs were synthesized as gBlocks gene fragments through domain swapping and hybridization by incorporating important domains of previously characterized RTBV and MMV promoters. The developed promoter constructs were assessed for transient GUS expression in tobacco protoplast (Xanthi Brad) and agro-infiltrated tobacco, petunia, rice and pearl millet. Protoplast expression analysis showed that two promoter constructs, namely pUPMA-RP1-MP1GUS and pUPMA-RP4-MP1GUS exhibited 3.56 and 2.5 times higher activities than that of the CaMV35S promoter. We had observed the similar type of expression patterns of these promoters in agroinfiltration-based transient studies. RP1-MP1 and RP4-MP1 promoters exhibited 1.87- and 1.68-fold increase expression in transgenic tobacco plants; while, a 1.95-fold increase was found in RP1-MP1 transgenic rice plants when compared their activities with CaMV35S promoter. Furthermore, on evaluating these promoter constructs for their expression in the bacterial system, pUPMA-RP1-MP1GFP was found to have the highest GFP expression. Moreover, the promoter construct was also evaluated for its capacity to express the HMP3 gene. Biobeads of encapsulated bacterial cells expressing HMP3 gene under control of the pUPMA-RP4-MP1 promoter were found to reduce 72.9% copper and 29.2% zinc concentration from wastewater. Our results had demonstrated that the developed promoter constructs could be used for translational research in dicot, monocot plants and bacterial systems for efficient gene expression.

RTBV: !develops! Promoter Constructs
MMV: !develops! Promoter Constructs
Promoter Constructs: !enhances! GUS Expression
Promoter Constructs: !enhances! GFP Expression
Promoter Constructs: !expresses! HMP3 Gene
HMP3 Gene: !reduces! Copper & Zinc Concentration