Nutrient transporter genes could be a potential candidate for improving crop plants, with enhanced nutrient uptake leading to increased crop yield by providing tolerance against different biotic and abiotic stresses. The world's food supply is nearing a crisis in meeting the demands of an ever-growing global population, and an increase in both yield and nutrient value of major crops is vitally necessary to meet the increased population demand. Nutrients play an important role in plant metabolism as well as growth and development, and nutrient deficiency results in retarded plant growth and leads to reduced crop yield. A variety of cellular processes govern crop plant nutrient absorption from the soil. Among these, nutrient membrane transporters play an important role in the acquisition of nutrients from soil and transport of these nutrients to their target sites. In addition, as excess nutrient delivery has toxic effects on plant growth, these membrane transporters also play a significant role in the removal of excess nutrients in the crop plant. The key function provided by membrane transporters is the ability to supply the crop plant with an adequate level of tolerance against environmental stresses, such as soil acidity, alkalinity, salinity, drought, and pathogen attack. Membrane transporter genes have been utilized for the improvement of crop plants, with enhanced nutrient uptake leading to increased crop yield by providing tolerance against different biotic and abiotic stresses. Further understanding of the basic mechanisms of nutrient transport in crop plants could facilitate the advanced design of engineered plant crops to achieve increased yield and improve nutrient quality through the use of genetic technologies as well as molecular breeding. This review is focused on nutrient toxicity and tolerance mechanisms in crop plants to aid in understanding and addressing the anticipated global food demand.

Nutrient transporter genes: !enhance! Nutrient uptake 
Nutrient transporter genes: !provide tolerance against! Environmental stresses 
Nutrient transporter genes: !improve! Crop yield 
Nutrient transporter genes: !facilitate! Advanced design of engineered plant crops 
Nutrient transporter genes: !address! Global food demand