Protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is crucial for proper cellular function, including the production of peptides with biological functions through controlled proteolysis. Proteostasis has roles in maintenance of cellular functions and plant interactions with the environment under physiological conditions. Plant stress continues to reduce agricultural yields causing substantial economic losses; thus, it is critical to understand how plants perceive stress signals to elicit responses for survival. As previously shown in Arabidopsis thaliana, thimet oligopeptidases (TOPs) TOP1 (also referred to as organellar oligopeptidase) and TOP2 (also referred to as cytosolic oligopeptidase) are essential components in plant response to pathogens, but further characterization of TOPs and their peptide substrates is required to understand their contributions to stress perception and defense signaling. Herein, label-free peptidomics via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was used to differentially quantify 1111 peptides, originating from 369 proteins, between the Arabidopsis Col-0 wild type and top1top2 knock-out mutant. This revealed 350 peptides as significantly more abundant in the mutant, representing accumulation of these potential TOP substrates. Ten direct substrates were validated using in vitro enzyme assays with recombinant TOPs and synthetic candidate peptides. These TOP substrates are derived from proteins involved in photosynthesis, glycolysis, protein folding, biogenesis, and antioxidant defense, implicating TOP involvement in processes aside from defense signaling. Sequence motif analysis revealed TOP cleavage preference for non-polar residues in the positions surrounding the cleavage site. Identification of these substrates provides a framework for TOP signaling networks, through which the interplay between proteolytic pathways and defense signaling can be further characterized.

TOP1: !cleaves! Non-polar residues 
TOP2: !cleaves! Non-polar residues 
TOPs: !contribute to! Plant stress response 
TOPs: !process! Photosynthesis, glycolysis, protein folding, biogenesis, and antioxidant defense 
TOPs: !validate! Direct substrates 
TOPs: !quantify! 1111 peptides 
TOPs: !accumulate! 350 peptides