Snowmelt in alpine ecosystems brings ample water, and together with above-freezing temperatures, initiates plant growth. In this scenario, rapid activation of photosynthesis is essential for a successful life-history strategy. But, strong solar radiation in late spring enhances the risk of photodamage, particularly before photosynthesis is fully functional. We compared the photoprotective strategy of five alpine forbs: one geophyte not particularly specialised in subnival life (Crocus albiflorus) and four wintergreens differing in their degree of adaptation to subnival life, from least to most specialised: Gentiana acaulis, Geum montanum, Homogyne alpina and Soldanella alpina. We used distance to the edge of snow patches as a proxy to study time-dependent changes after melting. We postulated that the photoprotective response of snowbed specialists would be stronger than of more-generalist alpine meadow species. F<sub>v</sub> /F<sub>m</sub> was relatively low across wintergreens and even lower in the geophyte C. albiflorus. This species also had the largest xanthophyll-cycle pool and lowest tocopherol and flavonoid glycoside contents. After snow melting, all the species progressively activated ETR, but particularly the intermediate snowbed species G. acaulis and G. montanum. The photoprotective responses after snowmelt were idiosyncratic: G. montanum rapidly accumulated xanthophyll-cycle pigments, tocopherol and flavonoid glycosides; while S. alpina showed the largest increase in plastochromanol-8 and chlorophyll contents and the greatest changes in optical properties. Climate warming scenarios might shift the snowmelt date and consequently alter the effectiveness of photoprotection mechanisms, potentially changing the fitness outcome of the different strategies adopted by alpine forbs.

Snowmelt: !initiates! Plant Growth
Crocus albiflorus: !less specialised in! Subnival Life
Gentiana acaulis: !differs from! Crocus albiflorus
Geum montanum: !intermediate between! Crocus albiflorus and Gentiana acaulis
Homogyne alpina: !more specialised than! Crocus albiflorus
Soldanella alpina: !most specialised of! Alpine Forbs
F<sub>v</sub>/F<sub>m: !relatively low across! Wintergreens
ETR: !progressively activated by! All Species
G. montanum: !accumulated! Xanthophyll-Cycle Pigments
S. alpina: !showed largest increase in! Plastochromanol-8