Developing drought-tolerant cultivars is mainly restricted due to poor knowledge of the mechanism behind drought tolerance. In the present work, available germplasm of Vigna radiata (mung bean) was screened for drought tolerance using multiple agronomic and physiological parameters and used to selected one drought-tolerant (NM-13-1) and one drought-sensitive (NM-54) cultivar for further studies. Plant water status and PSII activity were found to be potential physiological discriminating traits. Changes in PSII and PSI activity, accumulation of proline, oxidative damage, and antioxidants were further assessed in selected drought-sensitive and drought-tolerant cultivars. Drought stress reduced PSII efficiency and electron transport in both mung bean cultivars. Drought increased NPQ and Y(NPQ), a greater increase in NPQ and Y(NPQ) was found in the drought-tolerant cv NM-13-1, indicating that the drought-tolerant cultivar managed over-excitation of PSII by safe heat dissipation via photo-protective component of NPQ. A decrease in PSI efficiency with an increase in donor end limitation of PSI in both mung bean cultivars further confirmed that the electron transport through PSII became down-regulated. However, the drought-sensitive cv. NM-54 had poor ability to manage over-excitation of PSII through buildup of Y(NPQ) thereby causing greater oxidative stress. Mung bean cultivars counteracted oxidative stress by accumulation of proline and increasing POD activities. Drought-tolerant cv. NM-13-1 had higher proline accumulation and antioxidant potential than in the drought-sensitive cultivar. Overall, drought tolerance in the mung bean cultivars can be related to plant water status, PSII activity, Y(NPQ), and POD activity, which can be effectively used for selecting mung bean cultivars for drought tolerance.

Drought: !reduces! PSII efficiency 
PSII: !increases! NPQ and Y(NPQ) 
Drought-tolerant cultivar: !manages! over-excitation of PSII 
Drought-sensitive cultivar: !has poor ability to manage! over-excitation of PSII 
Oxidative stress: !counteracted by! proline accumulation and POD activity 
Drought-tolerant cultivar: !has higher! proline accumulation and antioxidant potential