Carob is a predominantly rainfed tree crop of high nutritive value and a long history of adaptation to the edaphoclimatic stress conditions of the Mediterranean. However, declining attention to the carob tree in recent decades has aggravated genetic erosion. The extant <i>in situ</i> germplasm varies both in terms of pod morphology and composition, reflecting the genetic and physiological divide chiefly among grafted and non-grafted material, and possibly the impact of variable agro-environments. Accordingly, the present study aimed to establish a systematic categorization of the genetic and phenotypic diversity encountered across carob germplasm identified <i>in situ</i> throughout Cyprus, a historical center of production and genetic diversity for the species. Linking pod morphology, primary and secondary metabolite profiles with genotyped source material originating in different agro-environments and crop seasons would provide a framework for interpreting (a) the interaction of these factors in configuring carob pod physicochemical constitution, and (b) the relative stability of phenotypic traits against environmental and seasonal variation. Microsatellite analysis discriminated 36 genotypes out of the 124 trees located in nine traditional agro-environmental zones and revealed low genetic diversity within the grafted germplasm. Two landraces were identified: "Tillyria," which is widespread and predominant, and "Kountourka," which is mainly localized to the northeastern peninsula of Karpasia. Morphological traits, such as seeds-to-pod weight ratio, pod width and thickness were principally under genetic control. Contrarily, compositional traits, particularly total phenolic content-including condensed tannins, <i>in vitro</i> antioxidant capacity and to a lesser extent gallic acid, organic acids and minerals were under agro-environmental control. Agro-environmental zone also modulated principally fructose and glucose; sucrose was modulated equally by genotype and agro-environment, while total sugars were under genetic control. Statistically significant differences between seasons were detected for all traits except for the seeds-to-pod weight ratio, pod length and width. Hierarchical cluster analysis corroborates that Cyprus may be divided into two major agro-environmental zones modulating the compositional properties of the carob pulp. The present study provides a comprehensive insight into the extant carob genetic resources of Cyprus and advances our understanding of how genetic, agro-environmental and seasonal factors interact in shaping carob pod morphology and composition.

genotype: !affects! Pod morphology
agro-environment: !affects! Compositional traits
season: !affects! Total phenolic content
genotype: !modulates! Sucrose
agro-environment: !modulates! Fructose & glucose
season: !modulates! Total sugars