['33519864', 'Phenolamides represent one of the largest classes of plant-specialized secondary  metabolites and function in diverse physiological processes, including defense  responses and development. The biosynthesis of phenolamides requires the  BAHD-family acyltransferases, which transfer acyl-groups from different  acyl-donors specifically to amines, the acyl-group acceptors. However, the  mechanisms of substrate specificity and multisite-acylation of the BAHD-family  acyltransferases remain poorly understood. In this study, we provide a structural  and biochemical analysis of AtSHT and AtSDT, two representative BAHD-family  members that catalyze the multisite acylation of spermidine but show different  product profiles. By determining the structures of AtSHT and AtSDT and using  structure-based mutagenesis, we identified the residues important for substrate  recognition in AtSHT and AtSDT and hypothesized that the acyl acceptor spermidine  might adopt a free-rotating conformation in AtSHT, which can undergo mono-, di-,  or tri-acylation; while the spermidine molecule in AtSDT might adopt a linear  conformation, which only allows mono- or di-acylation to take place. In addition,  through sequence similarity network (SSN) and structural modeling analysis, we  successfully predicted and verified the functions of two uncharacterized  Arabidopsis BAHD acyltransferases, OAO95042.1 and NP_190301.2, which use  putrescine as the main acyl-acceptor. Our work provides not only an excellent  starting point for understanding multisite acylation in BAHD-family enzymes, but  also a feasible methodology for predicting possible acyl acceptor specificity of  uncharacterized BAHD-family acyltransferases.', '2020', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2020.610118', 'Zhang']

AtSHT: !catalyzes! multisite acylation of spermidine 
AtSDT: !catalyzes! multisite acylation of spermidine 
AtSHT: !recognizes! residues important for substrate recognition 
AtSDT: !recognizes! residues important for substrate recognition 
AtSHT: !adopts! free-rotating conformation 
AtSDT: !adopts! linear conformation 
OAO95042.1: !uses! putrescine as main acyl-acceptor 
NP_190301.2: !uses! putrescine as main acyl-acceptor