We applied an integrative approach using multiple methods to verify cytosine methylation in the chloroplast DNA of the multicellular brown alga Saccharina japonica. Cytosine DNA methylation is a heritable process which plays important roles in regulating development throughout the life cycle of an organism. Although methylation of nuclear DNA has been studied extensively, little is known about the state and role of DNA methylation in chloroplast genomes, especially in marine algae. Here, we have applied an integrated approach encompassing whole-genome bisulfite sequencing, methylated DNA immunoprecipitation, gene co-expression networks and photophysiological analyses to provide evidence for the role of chloroplast DNA methylation in a marine alga, the multicellular brown alga Saccharina japonica. Although the overall methylation level was relatively low in the chloroplast genome of S. japonica, gametophytes exhibited higher methylation levels than sporophytes. Gene-specific bisulfite-cloning sequencing provided additional evidence for the methylation of key photosynthetic genes. Many of them were highly expressed in sporophytes whereas genes involved in transcription, translation and biosynthesis were strongly expressed in gametophytes. Nucleus-encoded photosynthesis genes were co-expressed with their chloroplast-encoded counterparts potentially contributing to the higher photosynthetic performance in sporophytes compared to gametophytes where these co-expression networks were less pronounced. A nucleus-encoded DNA methyltransferase of the DNMT2 family is assumed to be responsible for the methylation of the chloroplast genome because it is predicted to possess a plastid transit peptide.

Cytosine DNA methylation: !affects! Process
Gametophytes: !exhibit higher! Methylation levels
Gene-specific bisulfite-cloning sequencing: !provides evidence for! Methylation of key photosynthetic genes
Nucleus-encoded photosynthesis genes: !co-expressed with! Chloroplast-encoded counterparts
Nucleus-encoded DNA methyltransferase: !assumed to be responsible for! Methylation of chloroplast genome