Evolutionary conserved defense mechanisms present in extant bryophytes and angiosperms, as well as moss-specific defenses are part of the immune response of Physcomitrium patens. Bryophytes and tracheophytes are descendants of early land plants that evolved adaptation mechanisms to cope with different kinds of terrestrial stresses, including drought, variations in temperature and UV radiation, as well as defense mechanisms against microorganisms present in the air and soil. Although great advances have been made on pathogen perception and subsequent defense activation in angiosperms, limited information is available in bryophytes. In this study, a transcriptomic approach uncovered the molecular mechanisms underlying the defense response of the bryophyte Physcomitrium patens (previously Physcomitrella patens) against the important plant pathogen Botrytis cinerea. A total of 3.072 differentially expressed genes were significantly affected during B. cinerea infection, including genes encoding proteins with known functions in angiosperm immunity and involved in pathogen perception, signaling, transcription, hormonal signaling, metabolic pathways such as shikimate and phenylpropanoid, and proteins with diverse role in defense against biotic stress. Similarly as in other plants, B. cinerea infection leads to downregulation of genes involved in photosynthesis and cell cycle progression. These results highlight the existence of evolutionary conserved defense responses to pathogens throughout the green plant lineage, suggesting that they were probably present in the common ancestors of land plants. Moreover, several genes acquired by horizontal transfer from prokaryotes and fungi, and a high number of P. patens-specific orphan genes were differentially expressed during B. cinerea infection, suggesting that they are important players in the moss immune response.

Pathogen: !perceived by! genes
Pathogen: !signaled by! proteins
Pathogen: !regulated by! transcription
Pathogen: !metabolized by! shikimate and phenylpropanoid pathways
Pathogen: !repressed by! photosynthesis and cell cycle progression
Pathogen: !enhanced by! horizontal gene transfer from prokaryotes and fungi
Pathogen: !activated by! P. patens-specific orphan genes