Plants are regularly exposed to biotic and abiotic stresses that adversely affect agricultural production. Omics has gained momentum in the last two decades, fueled by statistical methodologies, computational capabilities, mass spectrometry, nucleic-acid sequencing, and peptide-sequencing platforms. Functional genomics-especially metabolomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics-have contributed substantially to plant molecular responses to stress. Recent progress in reverse and forward genetics approaches have mediated high-throughput techniques for identifying stress-related genes. Furthermore, web-based genetic databases have mediated bioinformatics techniques for detecting families of stress-tolerant genes. Gene ontology (GO) databases provide information on the gene product's functional features and help with the computational estimation of gene function. Functional omics data from multiple platforms are useful for positional cloning. Stress-tolerant plants have been engineered using stress response genes, regulatory networks, and pathways. The genome-editing tool, CRISPR-Cas9, reveals the functional features of several parts of the plant genome. Current developments in CRISPR, such as <i>de novo</i> meristem induction genome-engineering in dicots and temperature-tolerant LbCas12a/CRISPR, enable greater DNA insertion precision. This review discusses functional omics for molecular insight and CRISPR-Cas9-based validation of gene function in crop plants. Omics and CRISPR-Cas9 are expected to garner knowledge on molecular systems and gene function and stress-tolerant crop production.

Omics: !contributes to! Plant molecular responses
Reverse/forward genetics: !identifies! Stress-related genes
GO databases: !provide information on! Gene product's functional features
Functional omics data: !useful for! Positional cloning
Stress response genes: !engineer! Stress-tolerant plants
CRISPR-Cas9: !reveals! Functional features of plant genome
CRISPR-Cas9: !enables! DNA insertion precision
Omics/CRISPR-Cas9: !garner knowledge on! Molecular systems/gene function