Verticillium wilt is a widespread and destructive disease, which causes serious loss of cotton yield and quality. Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) is involved in many biological processes, such as plant disease resistance response, through a variety of regulatory mechanisms, but their possible roles in cotton against Verticillium dahliae infection remain largely unclear. Here, we measured the transcriptome of resistant G. hirsutum following infection by V. dahliae and 4277 differentially expressed lncRNAs (delncRNAs) were identified. Localization and abundance analysis revealed that delncRNAs were biased distribution on chromosomes. We explored the dynamic characteristics of disease resistance related lncRNAs in chromosome distribution, induced expression profiles, biological function, and these lncRNAs were divided into three categories according to their induced expression profiles. For the delncRNAs, 687 cis-acting pairs and 14,600 trans-acting pairs of lncRNA-mRNA were identified, which indicated that trans-acting was the main way of Verticillium wilt resistance-associated lncRNAs regulating target mRNAs in cotton. Analyzing the regulation pattern of delncRNAs revealed that cis-acting and trans-acting lncRNAs had different ways to influence target genes. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis revealed that the regulatory function of delncRNAs participated significantly in stimulus response process, kinase activity and plasma membrane components. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis indicated that delncRNAs participated in some important disease resistance pathways, such as plant-pathogen interaction, alpha-linolenic acid metabolism and plant hormone signal transduction. Additionally, 21 delncRNAs and 10 target genes were identified as being involved in alpha-linolenic acid metabolism associated with the biosynthesis of jasmonic acid (JA). Subsequently, we found that GhlncLOX3 might regulate resistance to V. dahliae through modulating the expression of GhLOX3 implicated in JA biosynthesis. Further functional analysis showed that GhlncLOX3-silenced seedlings displayed a reduced resistance to V. dahliae, with down-regulated expression of GhLOX3 and decreased content of JA. This study shows the dynamic characteristics of delncRNAs in multiaspect, and suggests that GhlncLOX3-GhLOX3-JA network participates in response to V. dahliae invasion. Our results provide novel insights for genetic improvement of Verticillium wilt resistance in cotton using lncRNAs.

lncRNA: !localizes to! Chromosomes
lncRNA: !regulates! mRNA
lncRNA: !participates in! Stimulus response process
lncRNA: !participates in! Kinase activity
lncRNA: !participates in! Plasma membrane components
lncRNA: !participates in! Plant-pathogen interaction
lncRNA: !participates in! Alpha-linolenic acid metabolism
lncRNA: !participates in! Plant hormone signal transduction
GhlncLOX3: !regulates! GhLOX3
GhlncLOX3: !modulates! JA biosynthesis
GhlncLOX3: !influences! Resistance to V. dahliae