APETALA2/ethylene responsive factor (AP2/ERF) transcription factors are a plant-specific family of transcription factors and one of the largest families of transcription factors. Ethylene response factors (ERF) regulate plant growth, development, and responses to biotic and abiotic stress. In a previous study, the ERF2 gene was significantly upregulated in both resistant and susceptible tomato cultivars in response to Stemphylium lycopersici. The main purpose of this study was to systematically analyze the ERF family and to explore the mechanism of ERF2 in tomato plants resisting pathogen infection by the Virus-induced Gene Silencing technique. In this experiment, 134 ERF genes were explored and subjected to bioinformatic analysis and divided into twelve groups. The spatiotemporal expression characteristics of ERF transcription factor gene family in tomato were diverse. Combined with RNA-seq, we found that the expression of 18 ERF transcription factors increased after inoculation with S. lycopersici. In ERF2-silenced plants, the susceptible phenotype was observed after inoculation with S. lycopersici. The hypersensitive response and ROS production were decreased in the ERF2-silenced plants. Physiological analyses showed that the superoxide dismutase, peroxidase and catalase activities were lower in ERF2-silenced plants than in control plants, and the SA and JA contents were lower in ERF2-silenced plants than in control plants after inoculation with S. lycopersici. Furthermore, the results indicated that ERF2 may directly or indirectly regulate Pto, PR1b1 and PR-P2 expression and enhance tomato resistance. In this study, we identified and analyzed members of the tomato ERF family by bioinformatics methods and classified, described and analyzed these genes. Subsequently, we used VIGS technology to significantly reduce the expression of ERF2 in tomatoes. The results showed that ERF2 had a positive effect on tomato resistance to S. lycopersici. Interestingly, ERF2 played a key role in multiple SA, JA and ROS signaling pathways to confer resistance to invasion by S. lycopersici. In addition, ERF2 may directly or indirectly regulate Pto, PR1b1 and PR-P2 expression and enhance tomato resistance to S. lycopersici. In summary, this study provides gene resources for breeding for disease resistance in tomato.

ERF2: !enhances! Tomato resistance 
ERF2: !regulates! Pto, PR1b1 and PR-P2 expression 
ERF2: !plays a key role in! SA, JA and ROS signaling pathways 
ERF2: !reduces! Hypersensitive response and ROS production 
ERF2: !decreases! Superoxide dismutase, peroxidase and catalase activities 
ERF2: !lowers! SA and JA contents