This work demonstrates that PpCIPK1, a putative protein kinase, participates in regulating plant salt tolerance in moss Physcomitrella patens. Calcineurin B-Like protein (CBL)-interacting protein kinases (CIPKs) have been reported to be involved in multiple signaling networks and function in plant growth and stress responses, however, their biological functions in non-seed plants have not been well characterized. In this study, we report that PpCIPK1, a putative protein kinase, participates in regulating plant salt tolerance in moss Physcomitrella patens (P. patens). Phylogenetic analysis revealed that PpCIPK1 shared high similarity with its homologs in higher plants. PpCIPK1 transcription level was induced upon salt stress in P. patens. Using homologous recombination, we constructed PpCIPK1 knockout mutant lines (PpCIPK1 KO). Salt sensitivity analysis showed that independent PpCIPK1 KO plants exhibited severe growth inhibition and developmental deficiency of gametophytes under salt stress condition compared to that of wild-type P. patens (WT). Consistently, ionic homeostasis was disrupted in plants due to PpCIPK1 deletion, and high level of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> was accumulated in PpCIPK1 KO than that in WT. Furthermore, PpCIPK1 functions in regulating photosynthetic activity in response to salt stress. Interestingly, we observed that PpCIPK1 could completely rescue the salt-sensitive phenotype of sos2-1 to WT level in Arabidopsis, indicating that AtSOS2 and PpCIPK1 are functionally conserved. In conclusion, our work provides evidence that PpCIPK1 participates in salt tolerance regulation in P. patens.

PpCIPK1: !participates in! regulating plant salt tolerance 
PpCIPK1: !shares similarity with! homologs in higher plants 
PpCIPK1: !induces transcription level upon! salt stress 
PpCIPK1 KO: !exhibits severe growth inhibition and developmental deficiency under! salt stress condition 
PpCIPK1 KO: !accumulates high level of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> than! WT 
PpCIPK1: !functions in! regulating photosynthetic activity in response to salt stress 
AtSOS2: !is functionally conserved with! PpCIPK1