Melon (Cucumis melo L.) is an important cucurbit and has been considered as a model plant for studying sex determination. The four most common sexual morphotypes in melon are monoecious (A-G-M), gynoecious (--ggM-), andromonoecious (A-G-mm), and hermaphrodite (--ggmm). Sex expression in melons is complex, as the genes and associated networks that govern the sex expression are not fully explored. Recently, RNA-seq transcriptomic profiling, ChIP-qPCR analysis integrated with gene ontology annotation and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways predicted the differentially expressed genes including sex-specific ACS and ACO genes, in regulating the sex-expression, phytohormonal cross-talk, signal transduction, and secondary metabolism in melons. Integration of transcriptional control through genetic interaction in between the ACS7, ACS11, and WIP1 in epistatic or hypostatic manner, along with the recruitment of H3K9ac and H3K27me3, epigenetically, overall determine sex expression. Alignment of protein sequences for establishing phylogenetic evolution, motif comparison, and protein-protein interaction supported the structural conservation while presence of the conserved hydrophilic and charged residues across the diverged evolutionary group predicted the functional conservation of the ACS protein. Presence of the putative cis-binding elements or DNA motifs, and its further comparison with DAP-seq-based cistrome and epicistrome of Arabidopsis, unraveled strong ancestry of melons with Arabidopsis. Motif comparison analysis also characterized putative genes and transcription factors involved in ethylene biosynthesis, signal transduction, and hormonal cross-talk related to sex expression. Overall, we have comprehensively reviewed research findings for a deeper insight into transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of sex expression and flower development in melons.

ACS7: !interacts with! ACS11 
ACS7: !interacts with! WIP1 
ACS7: !recruits! H3K9ac 
ACS7: !recruits! H3K27me3 
ACS7: !compared to! DAP-seq cistrome 
ACS7: !compared to! DAP-seq epicistrome 
ACS7: !compared to! Arabidopsis 
ACS7: !characterizes! transcription factors