Crop improvement for Nitrogen Use Efficiency (NUE) requires a well-defined phenotype and genotype, especially for different N-forms. As N-supply enhances growth, we comprehensively evaluated 25 commonly measured phenotypic parameters for N response using 4 N treatments in six indica rice genotypes. For this, 32 replicate potted plants were grown in the green-house on nutrient-depleted sand. They were fertilized to saturation with media containing either nitrate or urea as the sole N source at normal (15 mM N) or low level (1.5 mM N). The variation in N-response among genotypes differed by N form/dose and increased developmentally from vegetative to reproductive parameters. This indicates survival adaptation by reinforcing variation in every generation. Principal component analysis segregated vegetative parameters from reproduction and germination. Analysis of variance revealed that relative to low level, normal N facilitated germination, flowering and vegetative growth but limited yield and NUE. Network analysis for the most connected parameters, their correlation with yield and NUE, ranking by Feature selection and validation by Partial least square discriminant analysis enabled shortlisting of eight parameters for NUE phenotype. It constitutes germination and flowering, shoot/root length and biomass parameters, six of which were common to nitrate and urea. Field-validation confirmed the NUE differences between two genotypes chosen phenotypically. The correspondence between multiple approaches in shortlisting parameters for NUE makes it a novel and robust phenotyping methodology of relevance to other plants, nutrients or other complex traits. Thirty-Four N-responsive genes associated with the phenotype have also been identified for genotypic characterization of NUE.

N-supply: !enhances! growth
genotypes: !differ in! N-response
vegetative parameters: !segregate from! reproduction
normal N: !facilitates! germination, flowering and vegetative growth
eight parameters: !shortlisted for! NUE phenotype
two genotypes: !chosen phenotypically for! field-validation
34 N-responsive genes: !associated with! phenotype