Boron (B) is an essential trace element in plants, and borate cross-linking of pectic polysaccharide rhamnogalacturonan-II (RG-II) in cell walls is required for normal cell growth. High concentrations of B are toxic to cells. Therefore, plants need to control B transport to respond to B conditions in the environment. Over the past two decades, genetic analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana have revealed that B transport is governed by two types of membrane transport molecules: NIPs (nodulin-26-like intrinsic proteins), which facilitate boric acid permeation, and BORs, which export borate from cells. In this article, we review recent findings on the (i) regulation at the cell level, (ii) diversity among plant species and (iii) evolution of these B transporters in plants. We first describe the systems regulating these B transporters at the cell level, focusing on the molecular mechanisms underlying the polar localization of proteins and B-dependent expression, as well as their physiological significance in A. thaliana. Then, we examine the presence of homologous genes and characterize the functions of NIPs and BORs in B homeostasis, in a wide range of plant species, including Brassica napus, Oryza sativa and Zea mays. Finally, we discuss the evolutionary aspects of NIPs and BORs as B transporters, and the possible relationship between the diversification of B transport and the occurrence of RG-II in plants. This review considers the sophisticated systems of B transport that are conserved among various plant species, which were established to meet mineral nutrient requirements.

NIPs: !facilitate! boric acid permeation
BORs: !export! borate from cells
Molecules: !regulate! B transport
A. thaliana: !localizes to! proteins
A. thaliana: !expresses! B-dependent expression
Brassica napus: !contains! homologous genes
Oryza sativa: !characterizes! functions of NIPs and BORs
Zea mays: !examines! presence of homologous genes
Evolution: !diversifies! B transport
RG-II: !relates to! diversification of B transport