Although N levels affect leaf photosynthetic capacity, the effects of N levels on the photochemistry of photosystems II and I (PSII and PSI, respectively) are not well-understood. In the present study, we examined this aspect in rice (Oryza sativa L. 'Hitomebore') plants grown under three different N levels at normal or high temperatures that can occur during rice culture and do not severely suppress photosynthesis. At both growth temperatures, the quantum efficiency of PSII [Y(II)] and the fraction of the primary quinone electron acceptor in its oxidized state were positively correlated with the amount of total leaf-N, whereas the quantum yields of non-photochemical quenching and donor-side limitation of PSI [Y(ND)] were negatively correlated with the amount of total leaf-N. These changes in PSII and PSI parameters were strongly correlated with each other. Growth temperatures scarcely affected these relationships. These results suggest that the photochemistry of PSII and PSI is coordinately regulated primarily depending on the amount of total leaf-N. When excess light energy occurs in low N-acclimated plants, oxidation of the reaction center chlorophyll of PSI is thought to be stimulated to protect PSI from excess light energy. It is also suggested that PSII and PSI normally operate at high temperature used in the present study. In addition, as the relationships between Y(II) and Y(ND) were found to be almost identical to those observed in osmotically stressed rice plants, common regulation is thought to be operative when excess light energy occurs due to different causes.

N levels: !affect! Leaf photosynthetic capacity
N levels: !correlate with! Quantum efficiency of PSII & fraction of primary quinone electron acceptor in oxidized state
N levels: !correlate negatively with! Quantum yields of non-photochemical quenching & donor-side limitation of PSI
Growth temperatures: !scarcely affect! Relationships between N levels & photochemistry of PSII & PSI
Excess light energy: !stimulates! Oxidation of reaction center chlorophyll of PSI
Osmotically stressed plants: !share common regulation! With excess light energy due to different causes