Moderate levels of genetic diversity and differentiation of Anisoptera costata were determined. A population divergence occurred during Younger Dryas. The anthropogenic disturbance had significantly affected the genetic diversity of the species in low tropical forests. Anisoptera costata Korth, an endangered species, is mainly distributed in the lowland tropical forests of the Southeast region in Vietnam, which has not been explored for genetic diversity and demographic history. In this study, eight polymorphic microsatellite markers were used to analyze 232 wild trees of A. costata at nine different populations, representing the natural distribution range of the species in Vietnam. Genetic diversity within the populations was determined with mean values of 0.284 and 0.327 observed and expected heterozygosity, respectively, while genetic differentiation among populations was found with Weir and Cockerham index of 0.12 and Hedrick index of 1.38. These results indicated that habitat fragmentation by the anthropogenic disturbance may be the major factor for the low heterozygosity values and affected the number of alleles in all the targeted populations of A. costata in lowland tropical forests. Populations in the Central Southeast area had a higher level of genetic diversity than the populations in the Coastal and Western Southeast areas. The analysis of molecular variance showed that high genetic variation existed within populations (86.15%) compared to the variation among populations. A reduction in the population size of A. costata was determined by BOTTLENECK. Different clustering methods (Bayesian analysis, the neighbor-joining tree, and principal coordinate analysis) suggested optimal genetic clusters related to gene flow among different areas. Approximate Bayesian computation suggested that population divergence occurred during Younger Dryas. We also discussed the measures for species conservation based on these results.

Anisoptera costata: !has! Moderate levels of genetic diversity and differentiation 
Anthropogenic disturbance: !affects! Genetic diversity of species 
Anisoptera costata: !distributed in! Lowland tropical forests of Southeast Vietnam 
Eight polymorphic microsatellite markers: !used to analyze! 232 wild trees of A. costata 
Weir and Cockerham index: !found with! 0.12 
Hedrick index: !found with! 1.38 
Habitat fragmentation: !causes! Low heterozygosity values 
Central Southeast area: !has higher! Genetic diversity than Coastal and Western Southeast areas 
Population size: !reduced by! BOTTLENECK 
Younger Dryas: !population divergence occurred during!