Secretome analysis of a salt-tolerant and control Chlamydomonas reinhardtii revealed 514 differentially expressed proteins. Membrane transport and trafficking, signal transduction and channel proteins were up-regulated in the ST secretome. Salinity is a major abiotic stress that limits crop production worldwide. Multiple adverse effects have been reported in many living organisms exposed to high-saline concentrations. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is known for secreting proteins in response to many environmental stresses. A salinity-tolerant (ST) strain of Chlamydomonas has been developed, whose cells were able to grow at 300 mM NaCl. The current study analyzed the secretomes of ST grown in TAP medium supplemented with 300 mM NaCl and the laboratory strain CC-503 grown in TAP medium without NaCl supplement. In total, 514 secreted proteins were identified of which 203 were up-regulated and 110 were down-regulated. Bioinformatic analysis predicted 168 proteins to be secreted or in the conventional secretory pathway. Out of these, 70 were up-regulated, while 51 proteins were down-regulated. Proteins involved in membrane transport and trafficking, signal transduction and channel proteins were altered in their expression in the ST secretome, suggesting the response of saline stress acts toward not only the intracellular pool of proteins but also the extracellular proteins. This also suggested that the secreted proteins might have roles in the extracellular space. Signal peptide (SP) prediction revealed that almost 40% of the predicted secreted proteins contained a signal peptide; however, a high proportion of proteins lacked an SP, suggesting that these proteins might be secreted through an unconventional protein secretion pathway.

Membrane transport: !up-regulated in! ST secretome
Signal transduction: !up-regulated in! ST secretome
Channel proteins: !up-regulated in! ST secretome
Salinity: !limits! crop production
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: !secretes proteins in response to! environmental stresses
ST strain: !able to grow at! 300 mM NaCl
Secreted proteins: !identified in! ST secretome
Bioinformatic analysis: !predicted! 168 proteins
Proteins: !altered in expression in! ST secretome
Signal peptide: !predicted for! 40% of proteins