Comprehensive characterization of Gramineae HATs and HDACs reveals their conservation and variation. The recent WGD/SD gene pairs in the CBP and RPD/HDA1 gene family may confer specific adaptive evolutionary changes. Expression of OsHAT and OsHDAC genes provides a new vision in different aspects of development and response to diverse stress. The histone acetylase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) have been proven to be tightly linked to play a crucial role in plant growth, development and response to abiotic stress by regulating histone acetylation levels. However, the evolutionary dynamics and functional differentiation of HATs and HDACs in Gramineae remain largely unclear. In the present study, we identified 37 HAT genes and 110 HDAC genes in seven Gramineae genomes by a detailed analysis. Phylogenetic trees of these HAT and HDAC proteins were constructed to illustrate evolutionary relationship in Gramineae. Gene structure, protein property and protein motif composition illustrated the conservation and variation of HATs and HDACs in Gramineae. Gene duplication analysis suggested that recent whole genome duplication (WGD)/segmental duplication (SD) events contributed to the diversification of the CBP and RPD3/HDA1 gene family in Gramineae. Furthermore, promoter cis-element prediction indicated that OsHATs and OsHDACs were likely functional proteins and involved in various signaling pathways. Expression analysis by RNA-seq data showed that all OsHAT and OsHDAC genes were expressed in different tissues or development stages, revealing that they were ubiquitously expressed. In addition, we found that their expression patterns were altered in response to cold, drought, salt, light, abscisic acid (ABA), and indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) treatments. These findings provide the basis for further identification of candidate OsHAT and OsHDAC genes that may be utilized in regulating growth and development and improving crop tolerance to abiotic stress.

Gene: !conserved in! Gramineae
Gene: !evolved by! WGD/SD
Gene: !regulates! Histone Acetylation
Gene: !expressed in! Different Tissues
Gene: !altered by! Cold, Drought, Salt, Light, ABA, IAA