Photosystem II (PSII) is a highly conserved integral-membrane multi-subunit pigment-protein complex. The proteins, pigments, lipids, and ions in PSII need to be assembled precisely to ensure a proper PSII biogenesis. D1 is the main subunit of PSII core reaction center (RC), and is usually synthesized as a precursor D1. D1 maturation by the C-terminal processing protease CtpA is essential for PSII assembly. However, the detailed mechanism about how D1 maturation affects PSII assembly is not clearly elucidated so far. In this study, Arabidopsis thaliana CtpA mutant (atctpa: SALK_056011), which lacks the D1 mature process, was used to investigate the function of this process on PSII assembly in more details. Without the C-terminal processing of precursor D1, PSII assembly, including PSII monomer, dimer, especially PSII supercomplexes (PSII SCs), was largely compromised as reported previously. Western blotting following the BN-2D-SDS PAGE revealed that although the assembly of PSII core proteins D2, CP43 and CP47 was affected by the loss of D1 mature process, the incorporation of CP43 was affected the most, indicated by its most reduced assembly efficiency into PSII SCs. Furthermore, the slower growth of yeast cells which were co-transformed with pD1 and CP43, when compared with the ones co-transformed with mature D1 and CP43, approved the existence of D1 C-terminal tail hindered the interaction efficiency between D1 and CP43, indicating the physiological importance of D1 mature process on the PSII assembly and the healthy growth of the organisms. The knockout Arabidopsis atctpa mutant is a good material to study the unexpected link between D1 maturation and PSII SCs assembly. The loss of D1 maturation mainly affects the incorporation of PSII core protein CP43, an inner antenna binding protein, which functions in the association of LHCII complexes to PSII dimers during the formation of PSII SCs. Our findings here provide detailed supports of the role of D1 maturation during PSII SCs assembly in higher plants.

D1: !matures! CtpA 
CtpA: !affects! PSII assembly 
D1: !affects! CP43 incorporation 
CP43: !binds! LHCII complexes 
LHCII: !associates with! PSII dimers 
PSII dimers: !form! PSII SCs