Mechanisms of the specific systemic response of plant to different adverse factors are poorly understood. We studied the mechanisms acting in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) under the action of local burn and gradual heating. Both stimuli induce a variation potential (VP) propagation and a biphasic (fast and long-term phases) photosynthetic response in non-stimulated zones of plant with stimulus-specific parameters of the latter: the fast phase or long-term phase predominance in responses induced by burn or heating, respectively. The burn-induced VP and photosynthetic response attenuate with distance, while the heating-induced VP and photosynthetic response were of more stable amplitude in distant part of the stimulated plant. VP propagation in both cases induced apoplast alkalization with dynamics well corresponding to such of VP and of the fast phase of photosynthetic response. Gradual heating induced a significant rise in jasmonate production along with a decrease in stomatal conductance with characteristic times well corresponding to the long-term phase of the photosynthetic response. We suppose that the VP-induced pH shift is responsible for in the induction of the fast phase, while jasmonate production for the long-term phase of the photosynthetic response. The revealed differences in the systemic response to stressors studied, apparently, reflect two distinct plant adaptation strategies to fast and slow-growing stimuli. The immediate response in the tissue nearest to the damage zone is the most important under a fast-growing stimulus. The fundamentally different situation is under a slowly-growing stimulus which provokes long-term changes in the plant that ensure the preparation of the whole organism for impending environmental changes.

VP: !induces! Apoplast alkalization
VP: !corresponds to! Fast phase of photosynthetic response
Heating: !induces! Jasmonate production
Heating: !corresponds to! Long-term phase of photosynthetic response
Burn: !induces! VP and photosynthetic response
Burn: !attenuates with! Distance
Heating: !induces! Decrease in stomatal conductance