Abscisic acid (ABA) can induce rapid stomatal closure in seed plants, but the action of this hormone on the stomata of fern and lycophyte species remains equivocal. Here, ABA-induced stomatal closure, signaling components, guard cell K+ and Ca2+ fluxes, vacuolar and actin cytoskeleton dynamics, and the permeability coefficient of guard cell protoplasts (Pf) were analyzed in species spanning the diversity of vascular land plants including 11 seed plants, 6 ferns, and 1 lycophyte. We found that all 11 seed plants exhibited ABA-induced stomatal closure, but the fern and lycophyte species did not. ABA-induced hydrogen peroxide elevation was observed in all species, but the signaling pathway downstream of nitric oxide production, including ion channel activation, was only observed in seed plants. In the angiosperm faba bean (Vicia faba), ABA application caused large vacuolar compartments to disaggregate, actin filaments to disintegrate into short fragments and Pf to increase. None of these changes was observed in the guard cells of the fern Matteuccia struthiopteris and lycophyte Selaginella moellendorffii treated with ABA, but a hypertonic osmotic solution did induce stomatal closure in fern and the lycophyte. Our results suggest that there is a major difference in the regulation of stomata between the fern and lycophyte plants and the seed plants. Importantly, these findings have uncovered the physiological and biophysical mechanisms that may have been responsible for the evolution of a stomatal response to ABA in the earliest seed plants.

ABA: !induces! stomatal closure (seed plants)
ABA: !elevates! hydrogen peroxide (all species)
ABA: !activates! ion channels (seed plants)
Vicia faba: !disaggregates! vacuolar compartments
Vicia faba: !disintegrates! actin filaments
Vicia faba: !increases! Pf
Matteuccia struthiopteris: !does not respond to! ABA
Selaginella moellendorffii: !does not respond to! ABA
hypertonic osmotic solution: !induces! stomatal closure (ferns, lycophytes)