Regulation of the plant immune system is important for controlling the specificity and amplitude of responses to pathogens and in preventing growth-inhibiting autoimmunity that leads to reductions in plant fitness. In previous work, we reported that SRFR1, a negative regulator of effector-triggered immunity, interacts with SNC1 and EDS1. When SRFR1 is non-functional in the Arabidopsis accession Col-0, SNC1 levels increase, causing a cascade of events that lead to autoimmunity phenotypes. Previous work showed that some members of the transcriptional co-repressor family TOPLESS interact with SNC1 to repress negative regulators of immunity. Therefore, to explore potential connections between SRFR1 and TOPLESS family members, we took a genetic approach that examined the effect of each TOPLESS member in the srfr1 mutant background. The data indicated that an additive genetic interaction exists between SRFR1 and two members of the TOPLESS family, TPR2 and TPR3, as demonstrated by increased stunting and elevated PR2 expression in srfr1 tpr2 and srfr1 tpr2 tpr3 mutants. Furthermore, the tpr2 mutation intensifies autoimmunity in the auto-active snc1-1 mutant, indicating a novel role of these TOPLESS family members in negatively regulating SNC1-dependent phenotypes. This negative regulation can also be reversed by overexpressing TPR2 in the srfr1 tpr2 background. Similar to TPR1 that positively regulates snc1-1 phenotypes by interacting with SNC1, we show here that TPR2 directly binds the N-terminal domain of SNC1. In addition, TPR2 interacts with TPR1 in vivo, suggesting that the opposite functions of TPR2 and TPR1 are based on titration of SNC1-TPR1 complexes by TPR2 or altered functions of a SNC1-TPR1-TPR2 complex. Thus, this work uncovers diverse functions of individual members of the TOPLESS family in Arabidopsis and provides evidence for the additive effect of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of SNC1.

SRFR1: !interacts with! SNC1
SRFR1: !interacts with! EDS1
TOPLESS: !interacts with! SNC1
TOPLESS: !represses! SRFR1
TPR2: !interacts with! SNC1
TPR2: !interacts with! TPR1
TPR2: !represses! SRFR1