Plant mitochondria are indispensable for plant metabolism and are tightly integrated into cellular homeostasis. This review provides an update on the latest research concerning the organization and operation of plant mitochondrial redox systems, and how they affect cellular metabolism and signaling, plant development, and stress responses. New insights into the organization and operation of mitochondrial energy systems such as the tricarboxylic acid cycle and mitochondrial electron transport chain (mtETC) are discussed. The mtETC produces reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, which can act as signals or lead to cellular damage, and are thus efficiently removed by mitochondrial antioxidant systems, including Mn-superoxide dismutase, ascorbate-glutathione cycle, and thioredoxin-dependent peroxidases. Plant mitochondria are tightly connected with photosynthesis, photorespiration, and cytosolic metabolism, thereby providing redox-balancing. Mitochondrial proteins are targets of extensive post-translational modifications, but their functional significance and how they are added or removed remains unclear. To operate in sync with the whole cell, mitochondria can communicate their functional status via mitochondrial retrograde signaling to change nuclear gene expression, and several recent breakthroughs here are discussed. At a whole organism level, plant mitochondria thus play crucial roles from the first minutes after seed imbibition, supporting meristem activity, growth, and fertility, until senescence of darkened and aged tissue. Finally, plant mitochondria are tightly integrated with cellular and organismal responses to environmental challenges such as drought, salinity, heat, and submergence, but also threats posed by pathogens. Both the major recent advances and outstanding questions are reviewed, which may help future research efforts on plant mitochondria.

mtETC: !produces! Reactive Oxygen and Nitrogen Species 
Mn-superoxide dismutase: !removes! Reactive Oxygen and Nitrogen Species 
Ascorbate-glutathione cycle: !removes! Reactive Oxygen and Nitrogen Species 
Thioredoxin-dependent peroxidases: !removes! Reactive Oxygen and Nitrogen Species 
Mitochondria: !communicates with! Nuclear Gene Expression 
Mitochondria: !integrated with! Photosynthesis 
Mitochondria: !integrated with! Photorespiration 
Mitochondria: !integrated with! Cytosolic Metabolism 
Mitochondria: !integrated with! Cellular and Organismal Responses to Environmental Challenges