Little information is available on the application of marker-trait association (MTA) analysis for traits related to drought tolerance in smooth bromegrass. The objectives of this study were to identify marker loci associated with important agronomic traits and drought tolerance indices as well as fining stable associations in a diverse panel of polycross derived genotypes of smooth bromegrass. Phenotypic evaluations were performed at two irrigation regimes (normal and deficit irrigation) during 2 years; and association analysis was done with 626 SRAP markers. The results of population structure analysis identified three main subpopulations possessing significant genetic differences. Under normal irrigation, 68 and 57 marker-trait associations were identified using general linear model (GLM) and mixed linear mode1 (MLM), respectively. While under deficit irrigation, 61 and 54 markers were associated with the genes controlling the studied traits, based on these two models, respectively. Some of the markers were associated with more than one trait. It was revealed that markers Me1/Em5-11, Me1/Em3-15, and Me5/Em4-7 were consistently linked with drought-tolerance indices. Following marker validation, the MTAs reported in this panel could be useful tools to initiate marker-assisted selection (MAS) and targeted trait introgression of smooth bromegrass under normal and deficit irrigation regimes, and possibly fine mapping and cloning of the underlying genes and QTLs.

Marker-Trait Association: !identifies! Marker loci 
Marker-Trait Association: !associated with! Agronomic traits 
Marker-Trait Association: !associated with! Drought tolerance indices 
Population Structure Analysis: !identified! Three main subpopulations 
General Linear Model: !identified! 68 marker-trait associations 
Mixed Linear Model: !identified! 57 marker-trait associations 
Deficit Irrigation: !identified! 61 marker-trait associations 
Mixed Linear Model: !identified! 54 marker-trait associations 
Markers: !consistently linked with! Drought-tolerance indices