Transcriptomic studies combined with a well annotated genome have laid the foundations for new understanding of molecular processes. Tools which visualise gene expression patterns have further added to these resources. The manual annotation of the Actinidia chinensis (kiwifruit) genome has resulted in a high quality set of 33,044 genes. Here we investigate gene expression patterns in diverse tissues, visualised in an Electronic Fluorescent Pictograph (eFP) browser, to study the relationship of transcription factor (TF) expression using network analysis. Sixty-one samples covering diverse tissues at different developmental time points were selected for RNA-seq analysis and an eFP browser was generated to visualise this dataset. 2839 TFs representing 57 different classes were identified and named. Network analysis of the TF expression patterns separated TFs into 14 different modules. Two modules consisting of 237 TFs were correlated with floral bud and flower development, a further two modules containing 160 TFs were associated with fruit development and maturation. A single module of 480 TFs was associated with ethylene-induced fruit ripening. Three "hub" genes correlated with flower and fruit development consisted of a HAF-like gene central to gynoecium development, an ERF and a DOF gene. Maturing and ripening hub genes included a KNOX gene that was associated with seed maturation, and a GRAS-like TF. This study provides an insight into the complexity of the transcriptional control of flower and fruit development, as well as providing a new resource to the plant community. The Actinidia eFP browser is provided in an accessible format that allows researchers to download and work internally.

Transcriptomic studies: !lay foundations for! molecular processes
Tools: !visualise! gene expression patterns
Actinidia chinensis genome: !annotated to! 33,044 genes
RNA-seq analysis: !generated! eFP browser
TFs: !separated into! 14 modules
HAF-like gene: !central to! gynoecium development
ERF and DOF gene: !associated with! flower and fruit development
KNOX gene: !associated with! seed maturation
GRAS-like TF: !associated with! fruit ripening
eFP browser: !provided in! accessible format