Reproductive isolation is a prerequisite to form and maintain a new species. Multiple prezygotic and postzygotic reproductive isolation barriers have been reported in plants. In the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana conspecific pollen tube precedence controlled by AtLURE1/PRK6-mediated signaling has been recently reported as a major prezygotic reproductive isolation barrier. By accelerating emergence of own pollen tubes from the transmitting tract, A. thaliana ovules promote self-fertilization and thus prevent fertilization by a different species. Taking advantage of a septuple atlure1null mutant, we now report on the role of AtLURE1/PRK6-mediated signaling for micropylar pollen tube guidance. Compared with wild-type (WT) ovules, atlure1null ovules displayed remarkably reduced micropylar pollen tube attraction efficiencies in modified semi-in vivo A. thaliana ovule targeting assays. However, when prk6 mutant pollen tubes were applied, atlure1null ovules showed micropylar attraction efficiencies comparable to that of WT ovules. These findings indicate that AtLURE1/PRK6-mediated signaling regulates micropylar pollen tube attraction in addition to promoting emergence of own pollen tubes from the transmitting tract. Moreover, semi-in vivo ovule targeting competition assays with the same amount of pollen grains from both A. thaliana and Arabidopsis lyrata showed that A. thaliana WT and xiuqiu mutant ovules are mainly targeted by own pollen tubes and that atlure1null mutant ovules are also entered to a large extent by A. lyrata pollen tubes. Taken together, we report that AtLURE1/PRK6-mediated signaling promotes conspecific micropylar pollen tube attraction representing an additional prezygotic isolation barrier.

AtLURE1/PRK6: !promotes! conspecific micropylar pollen tube attraction
AtLURE1/PRK6: !regulates! micropylar pollen tube attraction
AtLURE1/PRK6: !accelerates! emergence of own pollen tubes
A. thaliana ovules: !promote! self-fertilization
A. thaliana ovules: !prevent! fertilization by different species