In chloroplasts of land plants, the thylakoid network is organized into appressed regions called grana stacks and loosely arranged parallel stroma thylakoids. Many factors determining such intricate structural arrangements have been identified so far, including various thylakoid-embedded proteins, and polar lipids that build the thylakoid matrix. Although carotenoids are important components of proteins and the lipid phase of chloroplast membranes, their role in determining the thylakoid network structure remains elusive. We studied 2D and 3D thylakoid network organization in carotenoid-deficient mutants (ccr1-1, lut5-1, szl1-1, and szl1-1npq1-2) of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) to reveal the structural role of carotenoids in the formation and dynamics of the internal chloroplast membrane system. The most significant structural aberrations took place in chloroplasts of the szl1-1 and szl1-1npq1-2 plants. Increased lutein/carotene ratio in these mutants impaired the formation of grana, resulting in a significant decrease in the number of thylakoids used to build a particular stack. Further, combined biochemical and biophysical analyses revealed that hampered grana folding was related to decreased thylakoid membrane fluidity and significant changes in the amount, organization, and phosphorylation status of photosystem (PS) II (PSII) supercomplexes in the szl1-1 and szl1-1npq1-2 plants. Such changes resulted from a synergistic effect of lutein overaccumulation in the lipid matrix and a decreased level of carotenes bound with PS core complexes. Moreover, more rigid membrane in the lutein overaccumulating plants led to binding of Rubisco to the thylakoid surface, additionally providing steric hindrance for the dynamic changes in the level of membrane folding.

carotenoids: !determine! thylakoid network structure
lutein/carotene ratio: !impairs! grana formation
fluidity: !decreases! in mutants
PSII supercomplexes: !change in amount, organization, and phosphorylation status of! in mutants
membrane rigidity: !binds! Rubisco to thylakoid surface