['33634133', 'Floral organ development is fundamental to sexual reproduction in angiosperms.  Many key floral regulators (most of which are transcription factors) have been  identified and shown to modulate floral meristem determinacy and floral organ  identity, but not much is known about the regulation of floral organ growth,  which is a critical process by which organs to achieve appropriate morphologies  and fulfill their functions. Spatial and temporal control of anisotropic cell  expansion following initial cell proliferation is important for organ growth.  Cortical microtubules are well known to have important roles in plant cell polar  growth/expansion and have been reported to guide the growth and shape of sepals  and petals. In this study, we identified two homolog proteins, QWRF1 and QWRF2,  which are essential for floral organ growth and plant fertility. We found  severely deformed morphologies and symmetries of various floral organs as well as  a significant reduction in the seed setting rate in the qwrf1qwrf2 double mutant,  although few flower development defects were seen in qwrf1 or qwrf2 single  mutants. QWRF1 and QWRF2 display similar expression patterns and are both  localized to microtubules in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, we found altered  cortical microtubule organization and arrangements in qwrf1qwrf2 cells,  consistent with abnormal cell expansion in different floral organs, which  eventually led to poor fertility. Our results suggest that QWRF1 and QWRF2 are  likely microtubule-associated proteins with functional redundancy in fertility  and floral organ development, which probably exert their effects via regulation  of cortical microtubules and anisotropic cell expansion.', '2021', 'Front Cell Dev Biol', '10.3389/fcell.2021.634218', 'Zhu']

QWRF1: !localizes to! microtubules 
QWRF2: !localizes to! microtubules 
QWRF1: !interacts with! QWRF2 
QWRF1: !enhances! floral organ growth 
QWRF2: !enhances! floral organ growth 
QWRF1: !represses! fertility 
QWRF2: !represses! fertility