Abscission of plant organs is induced by developmental signals and diverse environmental stimuli and involves multiple regulatory networks, including biotic or abiotic stress-impaired auxin flux in the abscission zone (AZ). Depletion of auxin activates AZ ethylene (ETH) production and triggers acceleration of abscission, a process that requires hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). However, the interaction between these networks and the underlying mechanisms that control abscission are poorly understood. Here, we found that expression of tonoplast intrinsic proteins, which belong to the aquaporin (AQP) family in the AZ was important for tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) pedicel abscission. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and in situ hybridization revealed that SlTIP1;1 was most abundant and specifically present in the tomato pedicel AZ. SlTIP1;1 localized in the plasma membrane and tonoplast. Knockout of SlTIP1;1 resulted in delayed abscission, whereas overexpression of SlTIP1;1 accelerated abscission. Further analysis indicated that SlTIP1;1 mediated abscission via gating of cytoplasmic H2O2 concentrations and osmotic water permeability (Pf). Elevated cytoplasmic levels of H2O2 caused a suppressed auxin signal in the early abscission stage and enhanced ETH production during abscission. Furthermore, we found that increasing Pf was required to enhance the turgor pressure to supply the break force for AZ cell separation. Moreover, we observed that SlERF52 bound directly to the SlTIP1;1 promoter to regulate its expression, demonstrating a positive loop in which cytoplasmic H2O2 activates ETH production, which activates SlERF52. This, in turn, induces SlTIP1;1, which leads to elevated cytoplasmic H2O2 and water influx.

SlTIP1;1: !localizes to! plasma membrane and tonoplast 
SlTIP1;1: !enhances! abscission 
SlTIP1;1: !gates! cytoplasmic H2O2 concentrations 
SlTIP1;1: !regulates! osmotic water permeability 
H2O2: !suppresses! auxin signal 
H2O2: !enhances! ETH production 
ETH: !activates! SlERF52 
SlERF52: !induces! SlTIP1;1