Cotton is a significant economic crop. It is vulnerable to aphids (<i>Aphis gossypii</i> Glovers) during the growth period. Rapid and early detection has become an important means to deal with aphids in cotton. In this study, the visible/near-infrared (Vis/NIR) hyperspectral imaging system (376-1044 nm) and machine learning methods were used to identify aphid infection in cotton leaves. Both tall and short cotton plants (Lumianyan 24) were inoculated with aphids, and the corresponding plants without aphids were used as control. The hyperspectral images (HSIs) were acquired five times at an interval of 5 days. The healthy and infected leaves were used to establish the datasets, with each leaf as a sample. The spectra and RGB images of each cotton leaf were extracted from the hyperspectral images for one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) analysis. The hyperspectral images of each leaf were used for three-dimensional (3D) analysis. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) were used for identification and compared with conventional machine learning methods. For the extracted spectra, 1D CNN had a fine classification performance, and the classification accuracy could reach 98%. For RGB images, 2D CNN had a better classification performance. For HSIs, 3D CNN performed moderately and performed better than 2D CNN. On the whole, CNN performed relatively better than conventional machine learning methods. In the process of 1D, 2D, and 3D CNN visualization, the important wavelength ranges were analyzed in 1D and 3D CNN visualization, and the importance of wavelength ranges and spatial regions were analyzed in 2D and 3D CNN visualization. The overall results in this study illustrated the feasibility of using hyperspectral imaging combined with multi-dimensional CNN to detect aphid infection in cotton leaves, providing a new alternative for pest infection detection in plants.

Hyperspectral Imaging: !detects! Aphid Infection 
Machine Learning Methods: !used to identify! Aphid Infection 
1D CNN: !fine classification performance! Spectra 
2D CNN: !better classification performance! RGB Images 
3D CNN: !moderately better classification performance! HSIs 
1D/3D CNN Visualization: !analyzes! Important Wavelength Ranges 
2D/3D CNN Visualization: !analyzes! Importance of Wavelength Ranges and Spatial Regions