Controlled generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is pivotal for normal plant development and adaptation to changes in the external milieu. One of the major enzymatic sources of ROS in plants are the plasma-membrane localized NADPH oxidases, also called as Respiratory Burst Oxidase Homologs (RBOH). In addition to the six previously reported, seven new members of RBOH gene family were identified in barley using <i>in silico</i> analysis. Conservation of genomic structure and key residues important for catalytic activity and co-factor binding was observed in barley RBOH genes. Phylogenetic analysis of plant RBOHs revealed distinct clades for monocot and dicot RBOH proteins. Hence, we propose to use the rice nomenclature for naming barley RBOH genes. Temporal changes in ROS profiles were observed during barley malting and was accompanied by changes in protein carbonylation, lipid peroxidation, and antioxidant capacity. Among the nine differentially expressed HvRBOHs during various malting stages, HvRBOHA and HvRBOHC showed most significant sustained changes in expression. RNAi knockdown lines with reduced expression of HvRBOHA/C gene exhibited genetic compensation via inducible expression of other gene family members during malting. However, the physiological consequence of reduced expression of HvRBOHA/C manifested as a poor malting quality profile attributable to low alpha-amylase activity and high levels of beta-glucan. We propose that the HvRBOHs play a critical role in modulating the redox milieu during the early stages of malting, which in turn can significantly impact carbohydrate metabolism.

NADPH oxidases: !localizes to! plasma-membrane 
RBOH gene family: !identified in! barley 
RBOH proteins: !distinct clades for! monocot and dicot 
ROS profiles: !observed during! barley malting 
HvRBOHA/C: !differentially expressed during! malting stages 
HvRBOHA/C: !knockdown lines with reduced expression of! genetic compensation 
HvRBOHs: !play a critical role in! modulating redox milieu