The worldwide distribution of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) accessions imposes different types of evolutionary pressures, which contributes to various responses of these accessions to environmental stresses. Responses to drought stress have mostly been studied in the Columbia accession, which is predominantly used in plant research. However, the reactions to drought stress are complex and our understanding of the responses that contribute to maintaining plant growth during mild drought (MD) is very limited. Here, we studied the mechanisms with which natural accessions react to MD at a physiological and molecular level during early leaf development. We documented variations in MD responses among natural accessions and used transcriptome sequencing of a drought-sensitive accession, ICE163, and a drought-insensitive accession, Yeg-1, to gain insights into the mechanisms underlying this discrepancy. This revealed that ICE163 preferentially induces jasmonate- and anthocyanin-related pathways, which are beneficial in biotic stress defense, whereas Yeg-1 has a more pronounced activation of abscisic acid signaling, the classical abiotic stress response. Related physiological traits, including the content of proline, anthocyanins, and reactive oxygen species, stomatal closure, and cellular leaf parameters, were investigated and linked to the transcriptional responses. We can conclude that most of these processes constitute general drought response mechanisms that are regulated similarly in drought-insensitive and -sensitive accessions. However, the capacity to close stomata and maintain cell expansion under MD appeared to be major factors that allow to better sustain leaf growth under MD.

Accession: !responds to! Drought Stress
ICE163: !induces! Jasmonate- and Anthocyanin-related Pathways
Yeg-1: !activates! Abscisic Acid Signaling
Proline: !linked to! Transcriptional Responses
Anthocyanins: !linked to! Transcriptional Responses
Reactive Oxygen Species: !linked to! Transcriptional Responses
Stomatal Closure: !allows! Sustaining Leaf Growth Under MD
Cell Expansion: !allows! Sustaining Leaf Growth Under MD