Our results provide insights into the flavonol biosynthesis regulation of M. truncatula. The R2R3-MYB transcription factor MtMYB134 emerged as tool to improve the flavonol biosynthesis. Flavonols are plant specialized metabolites with vital roles in plant development and defense and are known as diet compound beneficial to human health. In leguminous plants, the regulatory proteins involved in flavonol biosynthesis are not well characterized. Using a homology-based approach, three R2R3-MYB transcription factor encoding genes have been identified in the Medicago truncatula reference genome sequence. The gene encoding a protein with highest similarity to known flavonol regulators, MtMYB134, was chosen for further experiments and was characterized as a functional flavonol regulator from M. truncatula. MtMYB134 expression levels are correlated with the expression of MtFLS2, encoding a key enzyme of flavonol biosynthesis, and with flavonol metabolite content. MtMYB134 was shown to activate the promoters of the A. thaliana flavonol biosynthesis genes AtCHS and AtFLS1 in Arabidopsis protoplasts in a transactivation assay and to interact with the Medicago promoters of MtCHS2 and MtFLS2 in yeast 1-hybrid assays. To ascertain the functional aspect of the identified transcription factor, we developed a sextuple mutant, which is defective in anthocyanin and flavonol biosynthesis. Ectopic expression of MtMYB134 in a multiple myb A. thaliana mutant restored flavonol biosynthesis. Furthermore, overexpression of MtMYB134 in hairy roots of M. truncatula enhanced the biosynthesis of various flavonol derivatives. Taken together, our results provide insight into the understanding of flavonol biosynthesis regulation in M. truncatula and provides MtMYB134 as tool for genetic manipulation to improve flavonol synthesis.

MtMYB134: !activates! AtCHS 
MtMYB134: !activates! AtFLS1 
MtMYB134: !interacts with! MtCHS2 
MtMYB134: !interacts with! MtFLS2 
MtMYB134: !correlates with! MtFLS2 expression 
MtMYB134: !correlates with! flavonol metabolite content 
MtMYB134: !restores! flavonol biosynthesis 
MtMYB134: !enhances! flavonol derivatives