The in vitro application of rhizosphere microorganisms led to a higher rooting percentage in Pyrus Py12 rootstocks and increased plant growth of Pyrus Py170 and Prunus RP-20. The rooting of fruit tree rootstocks is the most challenging step of the in vitro propagation process. The use of rhizosphere microorganisms to promote in vitro rooting and plant growth as an alternative to the addition of chemical hormones to culture media is proposed in the present study. Explants from two Pyrus (Py170 and Py12) rootstocks and the Prunus RP-20 rootstock were inoculated with Pseudomonas oryzihabitans PGP01, Cladosporium ramotenellum PGP02 and Phoma sp. PGP03 following two different methods to determine their effects on in vitro rooting and plantlet growth. The effects of the microorganisms on the growth of fully developed Py170 and RP-20 plantlets were also studied in vitro. All experiments were conducted using vermiculite to simulate a soil system in vitro. When applied to Py12 shoots, which is a hard-to-root plant material, both C. ramotenellum PGP02 and Phoma sp. PGP03 fungi were able to increase the rooting percentage from 56.25% to 100% following auxin indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) treatment. Thus, the presence of these microorganisms clearly improved root development, inducing a higher number of roots and causing shorter roots. Better overall growth and improved stem growth of treated plants was observed when auxin treatment was replaced by co-culture with microorganisms. A root growth-promoting effect was observed on RP-20 plantlets after inoculation with C. ramotenellum PGP02, while P. oryzihabitans PGP01 increased root numbers for both Py170 and RP-20 and increased root growth over stem growth for RP-20. It was also shown that the three microorganisms P. oryzihabitans PGP01, C. ramotenellum PGP02 and Phoma sp. PGP03 were able to naturally produce auxin, including indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), at different levels. Overall, our results demonstrate that the microorganisms P. oryzihabitans PGP01 and C. ramotenellum PGP02 had beneficial effects on in vitro rooting and plantlet growth and could be applied to in vitro tissue culture as a substitute for IBA.

P. oryzihabitans PGP01: !promotes! root growth 
C. ramotenellum PGP02: !promotes! root growth 
Phoma sp. PGP03: !promotes! root growth 
P. oryzihabitans PGP01: !produces! auxin 
C. ramotenellum PGP02: !produces! auxin 
Phoma sp. PGP03: !produces! auxin