Cigar tobacco is an important economic crop that is widely grown around the world. In recent years, varietal identification has become a frequent problem in germplasm preservation collections, which causes considerable inconvenience and uncertainty in the cataloging and preservation of cigar germplasm resources, in the selection of parental lines for breeding, and in the promotion and use of high quality varieties. Therefore, the use of DNA fingerprints to achieve rapid and accurate identification of varieties can play an important role in germplasm identification and property rights disputes. In this study, we used genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) on 113 cigar tobacco accessions to develop SNP markers. After filtering, 580,942 high-quality SNPs were obtained. We used the 580,942 SNPs to perform principal component analysis (PCA), population structure analysis, and neighbor joining (NJ) cluster analysis on the 113 cigar tobacco accessions. The results showed that the accessions were not completely classified based on their geographical origins, and the genetic backgrounds of these cigar resources are complex and diverse. We further selected from these high-quality SNPs to obtained 163 SNP sites, 133 of which were successfully converted into KASP markers. Finally, 47 core KASP markers and 24 candidate core markers were developed. Using the core markers, we performed variety identification and fingerprinting in 216 cigar germplasm accessions. The results of SNP fingerprinting, 2D barcoding, and genetic analysis of cigar tobacco germplasm in this study provide a scientific basis for screening and identifying high-quality cigar tobacco germplasm, mining important genes, and broadening the basis of cigar tobacco genetics and subsequent breeding work at the molecular level.

GBS: !develops! SNP markers
PCA: !classifies! accessions
NJ: !clusters! accessions
SNPs: !converts to! KASP markers
KASP markers: !identifies! varieties
SNP fingerprinting: !fingerprints! germplasm
2D barcoding: !analyzes! cigar tobacco germplasm
genetic analysis: !provides basis for! screening and identifying high-quality cigar tobacco germplasm