Photosynthesis in leaves generates fixed-carbon resources and essential metabolites that support sink tissues, such as roots. Two of these metabolites, sucrose and auxin, promote growth in root systems, but the explicit connection between photosynthetic activity and control of root architecture has not been explored. Through a mutant screen to identify pathways regulating root system architecture, we identified a mutation in the Arabidopsis thaliana CYCLOPHILIN 38 (CYP38) gene, which causes accumulation of pre-emergent stage lateral roots. CYP38 was previously reported to stabilize photosystem II (PSII) in chloroplasts. CYP38 expression is enriched in shoots, and grafting experiments show that the gene acts non-cell-autonomously to promote lateral root emergence. Growth of wild-type plants under low-light conditions phenocopies the cyp38 lateral root emergence defect, as does the inhibition of PSII-dependent electron transport or Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) production. Importantly, these perturbations to photosynthetic activity rapidly suppress lateral root emergence, which is separate from their effects on shoot size. Supplementary exogenous sucrose largely rescued primary root (PR) growth in cyp38, but not lateral root growth. Auxin (indole-3-acetic acid (IAA)) biosynthesis from tryptophan is dependent on reductant generated during photosynthesis. Consistently, we found that wild-type seedlings grown under low light and cyp38 mutants have highly diminished levels of IAA in root tissues. IAA treatment rescued the cyp38 lateral root defect, revealing that photosynthesis promotes lateral root emergence partly through IAA biosynthesis. These data directly confirm the importance of CYP38-dependent photosynthetic activity in supporting root growth, and define the specific contributions of two metabolites in refining root architecture under light-limited conditions.

CYP38: !stabilizes! PSII
CYP38: !promotes! lateral root emergence
Low-light: !phenocopies! cyp38 lateral root emergence defect
PSII-dependent electron transport: !inhibits! lateral root emergence
NADPH production: !inhibits! lateral root emergence
Sucrose: !rescues! PR growth in cyp38
Tryptophan: !generates! IAA
IAA: !rescues! cyp38 lateral root defect