Jasmonates (JAs) are plant hormones that regulate the biosynthesis of many secondary metabolites, such as hydroxycinnamic acid amides (HCAAs), through jasmonic acid (JA)-responsive transcription factors (TFs). HCAAs are renowned for their role in plant defense against pathogens. The multidrug and toxic compound extrusion transporter DETOXIFICATION18 (DTX18) has been shown to mediate the extracellular accumulation of HCAAs p-coumaroylagmatine (CouAgm) at the plant surface for defense response. However, little is known about the regulatory mechanism of DTX18 gene expression by TFs. Yeast one-hybrid screening using the DTX18 promoter as bait isolated the key positive regulator redox-responsive TF 1 (RRTF1), which is a member of the AP2/ethylene-response factor family of proteins. RRTF1 is a JA-responsive factor that is required for the transcription of the DTX18 gene, and it thus promotes CouAgm secretion at the plant surface. As a result, overexpression of RRTF1 caused increased resistance against the fungus Botrytis cinerea, whereas rrtf1 mutant plants were more susceptible. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the BTB/POZ-MATH (BPM) protein BPM1 as an interacting partner of RRTF1. The BPM family of proteins acts as substrate adaptors of CUL3-based E3 ubiquitin ligases, and we found that only BPM1 and BPM3 were able to interact with RRTF1. In addition, we demonstrated that RRTF1 was subjected to degradation through the 26S proteasome pathway and that JA stabilized RRTF1. Knockout of BPM1 and BPM3 in bpm1/3 double mutants enhanced RRTF1 accumulation and DTX18 gene expression, thus increasing resistance to the fungus B. cinerea. Our results provide a better understanding of the fine-tuned regulation of JA-induced TFs in HCAA accumulation.

Jasmonates: !regulate! biosynthesis
TFs: !respond to! Jasmonates
DTX18: !mediates! HCAA accumulation
RRTF1: !promotes! CouAgm secretion
RRTF1: !interacts with! BPM1/BPM3
JA: !stabilizes! RRTF1
BPM1/BPM3: !degrade! RRTF1
bpm1/3 double mutants: !enhance! RRTF1 accumulation