During drought stress, cellular proteostasis on the one hand and amino acid homeostasis on the other hand are severely challenged, because the decrease in photosynthesis induces massive proteolysis, leading to drastic changes in both the proteome and the free amino acid pool. Thus, we selected progressive drought stress in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) as a model to investigate on a quantitative level the balance between protein and free amino acid homeostasis. We analyzed the mass composition of the leaf proteome based on proteomics datasets, and estimated how many protein molecules are present in a plant cell and its subcellular compartments. In addition, we calculated stress-induced changes in the distribution of individual amino acids between the free and protein-bound pools. Under control conditions, an average Arabidopsis mesophyll cell contains about 25 billion protein molecules, of which 80% are localized in chloroplasts. Severe water deficiency leads to degradation of more than 40% of the leaf protein mass, and thus causes a drastic shift in distribution toward the free amino acid pool. Stress-induced proteolysis of just half of the 340 million RubisCO hexadecamers present in the chloroplasts of a single mesophyll cell doubles the cellular content of free amino acids. A major fraction of the amino acids released from proteins is channeled into synthesis of proline, which is a compatible osmolyte. Complete oxidation of the remaining fraction as an alternative respiratory substrate can fully compensate for the lack of photosynthesis-derived carbohydrates for several hours.

drought stress: !challenges! proteostasis 
drought stress: !challenges! amino acid homeostasis 
Arabidopsis: !selected as! model 
proteomics datasets: !analyzed to! estimate protein molecules 
stress-induced changes: !calculated in! distribution of individual amino acids 
mesophyll cell: !contains! 25 billion protein molecules 
water deficiency: !leads to! degradation of 40% of leaf protein mass 
RubisCO hexadecamers: !degraded to! double cellular content of free amino acids 
amino acids: !channeled into! synthesis of proline 
remaining fraction: !oxidized to! compensate for lack of photosynthesis-derived carbohydrates