In Arabidopsis thaliana, mitochondrial-localized heat-shock cognate protein 70-1 (mtHSC70-1) plays an important role in vegetativegrowth. However, whether mtHSC70-1 affects reproductive growth remains unknown. Here, we found that the mtHSC70-1 gene was expressed in the provascular cells of the embryo proper from the early heart stage onward during embryogenesis. Phenotypic analyses of mthsc70-1 mutants revealed that mtHSC70 deficiency leads to defective embryo development and that this effect is mediated by auxin. In addition to a dwarf phenotype, the mthsc70-1 mutant displayed defects in flower morphology, anther development, and embryogenesis. At early developmental stages, the mthsc70-1 embryos exhibited abnormal cell divisions in both embryo proper and suspensor cells. From heart stage onward, they displayed an abnormal shape such as with no or very small cotyledon protrusions, had aberrant number of cotyledons, or were twisted. These embryo defects were associated with reduced or ectopic expression of auxin responsive reporter DR5rev:GFP. Consistently, the expression of auxin biosynthesis and polar auxin transport genes were markedly altered in mthsc70-1. On the other hand, mitochondrial retrograde regulation (MRR) was enhanced in mthsc70-1. Treatment of wild-type plants with an inhibitor that activates mitochondrial retrograde signaling reduced the expression level of auxin biosynthesis and polar auxin transport genes and induced phenotypes similar to those of mthsc70-1. Taken together, our data reveal that loss of function of mtHSC70-1 induces MRR, which inhibits auxin biosynthesis and polar auxin transport, leading to abnormal auxin gradients and defective embryo development.

mtHSC70-1: !affects! reproductive growth
mtHSC70-1: !localizes to! provascular cells of embryo proper
mtHSC70-1: !enhances! mitochondrial retrograde regulation
mtHSC70-1: !represses! auxin biosynthesis and polar auxin transport
MRR: !inhibits! auxin biosynthesis and polar auxin transport
auxin: !mediates! effect of mtHSC70-1 on embryo development