Lignans/neolignans are generally synthesized from coniferyl alcohol (CA) in the cinnamate/monolignol pathway by oxidation to generate the corresponding radicals with subsequent stereoselective dimerization aided by dirigent proteins (DIRs). Genes encoding oxidases and DIRs for neolignan biosynthesis have not been identified previously. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the DIR AtDP1/AtDIR12 plays an essential role in the 8-O-4' coupling in neolignan biosynthesis by unequivocal structural determination of the compound missing in the atdp1 mutant as a sinapoylcholine (SC)-conjugated neolignan, erythro-3-{4-[2-hydroxy-2-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-1-hydroxymethylethoxy]-3,5-dimethoxyphenyl}acryloylcholine. Phylogenetic analyses showed that AtDP1/AtDIR12 belongs to the DIR-a subfamily composed of DIRs for 8-8' coupling of monolignol radicals. AtDP1/AtDIR12 is specifically expressed in outer integument 1 cells in developing seeds. As a putative oxidase for neolignan biosynthesis, we focused on AtLAC5, a laccase gene coexpressed with AtDP1/AtDIR12. In lac5 mutants, the abundance of feruloylcholine (FC)-conjugated neolignans decreased to a level comparable to those in the atdp1 mutant. In addition, SC/FC-conjugated neolignans were missing in the seeds of mutants defective in SCT/SCPL19, an enzyme that synthesizes SC. These results strongly suggest that AtDP1/AtDIR12 and AtLAC5 are involved in neolignan biosynthesis via SC/FC. A tetrazolium penetration assay showed that seed coat permeability increased in atdp1 mutants, suggesting a protective role of neolignans in A. thaliana seeds.

AtDP1/AtDIR12: !plays essential role in! 8-O-4' coupling 
AtLAC5: !involved in! neolignan biosynthesis 
AtDP1/AtDIR12: !specifically expressed in! outer integument 1 cells 
AtLAC5: !decreases abundance of! feruloylcholine-conjugated neolignans 
SCT/SCPL19: !synthesizes! sinapoylcholine 
AtDP1/AtDIR12 & AtLAC5: !involved in! neolignan biosynthesis via SC/FC 
atdp1 mutants: !increase! seed coat permeability