Root system architecture affects plant drought resistance and other key agronomic traits such as lodging. However, although phenotypic and genomic variation has been extensively analyzed, few field studies have integrated phenotypic and transcriptomic information, particularly for below-ground traits such as root system architecture. Here, we report the phenotypic and transcriptomic landscape of 61 rice (Oryza sativa) accessions with highly diverse below-ground traits grown in an upland field. We found that four principal components explained the phenotypic variation and that accessions could be classified into four subpopulations (indica, aus, japonica and admixed) based on their tiller numbers and crown root diameters. Transcriptome analysis revealed that differentially expressed genes associated with specific subpopulations were enriched with stress response-related genes, suggesting that subpopulations have distinct stress response mechanisms. Root growth was negatively correlated with auxin-inducible genes, suggesting an association between auxin signaling and upland field conditions. A negative correlation between crown root diameter and stress response-related genes suggested that thicker crown root diameter is associated with resistance to mild drought stress. Finally, co-expression network analysis implemented with DNA affinity purification followed by sequencing analysis identified phytohormone signaling networks and key transcription factors negatively regulating crown root diameter. Our datasets provide a useful resource for understanding the genomic and transcriptomic basis of phenotypic variation under upland field conditions.

tiller number: !classifies! subpopulations
stress response-related genes: !enriched in! subpopulations
auxin-inducible genes: !negatively correlated with! root growth
crown root diameter: !negatively correlated with! stress response-related genes
crown root diameter: !negatively regulated by! transcription factors
phytohormone signaling networks: !identified by! co-expression network analysis