The chloroplast genomes of Mediterranean Bupleurum species are reported for the first time. Phylogenetic analysis supports the species as a basal clade of Bupleurum with divergence time at 35.40 Ma. Bupleurum is one of the most species-rich genus with high medicinal value in Apiaceae. Although infrageneric classifications of Bupleurum have been the subject of numerous studies, it still remains controversial. Chloroplast genome information will prove essential in advancing our understanding on phylogenetic study. Here we report cp genomes of two woody Bupleurum species (Bupleurum gibraltaricum and B. fruticosum) endemic to Mediterranean. The complete cp genomes of the two species were 157,303 and 157,391 bp in size, respectively. They encoded 114 unique genes including 30 tRNA genes, 4 rRNA genes and 80 protein coding genes. Genome structure, distributions of SDRs and SSRs, gene content exhibited similarities among Bupleurum species. High variable hotspots were detected in eight intergenic spacers and four genes. Most of genes were under purifying selection with two exceptions: atpF and clpP. The phylogenetic analysis based on 80 coding genes revealed that the genus was divided into 2 distinct clades corresponding to the 2 subgenera (subg. Penninervia, subg. Bupleurum) with divergence time at the end of collision of India with Eurasia. Most species diversified mainly during the later period of uplift of Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. The cp genomes of the two Bupleurum species can be significant complementary to insights into the cp genome characteristics of this genus. The comparative chloroplast genomes and phylogenetic analysis advances our understanding of the evolution of cp genomes and phylogeny in Bupleurum.

Chloroplast genome: !localizes to! Bupleurum species 
Bupleurum species: !diverged at! 35.40 Ma 
Phylogenetic analysis: !revealed! 2 distinct clades 
Uplift of Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau: !corresponds to! species diversification 
Comparative chloroplast genomes: !advances understanding of! cp genome characteristics and phylogeny