Nuclear and plastid (chloroplast) genomes experience different mutation rates, levels of selection, and transmission modes, yet key cellular functions depend on their coordinated interactions. Functionally related proteins often show correlated changes in rates of sequence evolution across a phylogeny [evolutionary rate covariation (ERC)], offering a means to detect previously unidentified suites of coevolving and cofunctional genes. We performed phylogenomic analyses across angiosperm diversity, scanning the nuclear genome for genes that exhibit ERC with plastid genes. As expected, the strongest hits were highly enriched for genes encoding plastid-targeted proteins, providing evidence that cytonuclear interactions affect rates of molecular evolution at genome-wide scales. Many identified nuclear genes functioned in post-transcriptional regulation and the maintenance of protein homeostasis (proteostasis), including protein translation (in both the plastid and cytosol), import, quality control, and turnover. We also identified nuclear genes that exhibit strong signatures of coevolution with the plastid genome, but their encoded proteins lack organellar-targeting annotations, making them candidates for having previously undescribed roles in plastids. In sum, our genome-wide analyses reveal that plastid-nuclear coevolution extends beyond the intimate molecular interactions within chloroplast enzyme complexes and may be driven by frequent rewiring of the machinery responsible for maintenance of plastid proteostasis in angiosperms.

Nuclear genome: !experiences! Different mutation rates
Nuclear genome: !coordinates with! Plastid genome
Functionally related proteins: !show! Correlated changes in rates of sequence evolution
Phylogenomic analyses: !scans for! Genes exhibiting ERC with plastid genes
Strongest hits: !enriched for! Genes encoding plastid-targeted proteins
Nuclear genes: !function in! Post-transcriptional regulation and maintenance of protein homeostasis
Nuclear genes: !exhibit strong signatures of coevolution with! Plastid genome