['33779763', 'During photosynthesis, electrons travel from light-excited chlorophyll molecules  along the electron transport chain to the final electron acceptor nicotinamide  adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) to form NADPH, which fuels the  Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle (CBBC). To allow photosynthetic reactions to occur  flawlessly, a constant resupply of the acceptor NADP is mandatory. Several known  stromal mechanisms aid in balancing the redox poise, but none of them utilizes  the structurally highly similar coenzyme NAD(H). Using Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) as a C3-model, we describe a pathway that employs the stromal enzyme  PHOSPHOGLYCERATE DEHYDROGENASE 3 (PGDH3). We showed that PGDH3 exerts high  NAD(H)-specificity and is active in photosynthesizing chloroplasts. PGDH3  withdrew its substrate 3-PGA directly from the CBBC. As a result, electrons  become diverted from NADPH via the CBBC into the separate NADH redox pool. pgdh3  loss-of-function mutants revealed an overreduced NADP(H) redox pool but a more  oxidized plastid NAD(H) pool compared to wild-type plants. As a result,  photosystem I acceptor side limitation increased in pgdh3. Furthermore, pgdh3  plants displayed delayed CBBC activation, changes in nonphotochemical quenching,  and altered proton motive force partitioning. Our fluctuating light-stress  phenotyping data showed progressing photosystem II damage in pgdh3 mutants,  emphasizing the significance of PGDH3 for plant performance under natural light  environments. In summary, this study reveals an NAD(H)-specific mechanism in the  stroma that aids in balancing the chloroplast redox poise. Consequently, the  stromal NAD(H) pool may provide a promising target to manipulate plant  photosynthesis.', '2021 May 27', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1093/plphys/kiaa117', 'ORCID:']

electrons: !travel from! light-excited chlorophyll molecules 
NADP: !forms! NADPH
PGDH3: !withdraws substrate! 3-PGA
pgdh3: !exerts! NAD(H)-specificity
pgdh3: !reveals! overreduced NADP(H) redox pool
pgdh3: !displays! delayed CBBC activation
pgdh3: !causes! photosystem II damage
stromal NAD(H): !balances! chloroplast redox poise