As the key regulators in BR signaling, BES1 family genes regulate thousands of target genes involved in various development processes. So far, the functions of BES1 family are poorly understood in tomato, and a comprehensive genomic and expressional analysis is worth to conduct for this family. Here, nine SlBES1 family members were identified in tomato and classified into five groups based on the conserved motif, gene structure and phylogenetic analysis. Synteny among tomato, Arabidopsis, pepper and rice were further analyzed to obtain insights into evolutionary characteristics. Several cis-elements related to hormone, stress and plant development were exhibited in the promoter regions of SlBES1 family genes. Subcellular localization showed seven members localized both in the nucleus and cytoplasm, implying the presence of dephosphorylated and phosphorylated form of these seven proteins, furthermore, five of them possessed transcription activation activity whereas the left two functioned as transcriptional repressors. Another two members, however, neither localized in the nucleus nor had transactivation activity. Besides, SlBES1.8 showed flower-specific expression while other members expressed ubiquitously in all organs. Moreover, SlBES1 genes exhibited variational expression in response to nine principal plant hormones. Notably, the expression levels of SlBES1 genes presented a dominant downregulated trend in response to stresses. In this study, we systematically analyzed the genomic characterization of SlBES1 family, together with the analyses of protein functional features and expression patterns, our results lay a foundation for the functional research of SlBES1 family.

BES1 family: !regulates! target genes 
SlBES1 family: !classified into! five groups 
Synteny: !analyzed among! tomato, Arabidopsis, pepper and rice 
Cis-elements: !exhibited in! promoter regions 
Subcellular localization: !localized in! nucleus and cytoplasm 
Transactivation activity: !possessed by! five members 
Expression pattern: !showed flower-specific expression for! SlBES1.8 
Hormone response: !varied in response to! nine principal plant hormones 
Stress response: !downregulated in response to! stresses