['33798552', 'Human macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is an atypical chemokine  implicated in intercellular signaling and innate immunity. MIF orthologs  (MIF/D-DT-like proteins, MDLs) are present throughout the plant kingdom, but  remain experimentally unexplored in these organisms. Here, we provide an in  planta characterization and functional analysis of the three-member gene/protein  MDL family in Arabidopsis thaliana. Subcellular localization experiments  indicated a nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of MDL1 and MDL2, while MDL3 is  localized to peroxisomes. Protein-protein interaction assays revealed the in vivo  formation of MDL1, MDL2, and MDL3 homo-oligomers, as well as the formation of  MDL1-MDL2 hetero-oligomers. Functionally, Arabidopsismdl mutants exhibited a  delayed transition from vegetative to reproductive growth (flowering) under  long-day conditions, but not in a short-day environment. In addition, mdl mutants  were more resistant to colonization by the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas  syringae pv. maculicola. The latter phenotype was compromised by the additional  mutation of SALICYLIC ACID INDUCTION DEFICIENT 2 (SID2), a gene implicated in the  defense-induced biosynthesis of the key signaling molecule salicylic acid.  However, the enhanced antibacterial immunity was not associated with any  constitutive or pathogen-induced alterations in the levels of characteristic  phytohormones or defense-associated metabolites. Interestingly, bacterial  infection triggered relocalization and accumulation of MDL1 and MDL2 at the  peripheral lobes of leaf epidermal cells. Collectively, our data indicate  redundant functionality and a complex interplay between the three chemokine-like  Arabidopsis MDL proteins in the regulation of both developmental and  immune-related processes. These insights expand the comparative cross-kingdom  analysis of MIF/MDL signaling in human and plant systems.', '2021 Jan-Jun', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100611', 'Panstruga']

MIF: !implicated in! intercellular signaling 
MDL1: !localizes to! nucleo-cytoplasmic 
MDL2: !localizes to! nucleo-cytoplasmic 
MDL3: !localizes to! peroxisomes 
MDL1: !interacts with! MDL2 
MDL2: !interacts with! MDL3 
mdl mutants: !delayed transition from! vegetative to reproductive growth 
mdl mutants: !more resistant to! Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola 
SID2 mutation: !compromises! enhanced antibacterial immunity 
bacterial infection: !triggers relocalization of! MDL1 and MDL2