The gynoecium is the most complex organ formed by the flowering plants. It encloses the ovules, provides a surface for pollen contact and self-incompatibility reactions, allows pollen tube growth, and, post fertilization, develops into the fruit. Consequently, the regulation of gynoecium morphogenesis is complex and appropriate timing of this process in part determines reproductive success. However, little is known about the global control of gynoecium development, even though many regulatory genes have been characterized. Here, we characterized dynamic gene expression changes using laser-microdissected gynoecium tissue from four developmental stages in Arabidopsis. We provide a high-resolution map of global expression dynamics during gynoecium morphogenesis and link these to the gynoecium interactome. We reveal groups of genes acting together early and others acting late in morphogenesis. Clustering of co-expressed genes enables comparisons between the leaf, shoot apex, and gynoecium transcriptomes, allowing the dissection of common and distinct regulators. Furthermore, our results lead to the discovery of genes with putative transcription factor activity (B3LF1, -2, DOFLF1), which, when mutated, lead to impaired gynoecium expansion, illustrating that global transcriptome analyses reveal yet unknown developmental regulators. Our data show that genes encoding highly interacting proteins, such as SEPALLATA3, AGAMOUS, and TOPLESS, are expressed evenly during development but switch interactors over time, whereas stage-specific proteins tend to have fewer interactors. Our analysis connects specific transcriptional regulator activities, protein interactions, and underlying metabolic processes, contributing toward a dynamic network model for gynoecium development.

Gene: !affects! Gynoecium morphogenesis 
Gene: !synthesizes! Transcription factor activity 
Gene: !interacts with! SEPALLATA3 
Gene: !interacts with! AGAMOUS 
Gene: !interacts with! TOPLESS 
Gene: !enhances! Protein interactions 
Gene: !represses! Metabolic processes