['33806011', 'Serotonin N-acetyltransferase 1 (SNAT1), the penultimate enzyme for melatonin  biosynthesis has shown N-acetyltransferase activity toward multiple substrates,  including histones, serotonin, and plastid proteins. Under two different light  conditions such as 50 or 100 mumol m(-2) s(-1), a SNAT1-knockout (snat1) mutant of  Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia (Col-0) exhibited small size phenotypes  relative over wild-type (WT) Arabidopsis Col-0. Of note, the small phenotype is  stronger when growing at the 50 mumol m(-2) s(-1), exhibiting a dwarfism phenotype  and delayed flowering. The snat1 Arabidopsis Col-0 accumulated less starch than  the WT Col-0. Moreover, snat1 exhibited lower Lhcb1, Lhcb4, and RBCL protein  levels, compared with the WT Col-0, but no changes in the corresponding  transcripts, suggesting the involvement of melatonin in chloroplast protein  quality control (CPQC). Accordingly, caseinolytic protease (Clp) and chloroplast  heat shock proteins (CpHSPs), two key proteins involved in CPQC, as well as ROS  defense were suppressed in snat1. In contrast, exogenous melatonin treatment  induced expression of Clp, CpHSP, APX1, and GST, but not other growth-related  genes such as DWF4, KS, and IAA1. Finally, the induction of ClpR1, APX1, and GST1  in response to melatonin was inhibited in the mitogen-activated protein kinase  (MAPK) knockdown Arabidopsis (mpk3/6), suggesting that melatonin-mediated CPQC  was mediated, in part, by the MAPK signaling cascade. These results suggest that  melatonin is involved in CPQC, which plays a pivotal role in starch synthesis in  plants.', '2021 Mar 25', 'Antioxidants (Basel)', '10.3390/antiox10040511', 'ORCID:']

SNAT1: !synthesizes! melatonin 
snat1 mutant: !exhibits! small size phenotype 
snat1 mutant: !accumulates less! starch 
snat1 mutant: !suppresses! Lhcb1, Lhcb4, RBCL proteins 
exogenous melatonin: !induces! Clp, CpHSP, APX1, GST 
melatonin: !mediates! CPQC 
MAPK signaling cascade: !mediates! melatonin-mediated CPQC