To examine the effect of mitochondrial function on photosynthesis, wild-type and transgenic Nicotiana tabacum with varying amounts of alternative oxidase (AOX) were treated with different respiratory inhibitors. Initially, each inhibitor increased the reduction state of the chloroplast electron transport chain, most severely in AOX knockdowns and least severely in AOX overexpressors. This indicated that the mitochondrion was a necessary sink for photo-generated reductant, contributing to the 'P700 oxidation capacity' of photosystem I. Initially, the Complex III inhibitor myxothiazol and the mitochondrial ATP synthase inhibitor oligomycin caused an increase in photosystem II regulated non-photochemical quenching not evident with the Complex III inhibitor antimycin A (AA). This indicated that the increased quenching depended upon AA-sensitive cyclic electron transport (CET). Following 12 h with oligomycin, the reduction state of the chloroplast electron transport chain recovered in all plant lines. Recovery was associated with large increases in the protein amount of chloroplast ATP synthase and mitochondrial uncoupling protein. This increased the capacity for photophosphorylation in the absence of oxidative phosphorylation and enabled the mitochondrion to act again as a sink for photo-generated reductant. Comparing the AA and myxothiazol treatments at 12 h showed that CET optimized photosystem I quantum yield, depending upon the P700 oxidation capacity. When this capacity was too high, CET drew electrons away from other sinks, moderating the P700<sup>+</sup> amount. When P700 oxidation capacity was too low, CET acted as an electron overflow, moderating the amount of reduced P700. This study reveals flexible chloroplast-mitochondrion interactions able to overcome lesions in energy metabolism.

AOX: !affects! Reduction state of chloroplast electron transport chain
Myxothiazol: !increases! Photosystem II regulated non-photochemical quenching
Oligomycin: !causes! Increase in photosystem II regulated non-photochemical quenching
ATP synthase: !increases! Capacity for photophosphorylation
Uncoupling protein: !increases! Capacity for photophosphorylation
CET: !optimizes! Photosystem I quantum yield
P700 oxidation capacity: !moderates! P700+ amount