Drought stress induces the formation of cortical aerenchyma in roots, providing drought tolerance by reducing respiration. However, unrestricted aerenchyma formation impedes the radial transport of water through the root's central cylinder; thereby decreasing the water uptake under drought stress. Therefore, exploring the root architectural and anatomical alterations in rice under drought is essential for targeting crop improvement. Drought stress-induced accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) plays a key role in the lysigenous aerenchyma development. However, the influence of nitric oxide (NO) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) in the development of lysigenous aerenchyma under drought has never been studied in rice. The present study examined the effect of ROS and RNS, generated by progressive drought stress, on the lysigenous aerenchyma formation in the roots of contrasting rice genotypes of the Eastern Indo-Gangetic plains (EIGP). As expected, the PEG-induced drought stress stimulated the expression of NADPH oxidase (NOX), thereby promoting the ROS generation in roots of the rice seedlings. Excessive ROS and RNS accumulations in roots affected the membrane lipids, promoting the tissue-specific programmed cell death (PCD) in rice. The activation of the antioxidant defense system played a major role in the ROS and RNS detoxification, thereby restricting the root aerenchyma formation in rice under drought stress. The results also displayed that drought tolerance in rice is associated with the formation of the Casparian strip, which limits the apoplastic flow of water in the water-deficient roots. Overall, our study revealed the association of nitro-oxidative metabolism with PCD and lysigenous aerenchyma formation in the cortical cells of root under drought stress in rice.

Drought stress: !induces! ROS/RNS
NOX: !promotes! ROS generation
ROS/RNS: !affects! membrane lipids
membrane lipids: !promote! PCD
antioxidant defense system: !activates! ROS/RNS detoxification
Casparian strip: !limits! apoplastic flow of water