Analysis of 350 Agrobacterium wgs sequences reveals complex evolutionary history of T-DNA regions Virulent Agrobacterium strains transfer one or more plasmid DNA fragments to plant cells during a well-characterized transformation process. The transferred DNA sequences (T-DNA regions) are delimited by 25 nucleotide long conserved border sequences. Until recently, relatively few T-DNA regions were known. However, due to increased whole genome sequencing efforts, about 400 Agrobacterium sequences have now become available, 350 of which contain T-DNA regions. Detailed analysis identified 92 different T-DNA regions and several new T-DNA genes. T-DNA regions can be divided into three groups. I. Typical Agrobacterium rhizogenes T-DNA regions with rol genes. II. A large group of T-DNA regions with iaa and ipt genes, which can be further subdivided into seven subgroups. III. A small group of unusual T-DNA regions. The evolutionary relation between the T-DNA regions could not be completely elucidated, because of the lack of evolutionary intermediates. Several clusters of highly related structures suggest that evolution of T-DNA regions proceeds by slow, progressive evolution of gene sequences, accompanied by rapid changes in overall structure, due to recombination between T-DNA regions of different origins, and insertion of bacterial insertion sequences (IS). Divergence values for T-DNA genes suggest that they were recruited at different times in evolution. An attempt was made to link T-DNA region evolution to plasmid evolution. The present study provides a solid basis for further studies on T-DNA region diversity and evolution.

T-DNA regions: !divided into! 3 groups
rol genes: !found in! Typical Agrobacterium rhizogenes T-DNA regions
iaa and ipt genes: !found in! large group of T-DNA regions
7 subgroups: !subdivide! large group of T-DNA regions
evolutionary intermediates: !lack of! prevents elucidation of evolutionary relation between T-DNA regions
recombination: !causes! rapid changes in overall structure of T-DNA regions
IS: !inserted into! T-DNA regions
divergence values: !suggest! recruitment of T-DNA genes at different times in evolution
plasmid evolution: !linked to! T-DNA region evolution