Living cover is an important management measure for orchards in China, and has certain influences on soil properties, microorganisms, and the micro-ecological environment. However, there are few studies on the effects of living cover on the soil changes in hazelnut orchards. In this study, we compared the soils of living cover treatments with <i>Vulpia myuros</i> and the soils of no cover treatments, and analyzed the observed changes in soil properties, microorganisms, and microbial functions by using high-throughput ITS rDNA and 16S rRNA gene Illumina sequencing. The results demonstrated that the total organic carbon content in the 20-40 cm deep soils under the living cover treatments increased by 32.87 and 14.82% in May and July, respectively, compared with those under the no cover treatments. The living cover treatment with <i>V. myuros</i> also significantly increased the contents of total phosphorus (TP), total nitrogen (TN), available phosphorus (AP), and available potassium (AK) in the soil samples. Moreover, the influence of seasons was not as significant as that of soil depth. The living cover treatment also significantly improved the soil enzyme activity levels. The results demonstrated that Ascomycota, Mortierellomycota and Basidiomycota were the dominant fungal phyla in all samples, while Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, Acidobacteria, Firmicutes, and Chloroflexi were the dominant bacterial phyla, but the different treatments impacted the compositions of fungal and bacterial communities. Principal component analysis (PCA) showed that living cover with <i>V. myuros</i> significantly changed the soil fungal community structures whereas the bacterial community structures may be more sensitive to seasonal changes. At the microbial functional level, the living cover treatment increased the fungal operational taxonomic units (OTUs) of symbiotrophs and decreased that of pathotrophs. According to this study, we believe that the application of a living cover with <i>V. myuros</i> has a favorable regulating influence on soil properties, microbial communities and microbial function. This treatment can also reduce the use of herbicides, reduce the cost of orchard management, and store more carbon underground to achieve sustainable intensification of production in hazelnut orchards, so it can be considered as a management measure for hazelnut orchards.

Living cover: !increases! Total Organic Carbon 
Living cover: !increases! Total Phosphorus 
Living cover: !increases! Total Nitrogen 
Living cover: !increases! Available Phosphorus 
Living cover: !increases! Available Potassium 
Living cover: !increases! Soil Enzyme Activity 
Living cover: !influences! Fungal Community Structure 
Living cover: !influences! Bacterial Community Structure 
Living cover: !increases! Fungal Symbiotrophs 
Living cover: !decreases! Fungal Pathotrophs