Apomixis is a form of asexual reproduction that produces offspring without the need for combining male and female gametes, and the offspring have the same genetic makeup as the mother. Therefore, apomixis technology has great application potential in plant breeding. To identify the apomixis types and critical period, embryonic development at different flower development stages of Zanthoxylum bungeanum was observed by cytology. The results show that the S3 stage is the critical period of apomixis, during which the nucellar cells develop into an adventitious primordial embryo. Cytological observations showed that the type of apomixis in Z. bungeanum is sporophytic apomixis. Furthermore, miRNA sequencing, miRNA-target gene interaction, dual luciferase reporter assay, and RT-qPCR verification were used to reveal the dynamic regulation of miRNA-target pairs in Z. bungeanum apomixis. The miRNA sequencing identified 96 mature miRNAs, of which 40 were known and 56 were novel. Additionally, 29 differentially expressed miRNAs were screened according to the miRNAs expression levels at the different developmental stages. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analyses showed that the target genes of the differentially expressed miRNAs were mainly enriched in plant hormone signal transduction, RNA biosynthetic process, and response to hormone pathways. During the critical period of apomictic embryonic development, miR172c significantly reduces the expression levels of TOE3 and APETALA 2 (AP2) genes, thereby upregulating the expression of the AGAMOUS gene. A molecular regulation model of miRNA-target pairs was constructed based on their interactions and expression patterns to further understand the role of miRNA-target pairs in apomixis. Our data suggest that miR172c may regulates AGAMOUS expression by inhibiting TOE3 in the critical period of apomixis.

S3 stage: !critical period of! apomixis 
miRNA sequencing: !identifies! 96 mature miRNAs 
differentially expressed miRNAs: !enriched in! plant hormone signal transduction, RNA biosynthetic process, and response to hormone pathways 
miR172c: !reduces expression of! TOE3 and AP2 
miR172c: !upregulates expression of! AGAMOUS