Overexpression of pathogen-induced cysteine-rich transmembrane proteins (PCMs) in Arabidopsis thaliana enhances resistance against biotrophic pathogens and stimulates hypocotyl growth, suggesting a potential role for PCMs in connecting both biological processes. Plants possess a sophisticated immune system to protect themselves against pathogen attack. The defense hormone salicylic acid (SA) is an important player in the plant immune gene regulatory network. Using RNA-seq time series data of Arabidopsis thaliana leaves treated with SA, we identified a largely uncharacterized SA-responsive gene family of eight members that are all activated in response to various pathogens or their immune elicitors and encode small proteins with cysteine-rich transmembrane domains. Based on their nucleotide similarity and chromosomal position, the designated Pathogen-induced Cysteine-rich transMembrane protein (PCM) genes were subdivided into three subgroups consisting of PCM1-3 (subgroup I), PCM4-6 (subgroup II), and PCM7-8 (subgroup III). Of the PCM genes, only PCM4 (also known as PCC1) has previously been implicated in plant immunity. Transient expression assays in Nicotiana benthamiana indicated that most PCM proteins localize to the plasma membrane. Ectopic overexpression of the PCMs in Arabidopsis thaliana resulted in all eight cases in enhanced resistance against the biotrophic oomycete pathogen Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis Noco2. Additionally, overexpression of PCM subgroup I genes conferred enhanced resistance to the hemi-biotrophic bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000. The PCM-overexpression lines were found to be also affected in the expression of genes related to light signaling and development, and accordingly, PCM-overexpressing seedlings displayed elongated hypocotyl growth. These results point to a function of PCMs in both disease resistance and photomorphogenesis, connecting both biological processes, possibly via effects on membrane structure or activity of interacting proteins at the plasma membrane.

PCM: !enhances! Resistance
PCM: !stimulates! Hypocotyl growth
SA: !activates! PCM genes
PCM: !localizes to! Plasma membrane
PCM: !overexpression of! Enhances resistance
PCM: !affects! Light signaling & development
PCM: !connects! Disease resistance & photomorphogenesis