['33856472', 'Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are ubiquitous cofactors in all life and are used in  a wide array of diverse biological processes, including electron transfer chains  and several metabolic pathways. Biosynthesis machineries for Fe-S clusters exist  in plastids, the cytosol, and mitochondria. A single monothiol glutaredoxin (GRX)  is involved in Fe-S cluster assembly in mitochondria of yeast and mammals. In  plants, the role of the mitochondrial homolog GRXS15 has only partially been  characterized. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) grxs15 null mutants are not  viable, but mutants complemented with the variant GRXS15 K83A develop with a  dwarf phenotype similar to the knockdown line GRXS15amiR. In an in-depth  metabolic analysis of the variant and knockdown GRXS15 lines, we show that most  Fe-S cluster-dependent processes are not affected, including biotin biosynthesis,  molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis, the electron transport chain, and aconitase in  the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Instead, we observed an increase in most TCA  cycle intermediates and amino acids, especially pyruvate, glycine, and  branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs). Additionally, we found an accumulation of  branched-chain alpha-keto acids (BCKAs), the first degradation products resulting  from transamination of BCAAs. In wild-type plants, pyruvate, glycine, and BCKAs  are all metabolized through decarboxylation by mitochondrial lipoyl cofactor  (LC)-dependent dehydrogenase complexes. These enzyme complexes are very abundant,  comprising a major sink for LC. Because biosynthesis of LC depends on continuous  Fe-S cluster supply to lipoyl synthase, this could explain why LC-dependent  processes are most sensitive to restricted Fe-S supply in grxs15 mutants.', '2021 Jul 6', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1093/plphys/kiab172', 'ORCID:']

GRXS15: !synthesizes! Fe-S clusters 
GRXS15: !affects! TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids 
GRXS15: !represses! Lipoyl cofactor-dependent dehydrogenase complexes 
Lipoyl cofactor: !enhances! Decarboxylation of pyruvate, glycine, and BCKAs