Among the major phytohormones, the cytokinin exhibits unique features for its ability to positively affect the developmental status of plastids. Even early on in its research, cytokinins were known to promote plastid differentiation and to reduce the loss of chlorophyll in detached leaves. Since the discovery of the components of cytokinin perception and primary signaling, the genes involved in photosynthesis and plastid differentiation have been identified as those directly targeted by type-B response regulators. Furthermore, cytokinins are known to modulate versatile cellular processes such as promoting the division and differentiation of cells and, in concert with auxin, initiating the <i>de novo</i> formation of shoot apical meristem (SAM) in tissue cultures. Yet how cytokinins precisely participate in such diverse cellular phenomena, and how the associated cellular processes are coordinated as a whole, remains unclear. A plausible presumption that would account for the coordinated gene expression is the tight and reciprocal communication between the nucleus and plastid. The fact that cytokinins affect plastid developmental status via gene expression in both the nucleus and plastid is interpreted here to suggest that cytokinin functions as an initiator of anterograde (nucleus-to-plastid) signaling. Based on this viewpoint, we first summarize the physiological relevance of cytokinins to the coordination of plastid differentiation with <i>de novo</i> shoot organogenesis in tissue culture systems. Next, the role of endogenous cytokinins in influencing plastid differentiation within the SAM of intact plants is discussed. Finally, a presumed plastid-derived signal in response to cytokinins for coupled nuclear gene expression is proposed.

Cytokinin: !promotes! Plastid differentiation 
Cytokinin: !reduces! Chlorophyll loss 
Type-B response regulators: !targeted by! Cytokinins 
Cytokinins: !modulate! Cellular processes 
Cytokinins: !initiate! Shoot apical meristem formation 
Nucleus: !communicates with! Plastid 
Cytokinins: !affect! Gene expression in nucleus and plastid 
Cytokinins: !initiate! Anterograde signaling 
Cytokinins: !coordinate! Plastid differentiation and shoot organogenesis 
Plastid: !responds to! Cytokinins