Heat shock factors (Hsfs) and Heat shock proteins (Hsps) belong to an essential group of molecular regulators involved in controlling cellular processes under normal and stress conditions. The role of Hsfs and Hsps is well known in model plant species under diverse stress conditions. While plants Hsfs are vital components of the signal transduction response to maintain cellular homeostasis, Hsps function as chaperones helping to maintain folding of damaged and newly formed proteins during stress conditions. In lettuce (Lactuca sativa), a highly consumed vegetable crop grown in the field and in hydroponic systems, the role of these gene families in response to artificial light is not well characterized. Using a genome-wide analysis approach, we identified 32 Hsfs and 22 small heat shock proteins (LsHsps) in lettuce, some of which do not have orthologs in Arabidopsis, poplar, and rice. LsHsp60s, LsHsp90s, and LsHsp100s are highly conserved among dicot and monocot species. Surprisingly, LsHsp70s have three times more members than Arabidopsis and two times more than rice. Interestingly, the lettuce genome triplication did not contribute to the increased number of LsHsp70s genes. The large number of LsHsp70s was the result of genome tandem duplication. Chromosomal distribution analysis shows larger tandem repeats of LsHsp70s genes in Chr1, Chr7, Chr8, and Chr9. At the transcriptional level, some genes of the LsHsfs, LsHsps, LsHsp60s, and LsHsp70s families were highly responsive to UV and high intensity light stress, in contrast to LsHsp90s and LsHsp100s which did not respond to a light stimulus. Our genome-wide analysis provides a detailed identification of Hsfs and Hsps in lettuce. Chromosomal location and syntenic region analysis together with our transcriptional analysis under different light conditions provide candidate genes for breeding programs aiming to produce lettuce varieties able to grow healthy under hydroponic systems that use artificial light.

Hsfs: !regulate! Cellular processes
Hsps: !maintain folding of! Damaged and newly formed proteins
LsHsfs: !respond to! UV and high intensity light stress
LsHsps: !have orthologs in! Arabidopsis, poplar, and rice
LsHsp70s: !result from! Genome tandem duplication
LsHsp60s: !highly conserved among! Dicot and monocot species
Chromosomal location: !contribute to! Increased number of LsHsp70s genes