It is very important to promote root growth and delay root and leaf senescence, to improve nitrogen absorption and utilization efficiency, and to improve the storage nutrition level of the tree, so as to improve the fruit quality and yield of peach. In this experiment, we compared and analyzed the effects of traditional fertilization and bag-controlled release fertilizer (BCRF) on the growth of shoots and roots, senescence of leaves and roots, and fruit yield and quality. Moreover, the impacts of BCRF on ammonia volatilization, nitrogen utilization rate, fine root turnover, and plant storage nutrients were also investigated. Compared with conventional fertilizer use, the application of BCRF significantly promoted the shoot growth of young peach trees. Additionally, BCRF delayed leaf senescence and increased root activity in autumn. This increased the storage nutrients of the peach tree. Compared with traditional fertilizer, ammonia volatilization reduced to 54.36% under BCRF application situation. BCRF also promoted the occurrence of fine roots and decreased the annual turnover rate. A <sup>15</sup>N tracer test showed that, compared with traditional fertilizer, BCRF nitrogen utilization efficiency increased by 37.73% in peach trees under BCRF treatment significantly. The results from 3 consecutive years showed that the application of BCRF increased the yield of individual plants by 21.35% on average compared to the yield from plants receiving equal amounts of fertilizer applied by spreading (FSA). Thus, BCRF can promote the occurrence of fine roots and decrease the root annual turnover rate in peach trees, and it also improves the utilization efficiency of fertilizer, reduces ammonia volatilization, delays leaf senescence, and enhances storage nutrition, fruit yield, and fruit quality in peach trees.

BCRF: !promotes! shoot growth
BCRF: !delays! leaf senescence
BCRF: !increases! root activity
BCRF: !reduces! ammonia volatilization
BCRF: !increases! nitrogen utilization efficiency
BCRF: !promotes! fine root occurrence
BCRF: !decreases! root annual turnover rate
BCRF: !enhances! storage nutrition
BCRF: !increases! fruit yield
BCRF: !improves! fruit quality