Resveratrol (trans-3,4',5-trihydroxystilbene) is a natural stilbene phytoalexin which is also found to be good for human health. Cultivated peanut (<i>Arachis hypogaea</i> L.), a worldwide important legume crop, is one of the few sources of human's dietary intake of resveratrol. Although the variations of resveratrol contents among peanut varieties were observed, the variations across environments and its underlying genetic basis were poorly investigated. In this study, the resveratrol content in seeds of a recombination inbred line (RIL) population (Zhonghua 6 × Xuhua 13, 186 progenies) were quantified by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method across four environments. Genotypes, environments and genotype × environment interactions significantly influenced the resveratrol contents in the RIL population. A total of 8,114 high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified based on double-digest restriction-site-associated DNA sequencing (ddRADseq) reads. These SNPs were clustered into bins using a reference-based method, which facilitated the construction of high-density genetic map (2,183 loci with a total length of 2,063.55 cM) and the discovery of several chromosome translocations. Through composite interval mapping (CIM), nine additive quantitative trait loci (QTL) for resveratrol contents were identified on chromosomes A01, A07, A08, B04, B05, B06, B07, and B10 with 5.07-8.19% phenotypic variations explained (PVE). Putative genes within their confidential intervals might play roles in diverse primary and secondary metabolic processes. These results laid a foundation for the further genetic dissection of resveratrol content as well as the breeding and production of high-resveratrol peanuts.

Resveratrol: !found in! Peanut 
Cultivated peanut: !produces! Resveratrol 
Genotypes: !affects! Resveratrol content 
SNPs: !clustered into! Bins 
Bins: !facilitated! High-density genetic map 
High-density genetic map: !discovered! Chromosome translocations 
QTL: !identified on! Chromosomes A01, A07, A08, B04, B05, B06, B07, and B10 
Confidential intervals: !contain! Putative genes 
Putative genes: !play roles in! Primary and secondary metabolic processes