Modulation of the gaseous environment using oxygen absorbers and/or silica gel shows potential for enhancing seed longevity through trapping toxic volatiles emitted by seeds during artificial ageing. Volatile profiling using non-invasive gas chromatography-mass spectrometry provides insight into the specific processes occurring during seed ageing. Production of alcohols, aldehydes and ketones, derived from processes such as alcoholic fermentation, lipid peroxidation and Maillard reactions, are known to be dependent on storage temperature and relative humidity, but little is known about the potential modulating role of the gaseous environment, which also affects seed lifespan, on volatile production. Seeds of Lolium perenne (Poaceae), Agrostemma githago (Caryophyllaceae) and Pisum sativum (Fabaceae) were aged under normal atmospheric oxygen conditions and in sealed vials containing either oxygen absorbers, oxygen absorbers and silica gel (equilibrated at 60% RH), or silica gel alone. Seeds of A. githago that were aged in the absence of oxygen maintained higher viability and produced fewer volatiles than seeds aged in air. In addition, seeds of A. githago and L. perenne aged in the presence of silica gel were longer lived than those aged without silica, with no effect on seed moisture content or oxygen concentration in the storage containers, but with silica gel acting as a volatile trap. These results indicate that the use of inexpensive oxygen absorbers and silica gel could improve seed longevity in storage for some species and suggests a potential, and previously unidentified, role for silica gel in ultra-dry storage.

Oxygen absorbers: !enhance! Seed longevity
Volatile profiling: !provides insight into! Processes occurring during seed ageing
Storage temperature/relative humidity: !affects! Production of alcohols, aldehydes and ketones
Gaseous environment: !modulates! Volatile production
Seeds aged in absence of oxygen: !maintain higher viability and produce fewer volatiles than! Seeds aged in air
Silica gel: !acts as a volatile trap and improves seed longevity in storage for some species!