Plant transformation remains the most sought-after technology for functional genomics and crop genetic improvement, especially for introducing specific new traits and to modify or recombine already existing traits. Along with many other agricultural technologies, the global production of genetically engineered crops has steadily grown since they were first introduced 25 years ago. Since the first transfer of DNA into plant cells using Agrobacterium tumefaciens, different transformation methods have enabled rapid advances in molecular breeding approaches to bring crop varieties with novel traits to the market that would be difficult or not possible to achieve with conventional breeding methods. Today, transformation to produce genetically engineered crops is the fastest and most widely adopted technology in agriculture. The rapidly increasing number of sequenced plant genomes and information from functional genomics data to understand gene function, together with novel gene cloning and tissue culture methods, is further accelerating crop improvement and trait development. These advances are welcome and needed to make crops more resilient to climate change and to secure their yield for feeding the increasing human population. Despite the success, transformation remains a bottleneck because many plant species and crop genotypes are recalcitrant to established tissue culture and regeneration conditions, or they show poor transformability. Improvements are possible using morphogenetic transcriptional regulators, but their broader applicability remains to be tested. Advances in genome editing techniques and direct, non-tissue culture-based transformation methods offer alternative approaches to enhance varietal development in other recalcitrant crops. Here, we review recent developments in plant transformation and regeneration, and discuss opportunities for new breeding technologies in agriculture.

Agrobacterium tumefaciens: !transfers! DNA into plant cells 
Molecular breeding: !enables! rapid advances in crop varieties 
Sequenced plant genomes: !provide! information from functional genomics data 
Gene cloning and tissue culture methods: !accelerate! crop improvement and trait development 
Morphogenetic transcriptional regulators: !test! broader applicability 
Genome editing techniques: !offer! alternative approaches to enhance varietal development 
Non-tissue culture-based transformation methods: !enhance! varietal development in recalcitrant crops