For decisions on supplemental lighting a quantitative knowledge of the plants' responses to light under varying conditions is fundamental. In this study, we developed light dose-response curves of growth and morphological traits for <i>Ocimum basilicum</i> L. and examined the effects of light color (blue, red, and white plus far-red) and natural environment (season) on these curves. Four greenhouse experiments were conducted throughout the year to determine the efficiencies of the light regimes on growth and their effects on plant morphology. A special aspect was the photosynthetic efficiency of far-red light. Linear and monomolecular relationships were found for the relationships between plant traits and supplemental light dose. Traits related to biomass productivity increased linearly with light dose whereas some morphological characters showed a saturation behavior. Red light and white plus far-red light were more efficient in plant dry weight production than blue light, and the plants adapted differently to the light qualities: higher biomass under red light was related to a plant architecture more favorable for light capture, i.e., taller plants and bigger leaves. White plus far-red light, on the other hand, increased leaf mass per area (LMA) and light use efficiency (LUE). Blue light resulted in lowest plant light interception and LUE. Considering photosynthetic effects of near-infrared light (PPFD<sub>800</sub>, 400-800 nm) instead of photosynthetic photon flux density (PPFD<sub>700</sub>, 400-700 nm) led to strongly reduced efficiencies. Traits related to photosynthesis such as dry weight, LMA and LUE were particularly affected by PPFD<sub>800</sub>. There were no interactions between the efficiencies of the different light colors and the seasons. Efficiencies of all light regimes were significantly lower during summer compared to spring and winter. Higher dry weight production during summer compared to winter and spring were a consequence of increased light interception rather than changes in LUE. The observed differences in seasonal efficiencies were directly linked to the amount of natural light present as indicated by changes in the ratio of supplemental to natural light.

light: !increases! biomass
light: !affects! plant architecture
light: !enhances! leaf mass per area
light: !influences! light use efficiency
season: !modulates! light efficiencies
natural light: !alters! ratio of supplemental to natural light