['33884686', 'Stromules are dynamic membrane-bound tubular structures that emanate from  plastids. Stromule formation is triggered in response to various stresses and  during plant development, suggesting that stromules may have physiological and  developmental roles in these processes. Despite the possible biological  importance of stromules and their prevalence in green plants, their exact roles  and formation mechanisms remain unclear. To explore these issues, we obtained  Arabidopsis thaliana mutants with excess stromule formation in the leaf epidermis  by microscopy-based screening. Here, we characterized one of these mutants,  stromule biogenesis altered 1 (suba1). suba1 forms plastids with severely altered  morphology in a variety of non-mesophyll tissues, such as leaf epidermis,  hypocotyl epidermis, floral tissues, and pollen grains, but apparently normal  leaf mesophyll chloroplasts. The suba1 mutation causes impaired chloroplast  pigmentation and altered chloroplast ultrastructure in stomatal guard cells, as  well as the aberrant accumulation of lipid droplets and their autophagic  engulfment by the vacuole. The causal defective gene in suba1 is  TRIGALACTOSYLDIACYLGLYCEROL5 (TGD5), which encodes a protein putatively involved  in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-to-plastid lipid trafficking required for the  ER pathway of thylakoid lipid assembly. These findings suggest that a  non-mesophyll-specific mechanism maintains plastid morphology. The distinct  mechanisms maintaining plastid morphology in mesophyll versus non-mesophyll  plastids might be attributable, at least in part, to the differential  contributions of the plastidial and ER pathways of lipid metabolism between  mesophyll and non-mesophyll plastids.', '2021 Jul', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.15287', 'Fujiwara']

Stromules: !form in response to! stresses 
Stromules: !have physiological and developmental roles in! processes 
suba1: !causes impaired chloroplast pigmentation and altered chloroplast ultrastructure in! stomatal guard cells 
TGD5: !encodes a protein involved in! ER-to-plastid lipid trafficking 
mesophyll plastids: !maintained by! plastidial pathway of lipid metabolism 
non-mesophyll plastids: !maintained by! ER pathway of lipid metabolism