Proline accumulation is one of the most common adaptive responses of higher plants against abiotic stresses like drought. It plays multiple roles in osmotic adjustment, cell homeostasis and stress recovery. Genetic regulation of proline accumulation under drought is complex, and transcriptional cascades modulating proline is poorly understood. Here, we employed quadruple mutant (abf1 abf2 abf3 abf4) to dissect the role of ABA-responsive elements (ABREs) binding transcription factors (ABFs) in modulating proline accumulation across varying stress scenarios. ABREs are present across the promoter of the P5CS1 gene, whose upregulation is considered a hallmark for drought inducible proline accumulation. Upon ABA treatment, P5CS1 mRNA expression and proline content in the shoot were significantly higher in Col-0 compared to the quadruple mutant. Similar results were found at 2 h and 3 h after acute dehydration. We quantified proline at different time points after drought stress treatment. The proline content was higher in wild type (Col-0) than the quadruple mutant at the early stage of drought. Notably, the proline accumulation in wild type increased at a slower rate than the quadruple mutant 7 d after drought stress. Besides, the quadruple mutant displayed significant oxidative damage, low tissue turgidity and higher membrane damage under terminal drought stress. Both terminal drought stress and long-term constant water stress revealed substantial differences in growth rate between wild type and quadruple mutant. The study provides evidence that ABFs are involved in drought stress response, such as proline biosynthesis in Arabidopsis.

ABA-responsive elements (ABREs): !bind! ABFs 
ABFs: !modulate! proline accumulation 
ABFs: !regulate! P5CS1 gene 
P5CS1 gene: !upregulates! proline accumulation 
Wild type: !accumulates! more proline than quadruple mutant 
Wild type: !increases! proline at slower rate than quadruple mutant 
Quadruple mutant: !displays! oxidative damage, low tissue turgidity and higher membrane damage 
Wild type: !exhibits! faster growth rate than quadruple mutant