Global food insecurity concerns due to climate change, emphasizes the need to focus on the sensitivity of sorghum to climate change and potential crop improvement strategies available, which is discussed in the current review to promote climate-smart agriculture. Climate change effects immensely disturb the global agricultural systems by reducing crop production. Changes in extreme weather and climate events such as high-temperature episodes and extreme rainfalls events, droughts, flooding adversely affect the production of staple food crops, posing threat to ecosystem resilience. The resulting crop losses lead to food insecurity and poverty and question the sustainable livelihoods of small farmer communities, particularly in developing countries. In view of this, it is essential to focus and adapt climate-resilient food crops which need lower inputs and produce sustainable yields through various biotic and abiotic stress-tolerant traits. Sorghum, "the camel of cereals", is one such climate-resilient food crop that is less sensitive to climate change vulnerabilities and also an important staple food in many parts of Asia and Africa. It is a rainfed crop and provides many essential nutrients. Understanding sorghum's sensitivity to climate change provides scope for improvement of the crop both in terms of quantity and quality and alleviates food and feed security in future climate change scenarios. Thus, the current review focused on understanding the sensitivity of sorghum crop to various stress events due to climate change and throws light on different crop improvement strategies available to pave the way for climate-smart agriculture.

Climate Change: !affects! Sorghum 
Sorghum: !provides! Nutrients 
Climate Change: !adversely affects! Crop Production 
Crop Production: !leads to! Food Insecurity 
Food Insecurity: !poses threat to! Ecosystem Resilience 
Ecosystem Resilience: !questions! Sustainable Livelihoods 
Sustainable Livelihoods: !particularly affects! Developing Countries 
Developing Countries: !requires! Climate-Resilient Food Crops 
Climate-Resilient Food Crops: !need! Lower Inputs 
Lower Inputs: !produce! Sustainable Yields 
Sustainable Yields: !alleviates! Food and Feed Security