The plants endomembrane system of the cellular compartments with its complex membrane trafficking network facilitates transport of macromolecules. The endomembrane dynamics are essential for maintaining basic and specific cellular functions including adaptation to the extracellular environment. The plant vacuole serves as a reservoir for nutrients and toxic metabolites and performs detoxification processes to maintain cellular homeostasis. The overexpression of AlRab7, a vesicle trafficking gene from Aeluropus lagopoides, improved germination and growth and reduced ionic and oxidative stress in transgenics. Moreover, the root and shoot of transgenic tobacco showed differential accumulation of phytohormone ABA and IAA with different ionic stresses. The improved growth (root and shoot length) can be co-related with higher IAA accumulation with NaCl stress. The low Na<sup>+</sup> /K<sup>+</sup> ratio with different NaCl stress treatments indicates better ion homeostasis in transgenics. Furthermore, the increased stomatal density and higher number of open stomata on both leaf surfaces in transgenics during NaCl stress suggest better gaseous exchange/functioning of guard cells. The maintained or increased superoxide dismutase, catalase, ascorbate peroxidase, guaiacol peroxidase, and glutathione reductase antioxidative enzyme activities suggest that an extensive reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging system was triggered to detoxify cellular ROS, which remained at low levels in transgenics during the different stress treatments. Our results suggest that the AlRab7 transgenic tobacco ameliorates ionic stress by facilitating differential and selective ion transport at vacuolar membrane regulating hormone signaling, ROS homeostasis, stomatal development, and movement.

AlRab7: !improves! Germination and Growth
AlRab7: !reduces! Ionic and Oxidative Stress
AlRab7: !regulates! Hormone Signaling
AlRab7: !scavenges! Reactive Oxygen Species
AlRab7: !facilitates! Differential and Selective Ion Transport