A major obstacle for orchid (Orchidaceae) breeding and production is a long juvenile phase before orchid reproductive development. The molecular basis for prolonged vegetative growth in orchids remains largely unclear despite many efforts to clarify the relevant mechanisms. In this study, we report functional characterization of Dendrobium Orchid TERMINAL FLOWER1 (DOTFL1), an ortholog of TFL1 in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), from the orchid Dendrobium Chao Praya Smile. DOTFL1 is highly expressed in pseudobulbs and the shoot apical meristem (SAM) before and during the floral transition, but is downregulated in inflorescence apices and open flowers. Ectopic expression of DOTFL1 rescues the early-flowering and terminal-flower phenotypes of tfl1-20 in Arabidopsis. Overexpression of DOTFL1 in Dendrobium orchids delays flowering and produces defective inflorescence meristems and flowers with vegetative traits, whereas knockdown of DOTFL1 accelerates flowering and perturbs the maintenance of the inflorescence meristem. Notably, DOTFL1 suppresses orchid flowering and associated pseudobulb formation during the floral transition. We further reveal that two orchid MADS-box transcription factors, Dendrobium Orchid SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS 1 (DOSOC1) and AGAMOUS-LIKE 24 (DOAGL24), could interact with each other and bind to the CArG-box motif at DOTFL1, implying a regulatory hierarchy similar to their counterparts in Arabidopsis. Taken together, our findings suggest that DOTFL1 promotes vegetative growth, modulates successive developmental events required for reproductive success in Dendrobium orchids, and may have evolved with a previously unknown role in controlling pseudobulb formation in the Orchidaceae family.

DOTFL1: !highly expressed in! pseudobulbs and SAM 
DOTFL1: !downregulated in! inflorescence apices and open flowers 
DOTFL1: !rescues! tfl1-20 phenotype 
DOTFL1: !overexpression delays! flowering 
DOTFL1: !knockdown accelerates! flowering 
DOTFL1: !suppresses! orchid flowering and pseudobulb formation 
DOSOC1: !interacts with! DOAGL24 
DOSOC1/DOAGL24: !bind to! CArG-box motif at DOTFL1