Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) quality control processes recognize and eliminate misfolded proteins to maintain cellular protein homeostasis and prevent the accumulation of defective proteins in the secretory pathway. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins carry a glycolipid modification, which provides an efficient ER export signal and potentially prevents the entry into ER-associated degradation (ERAD), which is one of the major pathways for clearance of terminally misfolded proteins from the ER. Here, we analyzed the degradation routes of different misfolded glycoproteins carrying a C-terminal GPI-attachment signal peptide in Arabidopsis thaliana. We found that a fusion protein consisting of the misfolded extracellular domain from Arabidopsis STRUBBELIG and the GPI-anchor attachment sequence of COBRA1 was efficiently targeted to hydroxymethylglutaryl reductase degradation protein 1 complex-mediated ERAD without the detectable attachment of a GPI anchor. Non-native variants of the GPI-anchored lipid transfer protein 1 (LTPG1) that lack a severely misfolded domain, on the other hand, are modified with a GPI anchor and targeted to the vacuole for degradation. Impaired processing of the GPI-anchoring signal peptide by mutation of the cleavage site or in a GPI-transamidase-compromised mutant caused ER retention and routed the non-native LTPG1 to ERAD. Collectively, these results indicate that for severely misfolded proteins, ER quality control processes are dominant over ER export. For less severely misfolded proteins, the GPI anchor provides an efficient ER export signal resulting in transport to the vacuole.

GPI-anchored proteins: !provide efficient ER export signal!
Misfolded proteins: !recognized and eliminated by! ER quality control processes 
Misfolded extracellular domain: !targeted to! hydroxymethylglutaryl reductase degradation protein 1 complex-mediated ERAD 
Non-native variants of GPI-anchored lipid transfer protein 1: !modified with! GPI anchor 
GPI-anchoring signal peptide: !processed by! cleavage site 
GPI-transamidase-compromised mutant: !causes ER retention of! non-native LTPG1