Breeding exploits novel allelic combinations assured by meiotic recombination. Barley (Hordeum vulgare) single pollen nucleus genotyping enables measurement of meiotic recombination rates in gametes before fertilization without the need for segregating populations. However, so far, established methods rely on whole-genome amplification of every single pollen nucleus due to their limited DNA content, thus restricting the number of analyzed samples. In this study, high-throughput measurements of meiotic recombination rates in barley pollen nuclei without whole-genome amplification were performed through a Crystal Digital PCR<sup>TM</sup> -based genotyping assay. Meiotic recombination rates within two centromeric and two distal chromosomal intervals were measured in hybrid plants by genotyping a total of >42 000 individual pollen nuclei (up to 4900 nuclei analyzed per plant). Determined recombination frequencies in pollen nuclei were similar to frequencies in segregating populations. We improved the efficiency of the genotyping by pretreating the pollen nuclei with a thermostable restriction enzyme. Additional opportunities for a higher sample throughput and a further increase of the genotyping efficiency are presented and discussed. Taken together, single barley pollen nucleus genotyping based on Crystal Digital PCR<sup>TM</sup> enables reliable, rapid and high-throughput meiotic recombination measurements within defined chromosomal intervals of intraspecific hybrid plants. The successful encapsulation of nuclei from a range of species with different nuclear and genome sizes suggests that the proposed method is broadly applicable to genotyping single nuclei.

Breeding: !exploits! Novel Allelic Combinations 
Meiotic Recombination: !measured in! Gametes 
Whole-Genome Amplification: !restricts! Number of Analyzed Samples 
Crystal Digital PCR<sup>TM</sup>: !enables! Meiotic Recombination Measurements 
Thermostable Restriction Enzyme: !improves! Genotyping Efficiency 
Single Nuclei: !genotyped with! Crystal Digital PCR<sup>TM</sup>