['33963081', 'Nitrogen (N) is an essential nutrient that affects multiple plant developmental  processes, including flowering. As flowering requires resources to develop sink  tissues for reproduction, nutrient availability is tightly linked to this  process. Low N levels accelerate floral transition; however, the molecular  mechanisms underlying this response are not well understood. Here, we identify  the FLOWERING BHLH 4 (FBH4) transcription factor as a key regulator of  N-responsive flowering in Arabidopsis Low N-induced early flowering is  compromised in fbh quadruple mutants. We found that FBH4 is a highly  phosphorylated protein and that FBH4 phosphorylation levels decrease under low N  conditions. In addition, decreased phosphorylation promotes FBH4 nuclear  localization and transcriptional activation of the direct target CONSTANS (CO)  and downstream florigen FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) genes. Moreover, we demonstrate  that the evolutionarily conserved cellular fuel sensor SNF1-RELATED KINASE 1  (SnRK1), whose kinase activity is down-regulated under low N conditions, directly  phosphorylates FBH4. SnRK1 negatively regulates CO and FT transcript levels under  high N conditions. Together, these results reveal a mechanism by which N levels  may fine-tune FBH4 nuclear localization by adjusting the phosphorylation state to  modulate flowering time. In addition to its role in flowering regulation, we also  showed that FBH4 was involved in low N-induced up-regulation of nutrient  recycling and remobilization-related gene expression. Thus, our findings provide  insight into N-responsive growth phase transitions and optimization of plant  fitness under nutrient-limited conditions.', '2021 May 11', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.2022942118', 'ORCID:']

N: !affects! flowering
FBH4: !localizes to! nucleus
FBH4: !interacts with! SnRK1
SnRK1: !enhances! FBH4 phosphorylation
FBH4: !represses! CO and FT transcript levels
FBH4: !synthesizes! nutrient recycling and remobilization-related gene expression