Kinesin (KIN) as a motor protein is a versatile nano-machine and involved in diverse essential processes in plant growth and development. However, the kinesin gene family has not been identified in watermelon, a valued and nutritious fruit, and yet their functions have not been characterized. Especially, their involvement in early fruit development, which directly determines the size, shape, yield and quality of the watermelon fruit, remains unclear. In this study, we performed a whole-genome investigation and comprehensive analysis of kinesin genes in C. lanatus. In total, 48 kinesins were identified and categorized into 10 kinesin subfamilies groups based on phylogenetic analysis. Their uneven distribution on 11 chromosomes was revealed by distribution analysis. Conserved motif analysis showed that the ATP-binding motif of kinesins was conserved within all subfamilies, but not the microtubule-binding motif. 10 segmental duplication pairs genes were detected by the syntenic and phylogenetic approaches, which showed the expansion of the kinesin gene family in C. lanatus genome during evolution. Moreover, 5 ClKINs genes are specifically and abundantly expressed in early fruit developmental stages according to comprehensive expression profile analysis, implying their critical regulatory roles during early fruit development. Our data also demonstrated that the majority of kinesin genes were responsive to plant hormones, revealing their potential involvement in the signaling pathways of plant hormones. Kinesin gene family in watermelon was comprehensively analyzed in this study, which establishes a foundation for further functional investigation of C. lanatus kinesin genes and provides novel insights into their biological functions. In addition, these results also provide useful information for understanding the relationship between plant hormone and kinesin genes in C. lanatus.

KIN: !involved in! diverse essential processes
KIN: !unevenly distributed on! 11 chromosomes
KIN: !expanded during evolution! segmental duplication pairs genes
KIN: !specifically and abundantly expressed in! early fruit developmental stages
KIN: !responsive to! plant hormones
KIN: !potentially involved in! signaling pathways of plant hormones