Nitrogen (N) is an important nutrient for plant growth, development, and agricultural production. Nitrogen stress could induce epigenetic changes in plants. In our research, overexpression of the OsNAR2.1 line was used as a testing target in rice plants with high nitrogen-use efficiency to study the changes of rice methylation and growth in respond of the endogenous and external nitrogen stress. Our results showed that external N deficiency could decrease seed N content and plant growth of the overexpression line. During the filial growth, we found that the low parent seed nitrogen (LPSN) in the overexpression line could lead to a decrease in the filial seed nitrogen content, total plant nitrogen content, yield, and OsNAR2.1 expression (28, 35, 23, and 55%, respectively) compared with high parent seed nitrogen (HPSN) in high nitrogen external supply. However, such decreases were not observed in wild type. Furthermore, methylation sequencing results showed that LPSN caused massive gene methylation changes, which enriched in over 20 GO pathways in the filial overexpression line, and the expression of OsNAR2.1 in LPSN filial overexpression plants was significantly reduced compared to HPSN filial plants in high external N, which was not shown in wild type. We suggest that the parent seed nitrogen content decreased induced DNA methylation changes at the epigenetic level and significantly decreased the expression of OsNAR2.1, resulting in a heritable phenotype of N deficiency over two generations of the overexpression line.

Nitrogen: !affects! Plant growth
Nitrogen: !induces! Epigenetic changes
OsNAR2.1: !decreases! Seed N content
OsNAR2.1: !reduces! Plant growth
Low Parent Seed Nitrogen: !decreases! Filial seed nitrogen content
Low Parent Seed Nitrogen: !decreases! Total plant nitrogen content
Low Parent Seed Nitrogen: !decreases! Yield
Low Parent Seed Nitrogen: !decreases! OsNAR2.1 expression
Low Parent Seed Nitrogen: !causes! Massive gene methylation changes
Low Parent Seed Nitrogen: !reduces! Expression of OsNAR2.1