The identification of chromosomes among Avena species have been studied by C-banding and in situ hybridization. However, the complicated results from several cytogenetic nomenclatures for identifying oat chromosomes are often contradictory. A universal karyotyping nomenclature system for precise chromosome identification and comparative evolutionary studies would be essential for genus Avena based on the recently released genome sequences of hexaploid and diploid Avena species. Tandem repetitive sequences were predicted and physically located on chromosomal regions of the released Avena sativa OT3098 genome assembly v1. Eight new oligonucleotide (oligo) probes for sequential fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) were designed and then applied for chromosome karyotyping on mitotic metaphase spreads of A. brevis, A. nuda, A. wiestii, A. ventricosa, A. fatua, and A. sativa species. We established a high-resolution standard karyotype of A. sativa based on the distinct FISH signals of multiple oligo probes. FISH painting with bulked oligos, based on wheat-barley collinear regions, was used to validate the linkage group assignment for individual A. sativa chromosomes. We integrated our new Oligo-FISH based karyotype system with earlier karyotype nomenclatures through sequential C-banding and FISH methods, then subsequently determined the precise breakage points of some chromosome translocations in A. sativa. This new universal chromosome identification system will be a powerful tool for describing the genetic diversity, chromosomal rearrangements and evolutionary relationships among Avena species by comparative cytogenetic and genomic approaches.

C-banding: !identifies! chromosomes
in situ hybridization: !identifies! chromosomes
Avena species: !have! complicated results
Oligo probes: !applied to! chromosome karyotyping
FISH signals: !distinguish! A. sativa chromosomes
Wheat-barley collinear regions: !validate! linkage group assignment
C-banding & FISH: !integrate! earlier nomenclatures
Breakage points: !determined by! translocations