['33986761', 'Severe drought stress can delay maize silk emergence relative to the pollen  shedding period, resulting in poor fertilization and reduced grain yield. Methods  to minimize the delay in silking could thus improve yield stability. An  Arabidopsis enhancer-tagged carboxylesterase 20 (AtCXE20) line was identified in  a drought tolerance screen. Ectopic expression of AtCXE20 in Arabidopsis and  maize resulted in phenotypes characteristic of strigolactone (SL)-deficient  mutants, including increased branching and tillering, decreased plant height,  delayed senescence, hyposensitivity to ethylene, and reduced flavonols. Maize  silk growth was increased by AtCXE20 overexpression, and this phenotype was  partially complemented by exogenous SL treatments. In drought conditions, the  transgenic maize plants silked earlier than controls and had decreased  anthesis-silking intervals. The purified recombinant AtCXE20 protein bound SL in  vitro, as indicated by SL inhibiting AtCXE20 esterase activity and altering  AtCXE20 intrinsic fluorescence. Homology modeling of the AtCXE20  three-dimensional (3D) protein structure revealed a large hydrophobic binding  pocket capable of accommodating, but not hydrolyzing SLs. The AtCXE20 protein  concentration in transgenic maize tissues was determined by mass spectrometry to  be in the micromolar range, well-above known endogenous SL concentrations. These  results best support a mechanism where ectopic expression of AtCXE20 with a  strong promoter effectively lowers the concentration of free SL by sequestration.  This study revealed an agriculturally important role for SL in maize silk growth  and provided a new approach for altering SL levels in plants.', '2021', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2021.639401', 'Habben']

AtCXE20: !enhances! silk growth 
AtCXE20: !binds! SL 
AtCXE20: !interacts with! maize 
AtCXE20: !represses! plant height 
AtCXE20: !synthesizes! branching and tillering 
AtCXE20: !affects! anthesis-silking intervals 
AtCXE20: !localizes to! transgenic maize tissues