Sterols are biologically important molecules that serve as membrane fluidity regulators and precursors of signaling molecules, either endogenous or involved in biotic interactions. There is currently no model of their biosynthesis pathways in brown algae. Here, we benefit from the availability of genome data and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) sterol profiling using a database of internal standards to build such a model. We expand the set of identified sterols in 11 species of red, brown, and green macroalgae and integrate these new data with genomic data. Our analyses suggest that some metabolic reactions may be conserved despite the loss of canonical eukaryotic enzymes, like the sterol side-chain reductase (SSR). Our findings are consistent with the principle of metabolic pathway drift through enzymatic replacement and show that cholesterol synthesis from cycloartenol may be a widespread but variable pathway among chlorophyllian eukaryotes. Among the factors contributing to this variability, one could be the recruitment of cholesterol biosynthetic intermediates to make signaling molecules, such as the mozukulins. These compounds were found in some brown algae belonging to Ectocarpales, and we here provide a first mozukulin biosynthetic model. Our results demonstrate that integrative approaches can already be used to infer experimentally testable models, which will be useful to further investigate the biological roles of those newly identified algal pathways.

Sterols: !serve as! membrane fluidity regulators 
GC-MS sterol profiling: !uses! database of internal standards 
Metabolic reactions: !may be conserved despite! loss of canonical eukaryotic enzymes 
Cholesterol synthesis: !may be a widespread but variable pathway among! chlorophyllian eukaryotes 
Recruitment of cholesterol biosynthetic intermediates: !may make! signaling molecules 
Mozukulins: !were found in! some brown algae 
Integrative approaches: !can be used to infer! experimentally testable models