The pervasive presence of nitric oxide (NO) in cells and its role in modifying cystein residues through protein S-nitrosylation is a remarkable redox based signalling mechanism regulating a variety of cellular processes. S-NITROSOGLUTATHIONE REDUCTASE (GSNOR) governs NO bioavailability by the breakdown of S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), fine-tunes NO signalling and controls total cellular S-nitrosylated proteins. Most of the published data on GSNOR functional analysis is based on the model plant Arabidopsis with no previous report for its effect on in vitro regeneration of tissue cultured plants. Moreover, the effect of GSNOR overexpression (O.E) on tomato growth, development and disease resistance remains enigmatic. Here we show that SlGSNOR O.E in tomato alters multiple developmental programs from in vitro culture establishment to plant growth and fruit set. Moreover, constitutive SlGSNOR O.E in tomato showed enhanced resistance against early blight (EB) disease caused by Alternaria solani and reduction in hypersensitive response (HR)-mediated cell death after Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (Pst DC3000) infiltrations. High GSNOR transcript levels led to the inhibition of in vitro shoot proliferation in transformed explants as revealed by the fluorescence microscopy after YFP labelling. Transgenic tomato lines overexpressing SlGSNOR showed defective phenotypes exhibiting stunted plant growth and bushy-type plants due to loss of apical dominance, along with reduced seed germination and delayed flowering. Furthermore, SlGSNOR O.E plants exhibited altered leaf arrangement, fruit shape and modified locules number in tomato fruit. These findings give a novel insight into a multifaceted regulatory role of SlGSNOR in tomato plant development, reproduction and response to pathogens.

GSNOR: !governs! NO bioavailability 
GSNOR: !fine-tunes! NO signalling 
GSNOR: !controls! total cellular S-nitrosylated proteins 
SlGSNOR O.E: !alters! multiple developmental programs 
SlGSNOR O.E: !enhances! resistance against EB disease 
SlGSNOR O.E: !reduces! HR-mediated cell death 
SlGSNOR O.E: !inhibits! in vitro shoot proliferation 
SlGSNOR O.E: !causes! stunted plant growth 
SlGSNOR O.E: !leads to! bushy-type plants 
SlGSNOR O.E: !reduces! seed germination 
SlGSNOR O.E: !delays! flowering 
SlGSNOR O.E: !alters! leaf arrangement 
SlGSNOR O.E: !modifies! fruit shape 
SlGSNOR O.E: !alters! locules number