Soybean cyst nematode, Heterodera glycines, is one of the most devastating pathogens of soybean and causes severe annual yield losses worldwide. Different soybean varieties exhibit different responses to H. glycines infection at various levels, such as the genomic, transcriptional, proteomic and metabolomic levels. However, there have not yet been any reports of the differential responses of incompatible and compatible soybean varieties infected with H. glycines based on combined metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses. In this study, the incompatible soybean variety PI437654 and three compatible soybean varieties, Williams 82, Zhonghuang 13 and Hefeng 47, were used to clarify the differences in metabolites and transcriptomics before and after the infection with HG1.2.3.5.7. A local metabolite-calibrated database was used to identify potentially differential metabolites, and the differences in metabolites and metabolic pathways were compared between the incompatible and compatible soybean varieties after inoculation with HG1.2.3.5.7. In total, 37 differential metabolites and 20 KEGG metabolic pathways were identified, which were divided into three categories: metabolites/pathways overlapped in the incompatible and compatible soybeans, and metabolites/pathways specific to either the incompatible or compatible soybean varieties. Twelve differential metabolites were found to be involved in predicted KEGG metabolite pathways. Moreover, 14 specific differential metabolites (such as significantly up-regulated nicotine and down-regulated D-aspartic acid) and their associated KEGG pathways (such as the tropane, piperidine and pyridine alkaloid biosynthesis, alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism, sphingolipid metabolism and arginine biosynthesis) were significantly altered and abundantly enriched in the incompatible soybean variety PI437654, and likely played pivotal roles in defending against HG1.2.3.5.7 infection. Three key metabolites (N-acetyltranexamic acid, nicotine and D,L-tryptophan) found to be significantly up-regulated in the incompatible soybean variety PI437654 infected by HG1.2.3.5.7 were classified into two types and used for combined analyses with the transcriptomic expression profiling. Associated genes were predicted, along with the likely corresponding biological processes, cellular components, molecular functions and pathways. Our results not only identified potential novel metabolites and associated genes involved in the incompatible response of PI437654 to soybean cyst nematode HG1.2.3.5.7, but also provided new insights into the interactions between soybeans and soybean cyst nematodes.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Metabolite: !enhances! Pathway 
Metabolite: !represses! Pathway 
Metabolite: !interacts with! Gene 
Gene: !synthesizes! Metabolite