['33999950', "The DEFECTIVE EMBRYO AND MERISTEMS 1 (DEM1) gene encodes a protein of unknown  biochemical function required for meristem formation and seedling development in  tomato, but it was unclear whether DEM1's primary role was in cell division or  alternatively, in defining the identity of meristematic cells. Genome sequence  analysis indicates that flowering plants possess at least two DEM genes.  Arabidopsis has two DEM genes, DEM1 and DEM2, which we show are expressed in  developing embryos and meristems in a punctate pattern that is typical of genes  involved in cell division. Homozygous dem1 dem2 double mutants were not  recovered, and plants carrying a single functional DEM1 allele and no functional  copies of DEM2, i.e. DEM1/dem1 dem2/dem2 plants, exhibit normal development  through to the time of flowering but during male reproductive development,  chromosomes fail to align on the metaphase plate at meiosis II and result in  abnormal numbers of daughter cells following meiosis. Additionally, these plants  show defects in both pollen and embryo sac development, and produce defective  male and female gametes. In contrast, dem1/dem1 DEM2/dem2 plants showed normal  levels of fertility, indicating that DEM2 plays a more important role than DEM1  in gamete viability. The increased importance of DEM2 in gamete viability  correlated with higher mRNA levels of DEM2 compared to DEM1 in most tissues  examined and particularly in the vegetative shoot apex, developing siliques,  pollen and sperm. We also demonstrate that gamete viability depends not only on  the number of functional DEM alleles inherited following meiosis, but also on the  number of functional DEM alleles in the parent plant that undergoes meiosis.  Furthermore, DEM1 interacts with RAS-RELATED NUCLEAR PROTEIN 1 (RAN1) in yeast  two-hybrid and pull-down binding assays, and we show that fluorescent proteins  fused to DEM1 and RAN1 co-localize transiently during male meiosis and pollen  development. In eukaryotes, RAN is a highly conserved GTPase that plays key roles  in cell cycle progression, spindle assembly during cell division, reformation of  the nuclear envelope following cell division, and nucleocytoplasmic transport.  Our results demonstrate that DEM proteins play an essential role in cell division  in plants, most likely through an interaction with RAN1.", '2021 May', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1009561', 'ORCID:']

DEM1: !encodes! protein 
DEM1: !required for! meristem formation 
DEM1: !expressed in! developing embryos 
DEM1: !interacts with! RAN1 
DEM2: !plays more important role than DEM1 in! gamete viability 
DEM2: !higher mRNA levels of! compared to DEM1 
RAN1: !plays key roles in! cell cycle progression 
RAN1: !co-localizes with! DEM1