Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) is constantly attacked by pathogens and insects. The most efficient control strategy is to develop resistant varieties using broad-spectrum gene resources. Several resistance loci harboured by superior varieties have been identified through genome-wide association studies. However, the key genes and/or loci have not been functionally identified. In this study, we identified a locus significantly associated with Verticillium wilt (VW) resistance, and within a 145.5-kb linkage disequilibrium, two non-specific lipid transfer protein genes (named GhnsLTPsA10) were highly expressed under Verticillium pathogen stress. The expression of GhnsLTPsA10 significantly increased in roots upon Verticillium dahliae stress but significantly decreased in leaves under insect attack. Furthermore, GhnsLTPsA10 played antagonistic roles in positively regulating VW and Fusarium wilt resistance and negatively mediating aphid and bollworm resistance in transgenic Arabidopsis and silenced cotton. By combining transcriptomic, histological and physiological analyses, we determined that GhnsLTPsA10-mediated phenylpropanoid metabolism further affected the balance of the downstream metabolic flux of flavonoid and lignin biosynthesis. The divergent expression of GhnsLTPsA10 in roots and leaves coordinated resistance of cotton against fungal pathogens and insects via the redirection of metabolic flux. In addition, GhnsLTPsA10 contributed to reactive oxygen species accumulation. Therefore, in this study, we elucidated the novel function of GhnsLTP and the molecular association between disease resistance and insect resistance, balanced by GhnsLTPsA10. This broadens our knowledge of the biological function of GhnsLTPsA10 in crops and provides a useful locus for genetic improvement of cotton.

GhnsLTPsA10: !enhances! VW and Fusarium wilt resistance
GhnsLTPsA10: !represses! aphid and bollworm resistance
GhnsLTPsA10: !affects! phenylpropanoid metabolism
GhnsLTPsA10: !mediates! metabolic flux of flavonoid and lignin biosynthesis
GhnsLTPsA10: !accumulates! reactive oxygen species