Stomatal movement and density influence plant water use efficiency and thus biomass production. Studies in model plants within controlled environments suggest MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 4 (MPK4) may be crucial for stomatal regulation. We present functional analysis of MPK4 for hybrid aspen (Populus tremula × tremuloides) grown under natural field conditions for several seasons. We provide evidence of the role of MPK4 in the genetic and environmental regulation of stomatal formation, differentiation, signaling, and function; control of the photosynthetic and thermal status of leaves; and growth and acclimation responses. The long-term acclimation manifested as variations in stomatal density and distribution. Short-term acclimation responses were derived from changes in the stomatal aperture. MPK4 localized in the cytoplasm of guard cells (GCs) was a positive regulator of abscisic acid (ABA)-dependent stomatal closure and nitric oxide metabolism in the ABA-dependent pathways, while to a lesser extent, it was involved in ABA-induced hydrogen peroxide accumulation. MPK4 also affected the stomatal aperture through deregulation of microtubule patterns and cell wall structure and composition, including via pectin methyl-esterification, and extensin levels in the GC wall. Deregulation of leaf anatomy (cell compaction) and stomatal movement, together with increased light energy absorption, resulted in altered leaf temperature, photosynthesis, cell death, and biomass accumulation in mpk4 transgenic plants. Divergence between absorbed energy and assimilated energy is a bottleneck, and MPK4 can participate in the control of energy dissipation (thermal effects). Furthermore, MPK4 can participate in balancing the photosynthetic energy distribution via its effective use in growth or redirection to acclimation/defense responses.

MPK4: !localizes to! guard cells
MPK4: !enhances! ABA-dependent stomatal closure
MPK4: !regulates! photosynthetic and thermal status of leaves
MPK4: !affects! stomatal aperture
MPK4: !deregulates! microtubule patterns and cell wall structure
MPK4: !controls! energy dissipation
MPK4: !balances! photosynthetic energy distribution