Nitraria tangutorum is an important desert shrub that shows resistance to drought, salt and wind erosion stresses. It is a central ecological species in its area. Here, we have studied how N. tangutorum has adapted to achieve a successful reproduction strategy. We found that N. tangutorum is mainly pollinated by insects of the Hymenoptera, Diptera and Coleoptera orders. Nitraria tangutorum has very small flowers, with the nectary composed of secretive epidermal cells from which nectar is secreted, located within the inner petals. In addition, analyzing the transcriptome of four successive flower developmental stages revealed that mainly differentially expressed genes associated with flower and nectary development, nectar biosynthesis and secretion, flavonoid biosynthesis, plant hormone signal transduction and plant-pathogen interaction show dynamic expression. From the nectar, we could identify seven important proteins, of which the L-ascorbate oxidase protein was first found in plant nectar. Based on the physiological functions of these proteins, we predict that floral nectar proteins of N. tangutorum play an important role in defending against microbial infestation and scavenging active oxygen. This study revealed that N. tangutorum is an insect-pollinated plant and its nectary is composed of secretive epidermal cells that specialized into secretive trichomes. We identified a large number of differentially expressed genes controlling flower and nectary development, nectar biosynthesis and secretion, flavonoid biosynthesis, plant hormone signal transduction and plant-pathogen interaction. We suggest that proteins present in N. tangutorum nectar may have both an antibacterial and oxygen scavenging effect. These results provide a scientific basis for exploring how the reproductive system of N. tangutorum and other arid-desert plants functions.

N. tangutorum: !pollinated by! insects 
N. tangutorum: !nectary composed of! secretive epidermal cells 
Differentially expressed genes: !associated with! flower and nectar development, nectar biosynthesis and secretion, flavonoid biosynthesis, plant hormone signal transduction and plant-pathogen interaction 
Proteins in nectar: !defend against! microbial infestation and scavenge active oxygen