The plant U-box (PUB) proteins are a family of ubiquitin ligases (E3) enzymes that involved in diverse biological processes, as well as in responses to plant stress response. However, the characteristics and functional divergence of the PUB gene family have not yet been previously studied in the Chinese white pear (Pyrus bretschneideri). In the present study, we identified 62 PbrPUBs in Chinese white pear genome. Based on the phylogenetic relationship, 62 PUB genes were clustered into five groups. The results of conserved motif and gene structure analysis supported the classification phylogenetic tree. The PbrPUB genes were unevenly distribution on 17 pear chromosomes, chromosome 15 housed most member of PUB family, with eight PUB genes. Cis-acting element analysis indicated that PUB genes might participate in diverse biological processes, especially in the response to abiotic stresses. Based on RNA-data from 'Dangshansuli' at seven tissues, we found that PUB genes exhibited diverse of expression level in seven tissues, and qRT-PCR experiment further supported the reliable of RNA-Seq data. To identify candidate genes associated with resistance, we conducted qRT-PCR experiment the expression level of pear seed plant under four abiotic stresses, including: ABA, dehydration, salt and cold treatment. One candidate PUB gene associated with dehydration stress was selected to conduct further functional experiment. Subcellular localization revealed PbrPUB18 protein was located on cell nucleus. Furthermore, heterologous over-expression of PbrPUB18 in Arabidopsis indicated that the over-expression of PbrPUB18 could enhance resistance in drought treatment. In conclusions, we systematically identified the PUB genes in pear, and provided useful knowledge for functional identification of PUB genes in pear.

PUB: !involved in! diverse biological processes
PUB: !clustered into! five groups
PUB: !unevenly distributed on! 17 pear chromosomes
PUB: !participate in! response to abiotic stresses
PUB: !exhibited diverse expression level in! seven tissues
PUB: !associated with! resistance
PUB: !located on! cell nucleus
PUB: !enhance! resistance in drought treatment