Changes in climate are likely to have a negative impact on water availability and soil fertility in many maize-growing agricultural areas. The development of high-throughput phenotyping platforms provides a new prospect for dissecting the dynamic complex plant traits such as abiotic stress tolerance into simple components. The growth phenotypes of 20 maize (<i>Zea mays</i> L.) inbred lines were monitored in a non-invasive way under control, nitrogen, and water limitation as well as under combined nitrogen and water stress using an automated phenotyping system in greenhouse conditions. Thirteen biomass-related and morphophysiological traits were extracted from RGB images acquired at 33 time points covering developmental stages from leaf count 5 at the first imaging date to leaf count 10-13 at the final harvest. For these traits, genetic differences were identified and dynamic developmental trends during different maize growth stages were analyzed. The difference between control and water stress was detectable 3-10 days after the beginning of stress depending on the genotype, while the effect of limited nitrogen supply only induced subtle phenotypic effects. Phenotypic traits showed different response dynamics as well as multiple and changing interaction patterns with stress progression. The estimated biovolume, leaf area index, and color ratios were found to be stress-responsive at different stages of drought stress progression and thereby represent valuable reference indicators in the selection of drought-adaptive genotypes. Furthermore, genotypes could be grouped according to two typical growth dynamic patterns in water stress treatments by c-means clustering analysis. Inbred lines with high drought adaptability across time and development were identified and could serve as a basis for designing novel genotypes with desired, stage-specific growth phenotypes under water stress through pyramiding. Drought recovery potential may play an equal role as drought tolerance in plant drought adaptation.

Gene: !affects! Traits 
Trait: !responds to! Stress 
Genotype: !groups according to! Growth dynamic patterns 
Genotype: !identifies! Drought-adaptive lines 
Genotype: !designs! Novel genotypes