The processabilities and mechanical properties of natural rubber depend greatly on its molecular weight (MW) and molecular weight distribution (MWD). However, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of molecular weight during rubber biosynthesis remain unclear. In the present study, we determined the MW and particle size of latex from 1-year-old virgin trees and 30-year-old regularly tapped trees of the Hevea clones Reyan7-33-97 and RRIM600. The results showed that both the MW and the particle size of latex varied between these two clones and increased with tree age. Latex from RRIM600 trees had a smaller average particle size than that from Reyan7-33-97 trees of the same age. In 1-year-old trees, the Reyan7-33-97 latex displayed a slightly higher MW than that of RRIM600, whereas in 30-year-old trees, the RRIM600 latex had a significantly higher MW than the Reyan7-33-97 latex. Comparative analysis of the transcriptome profiles indicated that the average rubber particle size is negatively correlated with the expression levels of rubber particle associated proteins, and that the high-MW traits of latex are closely correlated with the enhanced expression of isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) monomer-generating pathway genes and downstream allylic diphosphate (APP) initiator-consuming non-rubber pathways. By bioinformatics analysis, we further identified a group of transcription factors that potentially regulate the biosynthesis of IPP. Altogether, our results revealed the potential regulatory mechanisms involving gene expression variations in IPP-generating pathways and the non-rubber isoprenoid pathways, which affect the ratios and contents of IPP and APP initiators, resulting in significant rubber MW variations among same-aged trees of the Hevea clones Reyan7-33-97 and RRIM600. Our findings provide a better understanding of rubber biosynthesis and lay the foundation for genetic improvement of rubber quality in H. brasiliensis.

Tree Age: !affects! MW & Particle Size
IPP-generating Pathways: !enhances! High-MW Traits
Transcription Factors: !regulate! IPP Biosynthesis
Gene Expression Variations: !influence! IPP & APP Ratios