The cell wall is essential for plant survival. Determining the relationship between cell wall structure and function using mutant analysis or overexpressing cell wall-modifying enzymes has been challenging due to the complexity of the cell wall and the appearance of secondary, compensatory effects when individual polymers are modified. In addition, viability of the plants can be severely impacted by wall modification. A useful model system for studying structure-function relationships among extracellular matrix components is the seed coat epidermal cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. These cells synthesize relatively simple, easily accessible, pectin-rich mucilage that is not essential for plant viability. In this study, we expressed enzymes predicted to modify polysaccharide components of mucilage in the apoplast of seed coat epidermal cells and explored their impacts on mucilage. The seed coat epidermal-specific promoter TESTA ABUNDANT2 (TBA2) was used to drive expression of these enzymes to avoid adverse effects in other parts of the plant. Mature transgenic seeds expressing Rhamnogalacturonate lyase A (RglA) or Rhamnogalacturonate lyase B (RglB) that degrade the pectin rhamnogalacturonan-I (RG-I), a major component of mucilage, had greatly reduced mucilage capsules surrounding the seeds and concomitant decreases in the monosaccharides that comprise the RG-I backbone. Degradation of the minor mucilage component homogalacturonan (HG) using the HG-degrading enzymes Pectin lyase A (PLA) or ARABIDOPSIS DEHISCENCE ZONE POLYGALACTURONASE2 (ADPG2) resulted in developing seed coat epidermal cells with disrupted cell-cell adhesion and signs of early cell death. These results demonstrate the feasibility of manipulating the seed coat epidermal cell extracellular matrix using a targeted genetic engineering approach.

TBA2: !drives expression of! enzymes 
RglA/RglB: !degrade! RG-I 
PLA/ADPG2: !degrade! HG 
HG: !disrupts! cell-cell adhesion 
seed coat epidermal cells: !show signs of! early cell death