The <i>waxy</i> (<i>Wx</i>) gene, encoding the granule-bound starch synthase (GBSS), is responsible for amylose biosynthesis and plays a crucial role in defining eating and cooking quality. The waxy locus controls both the non-waxy and waxy rice phenotypes. Rice starch can be altered into various forms by either reducing or increasing the amylose content, depending on consumer preference and region. Low-amylose rice is preferred by consumers because of its softness and sticky appearance. A better way of improving crops other than downregulation and overexpression of a gene or genes may be achieved through the posttranslational modification of sites or regulatory enzymes that regulate them because of their significance. The impact of posttranslational GBSSI modifications on extra-long unit chains (ELCs) remains largely unknown. Numerous studies have been reported on different crops, such as wheat, maize, and barley, but the rice starch granule proteome remains largely unknown. There is a need to improve the yield of low-amylose rice by employing posttranslational modification of <i>Wx</i>, since the market demand is increasing every day in order to meet the market demand for low-amylose rice in the regional area that prefers low-amylose rice, particularly in China. In this review, we have conducted an in-depth review of waxy rice, starch properties, starch biosynthesis, and posttranslational modification of waxy protein to genetically improve starch quality in rice grains.

waxy gene: !encodes! GBSS 
GBSS: !controls! non-waxy and waxy rice phenotypes 
low-amylose rice: !preferred by! consumers 
downregulation/overexpression of gene: !not ideal for! improving crops 
posttranslational modification of sites/enzymes: !may be used to! improve crops 
impact of posttranslational GBSSI modifications: !unknown on! ELCs 
rice starch granule proteome: !largely unknown! 
market demand: !increasing for! low-amylose rice 
waxy protein: !genetically improved by! posttranslational modification