Salt stress is the second most important abiotic stress factor in the world, which seriously affects crop growth, development and grain production. In this study, we performed the first integrated physiological and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteome analysis of wheat seedling leaves under salt stress using a label-free-based quantitative proteomic approach. Salt stress caused significant decrease in seedling height, root length, relative water content and chlorophyll content of wheat seedling leaves, indicating that wheat seedling growth was significantly inhibited under salt stress. The ER proteome analysis identified 233 ER-localized differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) in response to salt stress, including 202 upregulated and 31 downregulated proteins. The upregulated proteins were mainly involved in the oxidation-reduction process, transmembrane transport, the carboxylic acid metabolic process, stress response, the arbohydrate metabolic process and proteolysis, while the downregulated proteins mainly participated in the metabolic process, biological regulation and the cellular process. In particular, salt stress induced significant upregulation of protein disulfide isomerase-like proteins and heat shock proteins and significant downregulation of ribosomal protein abundance. Further transcript expression analysis revealed that half of the detected DAP genes showed a consistent pattern with their protein levels under salt stress. A putative metabolic pathway of ER subproteome of wheat seedling leaves in response to salt stress was proposed, which reveals the potential roles of wheat ER proteome in salt stress response and defense.

Salt stress: !inhibits! wheat seedling growth 
oxidation-reduction process: !upregulated by! salt stress 
transmembrane transport: !upregulated by! salt stress 
carboxylic acid metabolic process: !upregulated by! salt stress 
stress response: !upregulated by! salt stress 
carbohydrate metabolic process: !upregulated by! salt stress 
proteolysis: !upregulated by! salt stress 
metabolic process: !downregulated by! salt stress 
biological regulation: !downregulated by! salt stress 
cellular process: !downregulated by! salt stress 
protein disulfide isomerase-like proteins: !upregulated by! salt stress 
heat shock proteins: !upregulated by! salt stress 
ribosomal protein abundance: !downregulated by! salt stress