We have previously reported that there is a tight link between high transpiration efficiency (TE; shoot biomass per unit water transpired) and restriction of transpiration under high vapor pressure deficit (VPD). In this study, we examine other factors affecting TE among major C4 cereals, namely species' differences, soil type, and source-sink relationships. We found that TE in maize (10 genotypes) was higher overall than in pearl millet (10 genotypes), and somewhat higher than in sorghum (16 genotypes). Overall, transpiration efficiency was higher in high-clay than in sandy soil under high VPD, but the effect was species-dependent with maize showing large variations in TE and yield across different soil types whilst pearl millet showed no variation in TE. This suggested that species fitness was specific to soil type. Removal of cobs drastically decreased TE in maize under high VPD, but removal of panicles did not have the same effect in pearl millet, suggesting that source-sink balance also drove variations in TE. We interpret the differences in TE between species as being accounted for by differences in the capacity to restrict transpiration under high VPD, with breeding history possibly having favored the source-sink balance in maize. This suggests that there is also scope to increase TE in pearl millet and sorghum through breeding. With regards to soil conditions, our results indicate that it appears to be critical to consider hydraulic characteristics and the root system together in order to better understand stomatal regulation and restriction of transpiration under high VPD. Finally, our results highlight the importance of sink strength in regulating transpiration/photosynthesis, and hence in influencing TE.

maize: !higher TE than! pearl millet
maize: !varies with! soil type
pearl millet: !no variation in! TE
maize: !decreased TE with! cob removal
pearl millet: !no decrease in! TE with panicle removal
species: !fitness specific to! soil type
source-sink balance: !drives variations in! TE
breeding history: !favored source-sink balance in! maize
hydraulic characteristics: !critical to consider for! stomatal regulation
sink strength: !important in regulating! transpiration/photosynthesis