Recently, numerous investigations have been done to study graphene and silver nanoparticle in the fields of agriculture and medicine. In the present study, the green synthesis of nanoparticles with two concentrations (0, 40, 60 mM) and their effect on the molecular and biochemical biosynthesis pathway of rosmarinic acid in a new method, low cost, and safe for the environment has been investigated. The transcript levels of key genes in the rosmarinic acid biosynthesis pathway (Tyrosine aminotransferase, rosmarinic acid synthase, and phenylalanine-ammonia lyase) were studied using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Then, the rosmarinic acid content was evaluated using HPLC. The results showed that a concentration-dependent manner was observed in treated plants. At the biochemical level, the use of nanocomposites at concentration of 40 mM showed higher soluble carbohydrate (37%), flavonoids (21%), total phenol (35%) as well as total protein (47%) compared to the control plants. HPLC results showed that rosmarinic acid content in the treated plants with a low concentration of nanocomposite (40 mM) was more affected than plants treated with a high concentration of nanocomposite (60 mM) (26%) and also compared to other treatments. At the molecular level, the result showed that Tyrosine aminotransferase and rosmarinic acid synthase gene expression was positively correlated with both silver nanoparticle concentrations and nanocomposite treatments, but phenylalanine-ammonia lyase gene expression was positively correlated only with nanocomposite at 40 mM concentration. It can conclude that the nanocomposite at low concentration is more likely to induce molecular and biochemical parameters. And also, in the rosmarinic acid biosynthesis pathway, the Tyrosine aminotransferase -derived pathway is more efficient than the phenylalanine-ammonia lyase -derived pathway by causing a nano-elicitor. Therefore, it was concluded that studied elicitor at low concentration, can create plants with higher production capacity.

Tyrosine aminotransferase: !enhances! rosmarinic acid content
rosmarinic acid synthase: !enhances! rosmarinic acid content
phenylalanine-ammonia lyase: !enhances! rosmarinic acid content
nanocomposite (40 mM): !enhances! Tyrosine aminotransferase and rosmarinic acid synthase gene expression
nanocomposite (60 mM): !enhances! Tyrosine aminotransferase gene expression
nanocomposite (40 mM): !enhances! phenylalanine-ammonia lyase gene expression