Epigenetic modifications in DNA bases and histone proteins play important roles in the regulation of gene expression and genome stability. Chemical modification of DNA base (e.g., addition of a methyl group at the fifth carbon of cytosine residue) switches on/off the gene expression during developmental process and environmental stresses. The dynamics of DNA base methylation depends mainly on the activities of the writer/eraser guided by non-coding RNA (ncRNA) and regulated by the developmental/environmental cues. <i>De novo</i> DNA methylation and active demethylation activities control the methylation level and regulate the gene expression. Identification of ncRNA involved in <i>de novo</i> DNA methylation, increased DNA methylation proteins guiding DNA demethylase, and methylation monitoring sequence that helps maintaining a balance between DNA methylation and demethylation is the recent developments that may resolve some of the enigmas. Such discoveries provide a better understanding of the dynamics/functions of DNA base methylation and epigenetic regulation of growth, development, and stress tolerance in crop plants. Identification of epigenetic pathways in animals, their existence/orthologs in plants, and functional validation might improve future strategies for epigenome editing toward climate-resilient, sustainable agriculture in this era of global climate change. The present review discusses the dynamics of DNA methylation (cytosine/adenine) in plants, its functions in regulating gene expression under abiotic/biotic stresses, developmental processes, and genome stability.

DNA base: !methylated by! writer/eraser
writer/eraser: !guided by! non-coding RNA
non-coding RNA: !regulates! gene expression
DNA methylation: !monitored by! methylation monitoring sequence
DNA methylation: !controlled by! de novo DNA methylation and active demethylation activities
DNA methylation: !affects! growth, development, and stress tolerance
DNA methylation: !enhances! genome stability