Phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) are the most abundant phospholipids in membranes. The biosynthesis of phospholipids occurs mainly via the Kennedy pathway. Recent studies have shown that through this pathway, choline (Cho) moieties are synthesized through the methylation of phosphoethanolamine (PEtn) to phosphocholine (PCho) by phospho-base N-methyltransferase. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the phosphoethanolamine/phosphocholine phosphatase1 (PECP1) is described as an enzyme that regulates the synthesis of PCho by decreasing the PEtn level during phosphate starvation to avoid the energy-consuming methylation step. By homology search, we identified a gene (At4g29530) encoding a putative PECP1 homolog from Arabidopsis with a currently unknown biological function in planta. We found that At4g29530 is not induced by phosphate starvation, and is mainly expressed in leaves and flowers. The analysis of null mutants and overexpression lines revealed that PEtn, rather than PCho, is the substrate in vivo, as in PECP1. Hydrophilic interaction chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry analysis of head group metabolites shows an increased PEtn level and decreased ethanolamine level in null mutants. At4g29530 null mutants have an early flowering phenotype, which is corroborated by a higher PC/PE ratio. Furthermore, we found an increased PCho level. The choline level was not changed, so the results corroborate that the PEtn-dependent pathway is the main route for the generation of Cho moieties. We assume that the PEtn-hydrolyzing enzyme participates in fine-tuning the metabolic pathway, and helps prevent the energy-consuming biosynthesis of PCho through the methylation pathway.

Phosphoethanolamine/phosphocholine phosphatase1 (PECP1): !regulates! Synthesis of PCho
At4g29530: !encodes! Putative PECP1 homolog
At4g29530: !mainly expressed in! Leaves and flowers
At4g29530 null mutants: !increase! PEtn level
At4g29530 null mutants: !decrease! Ethanolamine level
At4g29530 null mutants: !have! Early flowering phenotype
At4g29530 null mutants: !increase! PCho level