Multi-parent Advanced Generation Inter-crosses (MAGIC) lines have mosaic genomes that are generated shuffling the genetic material of the founder parents following pre-defined crossing schemes. In cereal crops, these experimental populations have been extensively used to investigate the genetic bases of several traits and dissect the genetic bases of epistasis. In plants, genomic prediction models are usually fitted using either diverse panels of mostly unrelated accessions or individuals of biparental families and several empirical analyses have been conducted to evaluate the predictive ability of models fitted to these populations using different traits. In this paper, we constructed, genotyped and evaluated a barley MAGIC population of 352 individuals developed with a diverse set of eight founder parents showing contrasting phenotypes for grain yield. We combined phenotypic and genotypic information of this MAGIC population to fit several genomic prediction models which were cross-validated to conduct empirical analyses aimed at examining the predictive ability of these models varying the sizes of training populations. Moreover, several methods to optimize the composition of the training population were also applied to this MAGIC population and cross-validated to estimate the resulting predictive ability. Finally, extensive phenotypic data generated in field trials organized across an ample range of water regimes and climatic conditions in the Mediterranean were used to fit and cross-validate multi-environment genomic prediction models including G×E interaction, using both genomic best linear unbiased prediction and reproducing kernel Hilbert space along with a non-linear Gaussian Kernel. Overall, our empirical analyses showed that genomic prediction models trained with a limited number of MAGIC lines can be used to predict grain yield with values of predictive ability that vary from 0.25 to 0.60 and that beyond QTL mapping and analysis of epistatic effects, MAGIC population might be used to successfully fit genomic prediction models. We concluded that for grain yield, the single-environment genomic prediction models examined in this study are equivalent in terms of predictive ability while, in general, multi-environment models that explicitly split marker effects in main and environmental-specific effects outperform simpler multi-environment models.

MAGIC lines: !shuffle! genetic material 
MAGIC population: !genotyped and evaluated! 352 individuals 
Genomic prediction models: !fitted! diverse panels 
Predictive ability: !varies! with size of training population 
G×E interaction: !included in! multi-environment genomic prediction models 
Predictive ability: !ranges from! 0.25 to 0.60