Plants and animals utilize various regulatory mechanisms for control of gene expression during development in different tissues and cell types. About 30 years ago, a new mechanism of gene regulation, termed RNA interference (RNAi), was discovered and proved revolutionary for the mechanistic understanding of gene regulation. Noncoding RNAs, including short, 21-24 nucleotide (nt) long microRNAs (miRNAs), endogenously-generated from MIR genes, are key components of RNAi processes, by post-transcriptionally controlling transcripts with antisense complementarity through either translational repression or mRNA degradation. Since their discovery, important roles in regulation of ontogenetic development, cell differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis in eukaryotes have been elucidated. In plants, miRNAs are known regulatory elements of basic endogenous functions and responses to the environmental stimuli. While the role of miRNAs in regulation of nutrient uptake, circadian clock and general response to abiotic stress is already well understood, a comprehensive understanding of their immune-regulatory roles in response to various biotic stress factors has not yet been achieved. This review summarizes the current understanding of the function of miRNAs and their targets in plants during interaction with microbial pathogens and symbionts. Additionally, we provide a consensus conclusion regarding the typical induction or repression response of conserved miRNA families to pathogenic and beneficial fungi, bacteria, and oomycetes, as well as an outlook of agronomic application of miRNAs in plants. Further investigation of plant miRNAs responsive to microbes, aided with novel sequencing and bioinformatics approaches for discovery and prediction in non-model organisms holds great potential for development of new forms of plant protection.

RNAi: !utilizes! Noncoding RNAs 
miRNAs: !controls! Transcripts 
miRNAs: !regulates! Ontogenetic Development 
miRNAs: !regulates! Cell Differentiation 
miRNAs: !regulates! Proliferation 
miRNAs: !regulates! Apoptosis 
miRNAs: !regulates! Nutrient Uptake 
miRNAs: !regulates! Circadian Clock 
miRNAs: !regulates! Abiotic Stress Response 
miRNAs: !regulates! Biotic Stress Response 
Pathogenic Fungi: !induces! miRNA Families 
Beneficial Fungi: !represses! miRNA Families 
Pathogenic Bacteria: !induces! miRNA Families 
Beneficial Bacteria: !represses! miRNA Families 
Pathogenic Oomycetes: !induces! miRNA Families 
Beneficial Oomycetes: !represses! miRNA Families