Grain mold is a major concern in sorghum [<i>Sorghum bicolor</i> (L.) Moench] production systems, threatening grain quality, safety, and nutritional value as both human food and livestock feed. The crop's nutritional value, environmental resilience, and economic promise poise sorghum for increased acreage, especially in light of the growing pressures of climate change on global food systems. In order to fully take advantage of this potential, sorghum improvement efforts and production systems must be proactive in managing the sorghum grain mold disease complex, which not only jeopardizes agricultural productivity and profitability, but is also the culprit of harmful mycotoxins that warrant substantial public health concern. The robust scholarly literature from the 1980s to the early 2000s yielded valuable insights and key comprehensive reviews of the grain mold disease complex. Nevertheless, there remains a substantial gap in understanding the complex multi-organismal dynamics that underpin the plant-pathogen interactions involved - a gap that must be filled in order to deliver improved germplasm that is not only capable of withstanding the pressures of climate change, but also wields robust resistance to disease and mycotoxin accumulation. The present review seeks to provide an updated perspective of the sorghum grain mold disease complex, bolstered by recent advances in the understanding of the genetic and the biochemical interactions among the fungal pathogens, their corresponding mycotoxins, and the sorghum host. Critical components of the sorghum grain mold disease complex are summarized in narrative format to consolidate a collection of important concepts: (1) the current state of sorghum grain mold in research and production systems; (2) overview of the individual pathogens that contribute to the grain mold complex; (3) the mycotoxin-producing potential of these pathogens on sorghum and other substrates; and (4) a systems biology approach to the understanding of host responses.

Pathogen: !causes! Grain Mold
Pathogen: !produces! Mycotoxins
Sorghum: !resists! Pathogen
Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !localizes to! X
Gene: !interacts with! Y
Gene: !enhances! Z
Gene: !represses! U
Gene: !synthesizes! I