Flavonoids are involved in axillary bud development in upland cotton. The phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis pathways regulate axillary bud growth by promoting the transport of auxin in upland cotton. In cotton production, simplified cultivation and mechanical harvesting are emerging trends that depend on whether the cotton plant type meets production requirements. The axillary bud is an important index of cotton plant-type traits, and the molecular mechanism of axillary bud development in upland cotton has not yet been completely studied. Here, a combined investigation of transcriptome and metabolome analyses in G. hirsutum CCRI 117 at the fourth week (stage 1), fifth week (stage 2) and sixth week (stage 3) after seedling emergence was performed. The metabolome results showed that the total lipid, amino acid and organic acid contents in the first stalk node decreased during axillary bud development. The abundance of 71 metabolites was altered between stage 2 and stage 1, and 32 metabolites exhibited significantly altered abundance between stage 3 and stage 2. According to the correlation analysis of metabolome and transcriptome profiles, we found that phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis pathways exhibit high enrichment degrees of both differential metabolites and differential genes in three stages. Based on the verification of hormone, soluble sugar and flavonoid detection, we propose a model for flavonoid-mediated regulation of axillary bud development in upland cotton, revealing that the decrease in secondary metabolites of phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis is an essential factor to promote the transport of auxin and subsequently promote the growth of axillary buds. Our findings provide novel insights into the regulation of phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis in axillary bud development and could prove useful for cultivating machine-harvested cotton varieties with low axillary buds.

Flavonoids: !regulate! axillary bud growth 
Phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis pathways: !promote! auxin transport 
Secondary metabolites of phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis: !decrease! to promote auxin transport 
Auxin: !promotes! axillary bud growth