Perilla frutescens (L.) Britt is a medicinal and edible plant widely cultivated in Asia. Terpenoids, flavonoids and phenolic acids are the primary source of medicinal ingredients. Glandular trichomes with multicellular structures are known as biochemical cell factories which synthesized specialized metabolites. However, there is currently limited information regarding the site and mechanism of biosynthesis of these constituents in P. frutescens. Herein, we studied morphological features of glandular trichomes, metabolic profiling and transcriptomes through different tissues. Observation of light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy indicated the presence of three distinct glandular trichome types based on their morphological features: peltate, capitate, and digitiform glandular trichomes. The oil of peltate glandular trichomes, collected by custom-made micropipettes and analyzed by LC-MS and GC-MS, contained perillaketone, isoegomaketone, and egomaketone as the major constituents which are consistent with the components of leaves. Metabolomics and transcriptomics were applied to explore the bioactive constituent biosynthesis in the leaves, stem, and root of P. frutescens. Transcriptome sequencing profiles revealed differential regulation of genes related to terpenoids, flavonoids, and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, respectively with most genes expressed highly in leaves. The genes affecting the development of trichomes were preliminarily predicted and discussed. The current study established the morphological and chemical characteristics of glandular trichome types of P. frutescens implying the bioactive constituents were mainly synthesized in peltate glandular trichomes. The genes related to bioactive constituents biosynthesis were explored via transcriptomes, which provided the basis for unraveling the biosynthesis of bioactive constituents in this popular medicinal plant.

glandular trichomes: !synthesize! bioactive constituents
peltate glandular trichomes: !contain! perillaketone, isoegomaketone, and egomaketone
metabolomics/transcriptomics: !reveal! differential regulation of genes related to terpenoids, flavonoids, and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis
genes: !affect! development of trichomes