3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGR) is a key enzyme in the mevalonate (MVA) pathway, which regulates the metabolism of terpenoids in the cytoplasm and determines the type and content of downstream terpenoid metabolites. Results showed that grapevine HMGR family has three members, such as VvHMGR1, VvHMGR2, and VvHMGR3. The expression of VvHMGRs in 'Kyoho' has tissue specificity, for example, VvHMGR1 keeps a higher expression, VvHMGR2 is the lowest, and VvHMGR3 gradually decreases as the fruit development. VvHMGR3 is closely related to CsHMGR1 and GmHMGR9 and has collinearity with CsHMGR2 and GmHMGR4. By the prediction of interaction protein, it can interact with HMG-CoA synthase, MVA kinase, FPP/GGPP synthase, diphosphate mevalonate decarboxylase, and participates in the synthesis and metabolism of terpenoids. VvHMGR3 have similar trends in expression with some of the genes of carotenoid biosynthesis and MEP pathways. VvHMGR3 responds to various environmental and phytohormone stimuli, especially salt stress and ultraviolet (UV) treatment. The expression level of VvHMGRs is diverse in grapes of different colors and aroma. VvHMGRs are significantly higher in yellow varieties than that in red varieties, whereas rose-scented varieties showed significantly higher expression than that of strawberry aroma. The expression level is highest in yellow rose-scented varieties, and the lowest in red strawberry scent varieties, especially 'Summer Black' and 'Fujiminori'. This study confirms the important role of VvHMGR3 in the process of grape fruit coloring and aroma formation, and provided a new idea to explain the loss of grape aroma and poor coloring during production. There may be an additive effect between color and aroma in the HMGR expression aspect.

VvHMGR1: !affects! Metabolism 
VvHMGR2: !localizes to! Cytoplasm 
VvHMGR3: !interacts with! HMG-CoA synthase 
VvHMGR3: !interacts with! MVA kinase 
VvHMGR3: !interacts with! FPP/GGPP synthase 
VvHMGR3: !interacts with! Diphosphate mevalonate decarboxylase 
VvHMGR3: !enhances! Carotenoid biosynthesis 
VvHMGR3: !enhances! MEP pathways 
VvHMGR3: !responds to! Salt stress 
VvHMGR3: !responds to! UV treatment 
VvHMGRs: !higher in! Yellow varieties 
VvHMGRs: !lower in! Red varieties 
VvHMGRs: !highest in! Yellow rose-scented varieties 
VvHMGRs: !lowest in! Red strawberry scent varieties 
VvHMGR3: !additive effect with! Color and