Brassica napus is an essential crop for oil and livestock feed. Eventually, this crop's economic interest is at the most risk due to anthropogenic climate change. DELLA proteins constitute a significant repressor of plant growth to facilitate survival under constant stress conditions. DELLA proteins lack DNA binding domain but can interact with various transcription factors or transcription regulators of different hormonal families. Significant progress has been made on Arabidopsis and cereal plants. However, no comprehensive study regarding DELLA proteins has been delineated in rapeseed. In our study, we have identified 10 BnaDELLA genes. All of the BnaDELLA genes are closely related to five AtDELLA genes, suggesting a relative function and structure. Gene duplication and synteny relationship among Brassica. napus, Arabidopsis. thaliana, Brassica rapa, Brassica oleracea, and Brassica nigra genomes were also predicted to provide valuable insights into the BnaDELLA gene family evolutionary characteristics. Chromosomal mapping revealed the uneven distribution of BnaDELLA genes on eight chromosomes, and site-specific selection assessment proposes BnaDELLA genes purifying selection. The motifs composition in all BnaDELLA genes is inconsistent; however, every BnaDELLA gene contains 12 highly conserved motifs, encoding DELLA and GRAS domains. The two known miRNAs (bna-miR6029 and bna-miR603) targets BnaC07RGA and BnaA09GAI, were also predicted. Furthermore, quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis has exhibited the BnaDELLA genes diverse expression patterns in the root, mature-silique, leaf, flower, flower-bud, stem, shoot-apex, and seed. Additionally, cis-acting element prediction shows that all BnaDELLA genes contain light, stress, and hormone-responsive elements on their promoters. The gene ontology (GO) enrichment report indicated that the BnaDELLA gene family might regulate stress responses. Combine with transcriptomic data used in this study, we detected the distinct expression patterns of BnaDELLA genes under biotic and abiotic stresses. In this study, we investigate evolution feature, genomic structure, miRNAs targets, and expression pattern of the BnaDELLA gene family in B. napus, which enrich our understanding of BnaDELLA genes in B. napus and suggests modulating individual BnaDELLA expression is a promising way to intensify rapeseed stress tolerance and harvest index.

DELLA proteins: !repress! plant growth
DELLA proteins: !interact with! transcription factors
BnaDELLA genes: !related to! AtDELLA genes
BnaDELLA genes: !unevenly distributed on! 8 chromosomes
BnaDELLA genes: !contain! 12 conserved motifs
bna-miR6029 and bna-miR603: !target! BnaC07RGA and BnaA09GAI
BnaDELLA genes: !expressed differently in! root, mature-silique, leaf, flower, flower-bud, stem, shoot-apex, and seed
BnaDELLA genes: !contain! light, stress, and hormone-responsive elements
BnaDELLA genes: !regulate! stress responses