The nucleotide-binding and leucine-rich repeat (NLR) proteins comprise a major class of intracellular immune receptors that are capable of detecting pathogen-derived molecules and activating immunity and cell death in plants. The activity of some NLRs, particularly the Toll-like/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) type, is highly correlated with their nucleocytoplasmic distribution. However, whether and how the nucleocytoplasmic homeostasis of NLRs is coordinated through a bidirectional nuclear shuttling mechanism remains unclear. Here, we identified a nuclear transport receptor, KA120, which is capable of affecting the nucleocytoplasmic distribution of an NLR protein and is essential in preventing its autoactivation. We showed that the ka120 mutant displays an autoimmune phenotype and NLR-induced transcriptome features. Through a targeted genetic screen using an artificial NLR microRNA library, we identified the TIR-NLR gene SNC1 as a genetic interactor of KA120. Loss-of-function snc1 mutations as well as compromising SNC1 protein activities all substantially suppressed ka120-induced autoimmune activation, and the enhanced SNC1 activity upon loss of KA120 functionappeared to occur at the protein level. Overexpression of KA120 efficiently repressed SNC1 activity and led to a nearly complete suppression of the autoimmune phenotype caused by the gain-of-function snc1-1 mutation or SNC1 overexpression in transgenic plants. Further florescence imaging analysis indicated that SNC1 undergoes altered nucleocytoplasmic distribution with significantly reduced nuclear signal when KA120 is constitutively expressed, supporting a role of KA120 in coordinating SNC1 nuclear abundance and activity. Consistently, compromising the SNC1 nuclear level by disrupting the nuclear pore complex could also partially rescue ka120-induced autoimmunity. Collectively, our study demonstrates that KA120 is essential to avoid autoimmune activation in the absence of pathogens and is required to constrain the nuclear activity of SNC1, possibly through coordinating SNC1 nucleocytoplasmic homeostasis as a potential mechanism.

KA120: !affects! nucleocytoplasmic distribution of NLR protein
KA120: !interacts with! SNC1
SNC1: !enhances! ka120-induced autoimmune activation
SNC1: !represses! KA120 activity
KA120: !synthesizes! SNC1 nuclear level