As an important cash crop, the yield of peanut is influenced by soil acidification and pathogen infection. Receptor-like protein kinases play important roles in plant growth, development and stress responses. However, little is known about the number, location, structure, molecular phylogeny, and expression of RLKs in peanut, and no comprehensive analysis of RLKs in the Al stress response in peanuts have been reported. A total of 1311 AhRLKs were identified from the peanut genome. The AhLRR-RLKs and AhLecRLKs were further divided into 24 and 35 subfamilies, respectively. The AhRLKs were randomly distributed across all 20 chromosomes in the peanut. Among these AhRLKs, 9.53% and 61.78% originated from tandem duplications and segmental duplications, respectively. The ka/ks ratios of 96.97% (96/99) of tandem duplication gene pairs and 98.78% (646/654) of segmental duplication gene pairs were less than 1. Among the tested tandem duplication clusters, there were 28 gene conversion events. Moreover, all total of 90 Al-responsive AhRLKs were identified by mining transcriptome data, and they were divided into 7 groups. Most of the Al-responsive AhRLKs that clustered together had similar motifs and evolutionarily conserved structures. The gene expression patterns of these genes in different tissues were further analysed, and tissue-specifically expressed genes, including 14 root-specific Al-responsive AhRLKs were found. In addition, all 90 Al-responsive AhRLKs which were distributed unevenly in the subfamilies of AhRLKs, showed different expression patterns between the two peanut varieties (Al-sensitive and Al-tolerant) under Al stress. In this study, we analysed the RLK gene family in the peanut genome. Segmental duplication events were the main driving force for AhRLK evolution, and most AhRLKs subject to purifying selection. A total of 90 genes were identified as Al-responsive AhRLKs, and the classification, conserved motifs, structures, tissue expression patterns and predicted functions of Al-responsive AhRLKs were further analysed and discussed, revealing their putative roles. This study provides a better understanding of the structures and functions of AhRLKs and Al-responsive AhRLKs.

Receptor-like protein kinases: !influence! Plant growth
AhRLKs: !evolved from! Tandem duplication 
AhRLKs: !evolved from! Segmental duplication 
AhRLKs: !subject to! Purifying selection 
Al-responsive AhRLKs: !identified as! Al-responsive 
Al-sensitive variety: !differs from! Al-tolerant variety