Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) plays an important role in the primary metabolism of higher plants. Several studies have revealed the critical importance of PEPC in the interaction of carbon and nitrogen metabolism. However, the function mechanism of PEPC in nitrogen metabolism is unclear and needs further investigation. This study indicates that transgenic rice expressing the sugarcane C4-PEPC gene displayed shorter primary roots and fewer crown roots at the seedling stage. However, total nitrogen content was significantly higher in transgenic rice than in wild type (WT) plants. Proteomic analysis revealed that there were more differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) responding to nitrogen changes in transgenic rice. In particular, the most enriched pathway "glutathione (GSH) metabolism", which mainly contains GSH S-transferase (GST), was identified in transgenic rice. The expression of endogenous PEPC, GST and several genes involved in the TCA cycle, glycolysis and nitrogen assimilation changed in transgenic rice. Correspondingly, the activity of enzymes including GST, citrate synthase, 6-phosphofructokinase, pyruvate kinase and ferredoxin-dependent glutamate synthase significantly changed. In addition, the levels of organic acids in the TCA cycle and carbohydrates including sucrose, starch and soluble sugar altered in transgenic rice under different nitrogen source concentrations. GSH that the substrate of GST and its components including glutamic acid, cysteine and glycine accumulated in transgenic rice. Moreover, the levels of phytohormones including indoleacetic acid (IAA), zeatin (ZT) and isopentenyladenosine (2ip) were lower in the roots of transgenic rice under total nutrients. Taken together, the phenotype, physiological and biochemical characteristics of transgenic rice expressing C<sub>4</sub>-PEPC were different from WT under different nitrogen levels. Our results revealed the possibility that PEPC affects nitrogen metabolism through regulating GST, which provide a new direction and concepts for the further study of the PEPC functional mechanism in nitrogen metabolism.

PEPC: !affects! Nitrogen metabolism
Transgenic rice: !expresses! Sugarcane C4-PEPC gene
GST: !is identified in! Transgenic rice
GST: !regulates! PEPC
GST: !synthesizes! GSH
TCA cycle: !alters! Organic acids
Carbohydrates: !change in! Transgenic rice
GSH: !accumulates in! Transgenic rice
Phytohormones: !decrease in! Roots of transgenic rice