Anthocyanin was highly accumulated in the leaves of red-leaved poplars; Many structural genes involved in anthocyanin synthesis were significantly up-regulated in 'Quanhong' and 'Xuanhong'; TTG2, HYH, and HY5 may be directly involved in the regulation of anthocyanin synthesis in both red-leaved poplars. The red-leaved poplar cultivars 'Quanhong' and 'Xuanhong' are bud mutations of Populus deltoides cv. 'Zhonglin 2025'. These cultivars are valued for their beautiful shape, lack of flying catkins, and ornamental leaf colors. However, the understanding of the molecular mechanism of anthocyanin accumulation in the leaves of red-leaved poplars is still unclear. Here, we profiled the changes of pigment content, transcriptome and proteome expression in the leaves of three poplar cultivars and the results showed that the ratios of anthocyanin to total chlorophyll in both red-leaved poplars were higher than that in 'Zhonglin 2025', indicating that the anthocyanin was highly accumulated in the leaves of red-leaved poplars. Based on the results of combined transcriptome and proteome analysis, 15 and 11 differentially expressed genes/proteins involved in anthocyanin synthesis were screened in 'Quanhong' and 'Xuanhong', respectively, indicating that the two red-leaved poplar cultivars have slightly different patterns of regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis. Among the 120 transcription factors, 3 (HY5, HYH, and TTG2), may be directly involved in the regulation of anthocyanin synthesis in both red-leaved poplars. This study screens the candidate genes involved in anthocyanin accumulation in the leaves of red-leaved poplars and lays a foundation for further exploring the molecular mechanism of leaf red coloration in red-leaved poplars.

Anthocyanin: !accumulated in! red-leaved poplars
Structural genes: !up-regulated in! 'Quanhong' and 'Xuanhong'
TTG2, HYH, HY5: !involved in regulation of! anthocyanin synthesis
Ratios of anthocyanin: !higher than! total chlorophyll
15/11 differentially expressed genes/proteins: !screened in! 'Quanhong'/'Xuanhong'
120 transcription factors: !screened for! anthocyanin accumulation