Nitrogen-use efficiency (NUE) is a function of N-response and yield that is controlled by many genes and phenotypic parameters that are poorly characterized. This study compiled all known yield-related genes in rice and mined them from the N-responsive microarray data to find 1,064 NUE-related genes. Many of them are novel genes hitherto unreported as related to NUE, including 80 transporters, 235 transcription factors (TFs), 44 MicroRNAs (miRNAs), 91 kinases, and 8 phosphatases. They were further shortlisted to 62 NUE-candidate genes following hierarchical methods, including quantitative trait locus (QTL) co-localization, functional evaluation in the literature, and protein-protein interactions (PPIs). They were localized to chromosomes 1, 3, 5, and 9, of which chromosome 1 with 26 genes emerged as a hotspot for NUE spanning 81% of the chromosomes. Further, co-localization of the NUE genes on NUE-QTLs resolved differences in the earlier studies that relied mainly on N-responsive genes regardless of their role in yield. Functional annotations and PPIs for all the 1,064 NUE-related genes and also the shortlisted 62 candidates revealed transcription, redox, phosphorylation, transport, development, metabolism, photosynthesis, water deprivation, and hormonal and stomatal function among the prominent processes. <i>In silico</i> expression analysis confirmed differential expression of the 62 NUE-candidate genes in a tissue/stage-specific manner. Experimental validation in two contrasting genotypes revealed that high NUE rice shows better photosynthetic performance, transpiration efficiency and internal water-use efficiency in comparison to low NUE rice. Feature Selection Analysis independently identified one-third of the common genes at every stage of hierarchical shortlisting, offering 6 priority targets to validate for improving the crop NUE.

NUE: !controlled by! many genes
N-response microarray data: !mined to find! 1,064 NUE-related genes
QTL co-localization: !used to shortlist! 62 NUE-candidate genes
chromosome 1: !emerged as hotspot for! NUE
transcription, redox, phosphorylation, transport, development, metabolism, photosynthesis, water deprivation, hormonal and stomatal function: !prominent processes related to! NUE
high NUE rice: !shows better! photosynthetic performance, transpiration efficiency and internal water-use efficiency