Cytokinins regulate diverse aspects of plant growth and development, primarily through modulation of gene expression. The cytokinin-responsive transcriptome has been thoroughly described in dicots, especially Arabidopsis, but much less so in monocots. Here, we present a meta-analysis of five different transcriptomic analyses of rice (Oryza sativa) roots treated with cytokinin, including three previously unpublished experiments. We developed a treatment method in which hormone is added to the media of rice seedlings grown in sterile hydroponic culture under a continuous airflow, which resulted in minimal perturbation of the seedlings, thus greatly reducing changes in gene expression in the absence of exogenous hormone. We defined a core set of 205 upregulated and 86 downregulated genes that were differentially expressed in at least three of the transcriptomic datasets. This core set includes genes encoding the type-A response regulators (RRs) and cytokinin oxidases/dehydrogenases, which have been shown to be primary cytokinin response genes. GO analysis revealed that the upregulated genes were enriched for terms related to cytokinin/hormone signaling and metabolism, while the downregulated genes were significantly enriched for genes encoding transporters. Variations of type-B RR binding motifs were significantly enriched in the promoters of the upregulated genes, as were binding sites for other potential partner transcription factors. The promoters of the downregulated genes were generally enriched for distinct cis-acting motifs and did not include the type-B RR binding motif. This analysis provides insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying cytokinin action in a monocot and provides a useful foundation for future studies of this hormone in rice and other cereals.

Cytokinins: !regulate! Plant Growth and Development
Type-A Response Regulators: !modulate! Gene Expression
Cytokinin Oxidases/Dehydrogenases: !are primary! Cytokinin Response Genes
GO Analysis: !reveals enrichment of! Cytokinin/Hormone Signaling and Metabolism
Transporters: !are downregulated! by Cytokinin
Type-B RR Binding Motifs: !are enriched in! Upregulated Gene Promoters
Cis-Acting Motifs: !are enriched in! Downregulated Gene Promoters