B-box (BBX) genes play important roles in plant growth regulation and responses to abiotic stresses. The plant growth and yield production of allotetraploid rapeseed is usually hindered by diverse nutrient stresses. However, no systematic analysis of Brassicaceae BBXs and the roles of BBXs in the regulation of nutrient stress responses have not been identified and characterized previously. In this study, a total of 536 BBXs were identified from nine brassicaceae species, including 32 AtBBXs, 66 BnaBBXs, 41 BoBBXs, 43 BrBBXs, 26 CrBBXs, 81 CsBBXs, 52 BnBBXs, 93 BjBBXs, and 102 BcBBXs. Syntenic analysis showed that great differences in the gene number of Brassicaceae BBXs might be caused by genome duplication. The BBXs were respectively divided into five subclasses according to their phylogenetic relationships and conserved domains, indicating their diversified functions. Promoter cis-element analysis showed that BBXs probably participated in diverse stress responses. Protein-protein interactions between BnaBBXs indicated their functions in flower induction. The expression profiles of BnaBBXs were investigated in rapeseed plants under boron deficiency, boron toxicity, nitrate limitation, phosphate shortage, potassium starvation, ammonium excess, cadmium toxicity, and salt stress conditions using RNA-seq data. The results showed that different BnaBBXs showed differential transcriptional responses to nutrient stresses, and some of them were simultaneously responsive to diverse nutrient stresses. Taken together, the findings investigated in this study provided rich resources for studying Brassicaceae BBX gene family and enriched potential clues in the genetic improvement of crop stress resistance.

B-box (BBX) genes: !play important roles in! plant growth regulation 
BBXs: !were identified from! nine brassicaceae species 
BBXs: !were divided into! five subclasses 
BBXs: !probably participated in! diverse stress responses 
Protein-protein interactions: !between BnaBBXs indicated their functions in! flower induction 
BnaBBXs: !showed differential transcriptional responses to! nutrient stresses