The actin cytoskeleton regulates an array of diverse cellular activities that support the establishment of plant-microbe interactions and plays a critical role in the execution of plant immunity. However, molecular and cellular mechanisms regulating the assembly and rearrangement of actin filaments (AFs) at plant-pathogen interaction sites remain largely elusive. Here, using live-cell imaging, we show that one of the earliest cellular responses in Arabidopsis thaliana upon powdery mildew attack is the formation of patch-like AF structures beneath fungal invasion sites. The AFs constituting actin patches undergo rapid turnover, which is regulated by the actin-related protein (ARP)2/3 complex and its activator, the WAVE/SCAR regulatory complex (W/SRC). The focal accumulation of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate at fungal penetration sites appears to be a crucial upstream modulator of the W/SRC-ARP2/3 pathway-mediated actin patch formation. Knockout of W/SRC-ARP2/3 pathway subunits partially compromised penetration resistance with impaired endocytic recycling of the defense-associated t-SNARE protein PEN1 and its deposition into apoplastic papillae. Simultaneously knocking out ARP3 and knocking down the Class I formin (AtFH1) abolished actin patch formation, severely impaired the deposition of cell wall appositions, and promoted powdery mildew entry into host cells. Our results demonstrate that the ARP2/3 complex and formins, two actin-nucleating systems, act cooperatively and contribute to Arabidopsis penetration resistance to fungal invasion.

ARP2/3 complex: !activates! WAVE/SCAR regulatory complex
WAVE/SCAR regulatory complex: !regulates! AF turnover
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate: !modulates! W/SRC-ARP2/3 pathway
W/SRC-ARP2/3 pathway: !mediates! actin patch formation
Knockout of W/SRC-ARP2/3 pathway subunits: !impairs! penetration resistance
ARP3: !abolishes! actin patch formation
AtFH1: !promotes! powdery mildew entry
ARP2/3 complex: !cooperates with! formins