The importance of increasing photosynthetic efficiency for sustainable crop yield increases to feed the growing world population is well recognized. The natural genetic variation in leaf photosynthesis in crop plants is largely unexploited for increasing yield potential. The genus Oryza, including cultivated rice and wild relatives, offers tremendous genetic variability to explore photosynthetic differences and underlying biochemical, photochemical, and developmental traits. We quantified leaf photosynthesis and related physiological parameters for six cultivated and three wild rice genotypes, and identified photosynthetically efficient wild rice accessions. Fitting A/Ci curves and biochemical analyses showed that leaf photosynthesis in cultivated rice varieties IR 64 and Nipponbare was limited due to leaf nitrogen content, Rubisco activity, and electron transport rate compared with photosynthetically efficient wild rice accessions Oryza australiensis and Oryza latifolia. The selected wild rice accessions with high leaf photosynthesis per unit area had anatomical features such as larger mesophyll cells with more chloroplasts, fewer mesophyll cells between two adjacent veins, and higher mesophyll cell and chloroplast surface area exposed to intercellular space. Our results show the existence of desirable variations in Rubisco activity, electron transport rate, and leaf anatomical features that could be targeted for increasing the photosynthetic efficiency of cultivated rice varieties.

Oryza: !offers! genetic variability
Leaf photosynthesis: !limited by! nitrogen content, Rubisco activity, electron transport rate
Wild rice accessions: !have! higher leaf photosynthesis per unit area
Mesophyll cells: !larger in! wild rice accessions
Chloroplasts: !more in! wild rice accessions
Mesophyll cells: !fewer between! two adjacent veins
Mesophyll cell/chloroplast surface area: !higher in! wild rice accessions
Rubisco activity: !desirable variations in! cultivated rice varieties
Electron transport rate: !desirable variations in! cultivated rice varieties
Leaf anatomical features: !targeted for! increasing photosynthetic efficiency