Autophagy is a key but undervalued process in root ontogeny, ensuring both the proper development of root tissues as well as the senescence of the entire organ. Autophagy is a process which occurs during plant adaptation to changing environmental conditions as well as during plant ontogeny. Autophagy is also engaged in plant root development, however, the limitations of belowground studies make it challenging to understand the entirety of the developmental processes. We summarize and discuss the current data pertaining to autophagy in the roots of higher plants during their formation and degradation, from the beginning of root tissue differentiation and maturation; all the way to the aging of the entire organ. During root growth, autophagy participates in the processes of central vacuole formation in cortical tissue development, as well as vascular tissue differentiation and root senescence. At present, several key issues are still not entirely understood and remain to be addressed in future studies. The major challenge lies in the portrayal of the mechanisms of autophagy on subcellular events in belowground plant organs during the programmed control of cellular degradation pathways in roots. Given the wide range of technical areas of inquiry where root-related research can be applied, including cutting-edge cell biological methods to track, sort and screen cells from different root tissues and zones of growth, the identification of several lines of evidence pertaining to autophagy during root developmental processes is the most urgent challenge. Consequently, a substantial effort must be made to ensure whether the analyzed process is autophagy-dependent or not.

Autophagy: !ensures! Proper root development 
Autophagy: !participates in! Central vacuole formation 
Autophagy: !participates in! Vascular tissue differentiation 
Autophagy: !participates in! Root senescence 
Autophagy: !requires! Technical areas of inquiry 
Autophagy: !requires! Identification of evidence