Moso bamboo, the fastest growing plant on earth, is an important source for income in large areas of Asia, mainly cultivated in China. Lateral organ boundaries domain (LBD) proteins, a family of transcription factors unique to plants, are involved in multiple transcriptional regulatory pathways and play important roles in lateral organ development, pathogen response, secondary growth, and hormone response. The LBD gene family has not previously been characterized in moso bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis). In this study, we identified 55 members of the LBD gene family from moso bamboo and found that they were distributed non-uniformly across its 18 chromosomes. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the moso bamboo LBD genes could be divided into two classes. LBDs from the same class share relatively conserved gene structures and sequences encoding similar amino acids. A large number of hormone response-associated cis-regulatory elements were identified in the LBD upstream promoter sequences. Synteny analysis indicated that LBDs in the moso bamboo genome showed greater collinearity with those of O. sativa (rice) and Zea mays (maize) than with those of Arabidopsis and Capsicum annuum (pepper). Numerous segmental duplicates were found in the moso bamboo LBD gene family. Gene expression profiles in four tissues showed that the LBD genes had different spatial expression patterns. qRT-PCR assays with the Short Time-series Expression Miner (STEM) temporal expression analysis demonstrated that six genes (PeLBD20, PeLBD29, PeLBD46, PeLBD10, PeLBD38, and PeLBD06) were consistently up-regulated during the rapid growth and development of bamboo shoots. In addition, 248 candidate target genes that function in a variety of pathways were identified based on consensus LBD binding motifs. In the current study, we identified 55 members of the moso bamboo transcription factor LBD and characterized for the first time. Based on the short-time sequence expression software and RNA-seq data, the PeLBD gene expression was analyzed. We also investigated the functional annotation of all PeLBDs, including PPI network, GO, and KEGG enrichment based on String database. These results provide a theoretical basis and candidate genes for studying the molecular breeding mechanism of rapid growth of moso bamboo.

LBD: !localizes to! moso bamboo 
LBD: !divided into! two classes 
LBD: !contains! hormone response-associated cis-regulatory elements 
LBD: !showed greater collinearity with! O. sativa and Zea mays 
LBD: !showed! segmental duplicates 
LBD: !had different! spatial expression patterns 
LBD: !up-regulated during! rapid growth and development of bamboo shoots 
LBD: !identified! 248 candidate target genes 
LBD: !function in! variety of pathways