The moss Pseudocrossidium replicatum is a desiccation-tolerant species that uses an inducible system to withstand severe abiotic stress in both protonemal and gametophore tissues. Desiccation tolerance (DT) is the ability of cells to recover from an air-dried state. Here, the moss Pseudocrossidium replicatum was identified as a fully desiccation-tolerant (FDT) species. Its gametophores rapidly lost more than 90% of their water content when exposed to a low-humidity atmosphere [23% relative humidity (RH)], but abscisic acid (ABA) pretreatment diminished the final water loss after equilibrium was reached. P. replicatum gametophores maintained good maximum photosystem II (PSII) efficiency (Fv/Fm) for up to two hours during slow dehydration; however, ABA pretreatment induced a faster decrease in the Fv/Fm. ABA also induced a faster recovery of the Fv/Fm after rehydration. Protein synthesis inhibitor treatment before dehydration hampered the recovery of the Fv/Fm when the gametophores were rehydrated after desiccation, suggesting the presence of an inducible protective mechanism that is activated in response to abiotic stress. This observation was also supported by accumulation of soluble sugars in gametophores exposed to ABA or NaCl. Exogenous ABA treatment delayed the germination of P. replicatum spores and induced morphological changes in protonemal cells that resembled brachycytes. Transcriptome analyses revealed the presence of an inducible molecular mechanism in P. replicatum protonemata that was activated in response to dehydration. This study is the first RNA-Seq study of the protonemal tissues of an FDT moss. Our results suggest that P. replicatum is an FDT moss equipped with an inducible molecular response that prepares this species for severe abiotic stress and that ABA plays an important role in this response.

ABA: !induces! morphological changes
ABA: !delays! germination
ABA: !diminishes! water loss
ABA: !induces! protective mechanism
ABA: !induces! molecular response
Dehydration: !activates! protective mechanism
Dehydration: !induces! molecular response
Protein synthesis inhibitor: !hampers! recovery of Fv/Fm
Soluble sugars: !accumulate! in gametophores exposed to ABA or NaCl