All land plants encode large multigene families of xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolases (XTHs), plant-specific enzymes that cleave and reconnect plant cell-wall polysaccharides. Despite the ubiquity of these enzymes, considerable uncertainty remains regarding the evolutionary history of the XTH family. Phylogenomic and comparative analyses in this study traced the non-plant origins of the XTH family to Alphaproteobacteria ExoKs, bacterial enzymes involved in loosening biofilms, rather than Firmicutes licheninases, plant biomass digesting enzymes, as previously supposed. The relevant horizontal gene transfer (HGT) event was mapped to the divergence of non-swimming charophycean algae in the Cryogenian geological period. This HGT event was the likely origin of charophycean EG16-2s, which are putative intermediates between ExoKs and XTHs. Another HGT event in the Cryogenian may have led from EG16-2s or ExoKs to fungal Congo Red Hypersensitive proteins (CRHs) to fungal CRHs, enzymes that cleave and reconnect chitin and glucans in fungal cell walls. This successive transfer of enzyme-encoding genes may have supported the adaptation of plants and fungi to the ancient icy environment by facilitating their sessile lifestyles. Furthermore, several protein evolutionary steps, including coevolution of substrate-interacting residues and putative intra-family gene fusion, occurred in the land plant lineage and drove diversification of the XTH family. At least some of those events correlated with the evolutionary gain of broader substrate specificities, which may have underpinned the expansion of the XTH family by enhancing duplicated gene survival. Together, this study highlights the Precambrian evolution of life and the mode of multigene family expansion in the evolutionary history of the XTH family.

XTHs: !originate from! Alphaproteobacteria ExoKs
XTHs: !transferred to! charophycean algae
ExoKs/EG16-2s: !transferred to! fungal CRHs
XTHs: !evolved from! CRHs
XTHs: !coevolved with! substrate-interacting residues
XTHs: !expanded by! gene fusion