Blueberry (<i>Vaccinium corymbosum</i> and hybrids) is a specialty crop with expanding production and consumption worldwide. The blueberry breeding program at the University of Florida (UF) has greatly contributed to expanding production areas by developing low-chilling cultivars better adapted to subtropical and Mediterranean climates of the globe. The breeding program has historically focused on recurrent phenotypic selection. As an autopolyploid, outcrossing, perennial, long juvenile phase crop, blueberry breeding cycles are costly and time consuming, which results in low genetic gains per unit of time. Motivated by applying molecular markers for a more accurate selection in the early stages of breeding, we performed pioneering genomic selection studies and optimization for its implementation in the blueberry breeding program. We have also addressed some complexities of sequence-based genotyping and model parametrization for an autopolyploid crop, providing empirical contributions that can be extended to other polyploid species. We herein revisited some of our previous genomic selection studies and showed for the first time its application in an independent validation set. In this paper, our contribution is three-fold: (i) summarize previous results on the relevance of model parametrizations, such as diploid or polyploid methods, and inclusion of dominance effects; (ii) assess the importance of sequence depth of coverage and genotype dosage calling steps; (iii) demonstrate the real impact of genomic selection on leveraging breeding decisions by using an independent validation set. Altogether, we propose a strategy for using genomic selection in blueberry, with the potential to be applied to other polyploid species of a similar background.

Blueberry: !has! Expanding Production and Consumption
Blueberry Breeding Program: !develops! Low-Chilling Cultivars
Molecular Markers: !provide! Accurate Selection
Sequence-Based Genotyping: !requires! Model Parametrization
Sequence Depth of Coverage: !affects! Genotype Dosage Calling Steps
Genomic Selection: !leverages! Breeding Decisions