Numerous environmental and endogenous factors affect the level of genetic diversity in natural populations. Genetic variability is the cornerstone of evolution and adaptation of species. However, currently, more and more plant species and local varieties (landraces) are on the brink of extinction due to anthropopression and climate change. Their preservation is imperative for the sake of future breeding programs. Gene banks have been created worldwide to conserve different plant species of cultural and economic importance. Many of them apply cryopreservation, a conservation method in which ultra-low temperatures (-135 °C to -196 °C) are used for long-term storage of tissue samples, with little risk of variation occurrence. Cells can be successfully cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen (LN) when the adverse effect of ice crystal formation and growth is mitigated by the removal of water and the formation of the so-called biological glass (vitrification). This state can be achieved in several ways. The involvement of key cold-regulated genes and proteins in the acquisition of cold tolerance in plant tissues may additionally improve the survival of LN-stored explants. The present review explains the importance of cryostorage in agronomy and presents an overview of the recent works accomplished with this strategy. The most widely used cryopreservation techniques, classic and modern cryoprotective agents, and some protocols applied in crops are considered to understand which parameters provide the establishment of high quality and broadly applicable cryopreservation. Attention is also focused on the issues of genetic integrity and functional genomics in plant cryobiology.

Cryopreservation: !uses! Ultra-low temperatures 
Cryopreservation: !mitigates! Ice crystal formation 
Biological glass: !formed by! Removal of water 
Cold-regulated genes: !involved in! Acquisition of cold tolerance 
Cryoprotective agents: !used in! Classic and modern cryopreservation 
Genetic integrity: !focused on! Functional genomics in plant cryobiology