Efficient accumulation of flavonoids is important for increased tolerance to biotic stress. Although several plant defense mechanisms are known, the roles of many pathways, proteins, and secondary metabolites in stress tolerance are unknown. We generated a flavanone 3-hydroxylase (F3H) overexpressor rice line and inoculated <i>Xanthomonas Oryzae</i> pv. <i>oryzae</i> and compared the control and wildtype inoculated plants. In addition to promoting plant growth and developmental maintenance, the overexpression of F3H increased the accumulation of flavonoids and increased tolerance to bacterial leaf blight (BLB) stress. Moreover, leaf lesion length was higher in the infected wildtype plants compared with infected transgenics. Kaempferol and quercetin, which scavenge reactive oxygen species, overaccumulated in transgenic lines compared with wildtypes in response to pathogenic infection, detected by scanning electron microscopy and spectrophotometry. The induction of F3H altered the antioxidant system and reduced the levels of glutathione peroxidase activity and malondialdehyde (MDA) contents in the transgenic lines compared with the wildtypes. Downstream gene regulation analysis showed that the expression of F3H increased the regulation of flavonol synthase (FLS), dihydroflavonol 4-reductase (DFR), and slender rice mutant (SLR1) during BLB stress. The analysis of SA and JA signaling revealed an antagonistic interaction between both hormones and that F3H induction significantly promoted SA and inhibited JA accumulation in the transgenic lines. SA-dependent nonexpressor pathogenesis-related (NPR1) and Xa1 showed significant upregulation in the infected transgenic lines compared with the infected control and wildtype lines. Thus, the overexpression of F3H was essential for increasing BLB stress tolerance.

F3H: !overexpresses! flavonoids 
F3H: !increases! tolerance to BLB stress 
F3H: !induces! FLS, DFR, SLR1 
F3H: !promotes! SA 
F3H: !inhibits! JA 
SA: !upregulates! NPR1 and Xa1 
JA: !downregulates! NPR1 and Xa1