Hazelnut is a traditional crop in northern Spain, where it grows wild as well as being cultivated. A field collection of 41 local and 17 non-local accessions, including 15 well-known cultivars, was established at SERIDA in Villaviciosa, Spain. Here, phenotypic variation was documented for phenological and morphological traits and chemical composition. A large degree of variation for most morphological and phenological traits, except nut maturity date, was revealed. Estimates of broad-sense heritability were high (>0.75) for most of the assessed characters, except for the first male bloom date (0.65), male and female flowering periods (0.40, 0.31), kernel weight (0.69), and kernel percentage (0.33). Local accessions produced smaller nuts and kernels than well-known cultivars but with higher kernel percentage. Limited overlapping between the male and female flowering periods (dychogamy) was observed, except for 'Forcinas 1', 'Forcinas 2', and 'Morell'. The local accessions generally exhibited significantly later male and female flowering compared with the reference cultivars. The local materials showed similar nutritional values to those reported previously for hazelnut. Moreover, the local accessions presented average values similar to the non-local accessions for total fat, ash and carbohydrate contents, as well as energy value, but their protein contents were lower. Their oils were rich in functional compounds, such as unsaturated fatty acids (average: 90.1%), tocopherols (514 mg/kg) and squalene (294.3 mg/kg). A hierarchical clustering on principal components analysis grouped the accessions and differentiated eight local accessions from the rest, including the landrace 'Casina'. This finding provides potential new cultivars, as well as sources of desirable traits, for European hazelnut breeding programs.

Hazelnut: !exhibits! Variation 
Phenological/Morphological Traits: !show! High Heritability 
Local Accessions: !produce! Smaller Nuts 
Male/Female Flowering Periods: !exhibit! Limited Overlapping 
Local Accessions: !flower! Later 
Nutritional Values: !similar to! Non-Local Accessions 
Oil: !rich in! Unsaturated Fatty Acids 
Clustering Analysis: !differentiates! Eight Local Accessions