Heavy metal contamination of agricultural fields has become a global concern as it causes a direct impact on human health. Rice is the major food crop for almost half of the world population and is grown under diverse environmental conditions, including heavy metal-contaminated soil. In recent years, the impact of heavy metal contamination on rice yield and grain quality has been shown through multiple approaches. In this review article, different aspects of heavy metal stress, that is uptake, transport, signaling and tolerance mechanisms, are comprehensively discussed with special emphasis on rice. For uptake, some of the transporters have specificity to one or two metal ions, whereas many other transporters are able to transport many different ions. After uptake, the intercellular signaling is mediated through different signaling pathways involving the regulation of various hormones, alteration of calcium levels, and the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Heavy metal stress signals from various intermediate molecules activate various transcription factors, which triggers the expression of various antioxidant enzymes. Activated antioxidant enzymes then scavenge various reactive oxygen species, which eventually leads to stress tolerance in plants. Non-enzymatic antioxidants, such as ascorbate, metalloids, and even metal-binding peptides (metallothionein and phytochelatin) can also help to reduce metal toxicity in plants. Genetic engineering has been successfully used in rice and many other crops to increase metal tolerance and reduce heavy metals accumulation. A comprehensive understanding of uptake, transport, signaling, and tolerance mechanisms will help to grow rice plants in agricultural fields with less heavy metal accumulation in grains.

Transporter: !specific to! Metal ions 
Signaling pathway: !involves! Hormones 
Transcription factor: !triggers! Antioxidant enzymes 
Antioxidant enzymes: !scavenge! Reactive oxygen species 
Ascorbate: !reduces! Metal toxicity 
Genetic engineering: !increases! Metal tolerance