Flexibility of plant metabolism is supported by redox regulation of enzymes via posttranslational modification of cysteine residues, especially in plastids. Here, the redox states of cysteine residues are partly coupled to the thioredoxin system and partly to the glutathione pool for reduction. Moreover, several plastid enzymes involved in reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging and damage repair draw electrons from glutathione. In addition, cysteine residues can be post-translationally modified by forming a mixed disulfide with glutathione (S-glutathionylation), which protects thiol groups from further oxidation and can influence protein activity. However, the evolution of the plastid glutathione-dependent redox network in land plants and the conservation of cysteine residues undergoing S-glutathionylation is largely unclear. We analysed the genomes of nine representative model species from streptophyte algae to angiosperms and found that the antioxidant enzymes and redox proteins belonging to the plastid glutathione-dependent redox network are largely conserved, except for lambda- and the closely related iota-glutathione S-transferases. Focussing on glutathione-dependent redox modifications, we screened the literature for target thiols of S-glutathionylation, and found that 151 plastid proteins have been identified as glutathionylation targets, while the exact cysteine residue is only known for 17% (26 proteins), with one or multiple sites per protein, resulting in 37 known S-glutathionylation sites for plastids. However, 38% (14) of the known sites were completely conserved in model species from green algae to flowering plants, with 22% (8) on non-catalytic cysteines. Variable conservation of the remaining sites indicates independent gains and losses of cysteines at the same position during land plant evolution. We conclude that the glutathione-dependent redox network in plastids is highly conserved in streptophytes with some variability in scavenging and damage repair enzymes. Our analysis of cysteine conservation suggests that S-glutathionylation in plastids plays an important and yet under-investigated role in redox regulation and stress response.

Thioredoxin system: !coupled to! cysteine residues 
Glutathione pool: !reduces! cysteine residues 
Enzymes: !draw electrons from! glutathione 
Mixed disulfide: !protects thiol groups from! oxidation 
Antioxidant enzymes: !largely conserved in! streptophytes 
Glutathione-dependent redox network: !plays an important role in! redox regulation