The circadian clock regulates a wide range of physiological processes in plants. Here we showed the circadian variations of the electrical signals in <i>Broussonetia papyrifera</i> L. and <i>Morus alba</i> L. in a natural state, which were analyzed using the day-night cycle method. The circadian characteristics of different plant electrical signals were compared by constructing a coupling model for the circadian rhythm of plant electrical signals. The electrical signal sensor had two electrode plates, which were fixed on the two ends of the splint, leaves could then be clamped and measured. The clamping force between the two electrode plates was uniform, which enabled continuous and nondestructive measurements. The results showed that an electric cyclic behavior was observed (circadian cycle) with the circadian variation in the plants within 24 h. Both the resistance (R) and the impedance (Z) increased firstly in the early morning and then decreased subsequently, while the capacitance (C) showed an opposite variation. Under different weather conditions, plant electrical signals showed periodic changes when the temperature and light intensity in the environment slightly changed within the physiological tolerance of plant. This indicated that the circadian clock of plant electrical signals could be maintained endogenously. The variation curves of plant electrical signals as time increased were fitted using the sine equation. The characteristic parameters of circadian rhythm of plant electrical signals were obtained. We found that although all plant electrical signals exhibited electric cyclic behavior, but the characteristics of circadian rhythms of electrical signals were different. This study provided a scientific basic for precisely monitoring plant electrical signals, and a reference for revealing circadian rhythms of plant electrical signals and their occurrence rules.

electrical signal sensor: !clamps! leaves 
plant electrical signals: !exhibit! electric cyclic behavior 
weather conditions: !affect! plant electrical signals 
sine equation: !fits! variation curves of plant electrical signals 
circadian clock: !regulates! physiological processes 
day-night cycle method: !analyzes! circadian variations of electrical signals