Some salt-stress responsive DEGs, mainly involved in ion transmembrane transport, hormone regulation, antioxidant system, osmotic regulation, and some miRNA jointly regulated the salt response process in allotriploid Populus cathayana. The molecular mechanism of plant polyploid stress resistance has been a hot topic in biological research. In this study, Populus diploids and first division restitution (FDR) and second division restitution (SDR) triploids were selected as research materials. All materials were treated with 70 mM NaCl solutions for 30 days in the same pot environment. We observed the growth state of triploids and diploids and determined the ratio of potassium and sodium ions, peroxidase (POD) activity, proline content, and ABA and jasmonic acid (JA) hormone content in leaves in the same culture environment with the same concentration of NaCl solution treatment. In addition, RNA-seq technology was used to study the differential expression of mRNA and miRNA. The results showed that triploid Populus grew well and the K<sup>+</sup> content and the K<sup>+</sup>/Na<sup>+</sup> ratio in the salt treatment were significantly lower than those in the control. The contents of ABA, JA, POD, and proline were increased compared with contents in diploid under salt stress. The salt-stress responsive DEGs were mainly involved in ion transport, cell homeostasis, the MAPK signaling pathway, peroxisome, citric acid cycle, and other salt response and growth pathways. The transcription factors mainly included NAC, MYB, MYB_related and AP2/ERF. Moreover, the differentially expressed miRNAs involved 32 families, including 743 miRNAs related to predicted target genes, among which 22 miRNAs were significantly correlated with salt-stress response genes and related to the regulation of hormones, ion transport, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and other biological processes. Our results provided insights into the physiological and molecular aspects for further research into the response mechanisms of allotriploid Populus cathayana to salt stress. This study provided valuable information for the salt tolerance mechanism of allopolyploids.

NAC: !regulates! MAPK signaling pathway
MYB: !regulates! MAPK signaling pathway
MYB_related: !regulates! MAPK signaling pathway
AP2/ERF: !regulates! MAPK signaling pathway
ion transport: !enhances! cell homeostasis
hormones: !regulate! salt-stress response genes
ROS: !regulate! salt-stress response genes
miRNAs: !interact with! predicted target genes