Fusarium wilt is a destructive soil-borne disease that threatens the production of mung bean. Mung bean lines Zheng8-4 and Zheng8-20 show high resistance and high susceptibility to Fusarium wilt, respectively. Transcriptome analysis was carried out to identify candidate genes involved in Fusarium wilt resistance using Zheng8-4 and Zheng8-20 at 0, 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 days post inoculation (dpi). Differential expression analysis showed that 3,254 genes responded to pathogen infection and were differentially expressed in the resistant and susceptible lines. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was also performed to identify five modules highly correlated with Fusarium wilt resistance, in which 453 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were considered likely to be involved in Fusarium wilt resistance. Among these DEGs, we found 24 genes encoding resistance (R) proteins, 22 encoding protein kinases, 20 belonging to transcription factor families, 34 encoding proteins with oxidoreductase activity, 17 involved in stimulation/stress responses, and 54 annotated to pathogen resistance-related pathways. Finally, 27 annotated genes were further selected as candidate genes of Fusarium wilt resistance in mung bean. This study identifies novel potential resistance-related genes against Fusarium wilt and provides a theoretical basis for further investigation of Fusarium wilt resistance in mung bean breeding.

Fusarium wilt: !threatens! mung bean production
Zheng8-4: !shows high resistance! Fusarium wilt
Zheng8-20: !shows high susceptibility! Fusarium wilt
Transcriptome analysis: !identifies! candidate genes
Differential expression analysis: !reveals! 3,254 genes
WGCNA: !identifies! five modules
DEGs: !likely involved in! Fusarium wilt resistance
R proteins: !encode! resistance
Protein kinases: !encode! protein kinases
Transcription factor families: !belong to! transcription factor families
Oxidoreductase activity: !encode proteins with! oxidoreductase activity
Stimulation/stress responses: !involved in! stimulation/stress responses
Pathogen resistance-related pathways: !annotated to! pathogen resistance-related pathways
27 annotated genes: !selected as! candidate genes