Frequent extreme climate events have attracted considerable attention around the world. <i>Malus sieversii</i> in Xinjiang is the ancestor of cultivated apple, and it is mainly distributed in the Ili river valley at end of the Tianshan Mountains. Wild fruit forests have been degraded, but the cause remains unclear. In order to identify whether extreme climate events caused this degradation reanalysis data and atmospheric circulation indices were used to determine the trends and the reasons for extreme climate changes. Subsequently, we further investigated the effect of extreme climate events on wild fruit forest using characteristics of extreme climate indices and tree-ring chronology. We found increasing trends in both extreme precipitation and warm indices, and decreasing trends in cool indices. Extreme climate events were mainly associated with the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO). Analysis of data of wind and geopotential height field at 500 hPa showed that strengthening wind, increasing geopotential height, cyclone and anti-cyclone circulation drivers contributed to extreme climate events. In the non-degraded region, there were significant positive correlations between tree-ring chronology and both extreme precipitation and extreme warm indices (except for warm spell duration indicator). The other extreme indices (except for heavy rain days) had a large correlation range with tree-rings in a 4-8-year period. These results indicated that extreme precipitation and extreme warm indices intensified <i>M. sieversii</i> growth of the non-degraded region on multi-time scales. In contrast, the degraded region showed insignificant negative relationship between tree-ring chronology and both extreme precipitation and extreme warm indices [except for warm spell duration index (WSDI)], and significant negative correlations in a 4-8-year period were detected between tree-ring chronology and most of the extreme precipitation indices, including heavy rain days, very wet days, cold spell duration indicator, simple precipitation intensity index (SDII), and annual total precipitation. Under the long disturbance of inappropriate anthropic activities, extreme climate has caused the outbreak of pests and diseases resulting in the degeneration of wild fruit forest. Our study provides scientific guidance for the ecosystem conservation in wild fruit forest in China, and also across the region.

Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation: !causes! extreme climate events 
extreme precipitation: !intensifies! M. sieversii growth 
extreme warm indices: !intensifies! M. sieversii growth 
heavy rain days: !negatively correlates with! tree-ring chronology 
very wet days: !negatively correlates with! tree-ring chronology 
cold spell duration indicator: !negatively correlates with! tree-ring chronology 
simple precipitation intensity index: !negatively correlates with! tree-ring chronology 
annual total precipitation: !negatively correlates with! tree-ring chronology 
inappropriate anthropic activities: !causes! wild fruit forest degradation