Bacillus subtilis is one of the non-pathogenic beneficial bacteria that promote plant growth and stress tolerance. In the present study, we revealed that seed priming with endophytic B. subtilis (strains 10-4, 26D) improved Phaseolus vulgaris L. (common bean) seed germination and plant growth under both saline and non-saline conditions. 10-4 and 26D decreased oxidative and osmotic damage to the plant cells since bacterial inoculations reduced lipid peroxidation and proline accumulation in plants under salinity. 26D and especially 10-4 preserved different elevated levels of chlorophyll (Chl) a and Chl b in bean leaves under salinity, while carotenoids (Car) increased only by 10-4 and slightly decreased by 26D. Under normal conditions, 10-4 and 26D did not affect Chl a and Car concentrations, while Chl b decreased in the same plants. Under non-saline and especially saline conditions, 10-4 and 26D significantly increased lignin accumulation in plant roots and the highest lignin content along with better growth and oxidative damages reduction was observed after 10-4 inoculation under salinity, indicating a major role of B. subtilis-induced strengthening the root cell walls in the implementation protective effect of studied bacteria on plants. Therefore, B. subtilis 10-4 and 26D exerts protective effects on the growth of common bean plants under salinity by regulating plant defense mechanisms and the major role in tolerance development may contribute through the activation by B. subtilis lignin deposition in roots. The obtained data also indicates a strain-dependent efficiency of endophytic B. subtilis since strains 10-4 and 26D differently improved growth attributes and modulates cellular response reactions of the same common bean plants both under normal and salinity conditions, that generates interest for further investigations in this direction.

B. subtilis 10-4: !enhances! lignin accumulation
B. subtilis 10-4: !reduces! lipid peroxidation
B. subtilis 10-4: !increases! Chl a and Car concentrations
B. subtilis 10-4: !decreases! proline accumulation
B. subtilis 26D: !reduces! lipid peroxidation
B. subtilis 26D: !decreases! Chl b concentration
B. subtilis 26D: !slightly decreases! Car concentrations
B. subtilis 26D: !decreases! proline accumulation