Woody cells generate lignocellulosic biomass, which is a promising sustainable bioresource for wide industrial applications. Woody cell differentiation in vascular plants, including the model plant poplar (Populus trichocarpa), is regulated by a set of NAC family transcription factors, the VASCULAR-RELATED NAC-DOMAIN (VND), NAC SECONDARY CELL WALL THICKENING PROMOTING FACTOR (NST)/SND, and SOMBRERO (SMB) (VNS)-related proteins, but the precise contributions of each VNS protein to wood quality are unknown. Here, we performed a detailed functional analysis of the poplar SMB-type VNS proteins PtVNS13-PtVNS16. PtVNS13-PtVNS16 were preferentially expressed in the roots of young poplar plantlets, similar to the Arabidopsis thalianaSMB gene. PtVNS13 and PtVNS14, as well as the NST-type PtVNS11, suppressed the abnormal root cap phenotype of the Arabidopsis sombrero-3 mutant, whereas the VND-type PtVNS07 gene did not, suggesting a functional gap between SMB- or NST-type VNS proteins and VND-type VNS proteins. Overexpressing PtVNS13-PtVNS16 in Arabidopsis seedlings and poplar leaves induced ectopic xylem-vessel-like cells with secondary wall deposition, and a transient expression assay showed that PtVNS13-16 transactivated woody-cell-related genes. Interestingly, although any VNS protein rescued the pendant stem phenotype of the Arabidopsis nst1-1 nst3-1 mutant, the resulting inflorescence stems exhibited distinct cell wall properties: poplar VNS genes generated woody cell walls with higher enzymatic saccharification efficiencies compared with Arabidopsis VNS genes. Together, our data reveal clear functional diversity among VNS proteins in woody cell differentiation and demonstrate a novel VNS-based strategy for modifying woody cell wall properties toward enhanced utilization of woody biomass.

PtVNS13-16: !preferentially expressed in! roots 
PtVNS13-14/NST-type PtVNS11: !suppress! abnormal root cap phenotype 
VND-type PtVNS07: !does not suppress! abnormal root cap phenotype 
PtVNS13-16: !induce! ectopic xylem-vessel-like cells 
PtVNS13-16: !transactivate! woody-cell-related genes 
Poplar VNS genes: !generate! woody cell walls with higher saccharification efficiencies