The chloroplast genomes of Caesalpinia group species are structurally conserved, but sequence level variation is useful for both phylogenomic and population genetic analyses. Variation in chloroplast genomes (plastomes) has been an important source of information in plant biology. The Caesalpinia group has been used as a model in studies correlating ecological and genomic variables, yet its intergeneric and infrageneric relationships are not fully solved, despite densely sampled phylogenies including nuclear and plastid loci by Sanger sequencing. Here, we present the de novo assembly and characterization of plastomes from 13 species from the Caesalpinia group belonging to eight genera. A comparative analysis was carried out with 13 other plastomes previously available, totalizing 26 plastomes and representing 15 of the 26 known Caesalpinia group genera. All plastomes showed a conserved quadripartite structure and gene repertoire, except for the loss of four ndh genes in Erythrostemon gilliesii. Thirty polymorphic regions were identified for inter- or intrageneric analyses. The 26 aligned plastomes were used for phylogenetic reconstruction, revealing a well-resolved topology, and dividing the Caesalpinia group into two fully supported clades. Sixteen microsatellite (cpSSR) loci were selected from Cenostigma microphyllum for primer development and at least two were cross-amplified in different Leguminosae subfamilies by in vitro or in silico approaches. Four loci were used to assess the genetic diversity of C. microphyllum in the Brazilian Caatinga. Our results demonstrate the structural conservation of plastomes in the Caesalpinia group, offering insights into its systematics and evolution, and provides new genomic tools for future phylogenetic, population genetics, and phylogeographic studies.

plastome: !structurally conserved in! Caesalpinia group
plastome: !reveals! well-resolved topology
plastome: !divides! Caesalpinia group into two clades
ndh gene: !lost in! Erythrostemon gilliesii
polymorphic region: !identified for! inter- or intrageneric analyses
microsatellite locus: !selected from! Cenostigma microphyllum
primer: !developed from! microsatellite locus
locus: !cross-amplified in! Leguminosae subfamilies
locus: !used to assess! genetic diversity of C. microphyllum