MYB transcription factors are a kind of DNA binding protein that can specifically interact with the promoter region. Members of MYB TFs are widely involved in plant growth and development, secondary metabolism, stress response, and hormone signal transduction. However, there is no report of comprehensive bioinformatics analysis on the MYB family of Casuarina equisetifolia. In this study, bioinformatics methods were used to screen out 182 MYB transcription factors from the Casuarina equisetifolia genome database, including 69 1R-MYB, 107 R2R3-MYB, 4 R1R2R3-MYB, and 2 4R-MYB. The C. equisetifolia R2R3-MYB genes were divided into 29 groups based on the phylogenetic topology and the classification of the MYB superfamily in Arabidopsis thaliana, while the remaining MYB genes (1R-MYB, R1R2R3-MYB, and 4R-MYB) was divided into 19 groups. Moreover, the conserved motif and gene structure analysis shown that the members of the CeqMYBs were divided into the same subgroups with mostly similar gene structures. In addition, many conserved amino acids in the R2 and R3 domains of CeqMYBs by WebLogo analysis, especially tryptophan residues (W), with 3 conserved W in R2 repeat and 2 conserved W in R3 repeat. Combining promoter and GO annotation analysis, speculated on the various biological functions of CeqMYBs, thus 32 MYB genes were selected to further explore its response to salt stress by using qPCR analysis technique. Most CeqMYB genes were differentially regulated following multiple salt treatments. Seven genes (CeqMYB164, CeqMYB4, CeqMYB53, CeqMYB32, CeqMYB114, CeqMYB71 and CeqMYB177) were assigned to the "response to salt stress" by GO annotation. Among them, the expression level of CeqMYB4 was up-regulated under various salt treatments, indicating CeqMYB4 might participated in the response to salt stress. Our results provide important information for the biological function of C. equisetifolia, as well as offer candidate genes for further study of salt stress mechanism.

MYB transcription factors: !interact with! promoter region 
C. equisetifolia MYB genes: !divided into! 29 groups 
C. equisetifolia R2R3-MYB genes: !classified according to! Arabidopsis thaliana 
C. equisetifolia MYB genes: !divided into! 19 groups 
WebLogo analysis: !reveals! conserved amino acids 
Promoter and GO annotation analysis: !speculates on! biological functions 
qPCR analysis technique: !used to explore! response to salt stress 
CeqMYB4: !up-regulated under! various salt treatments