Manteca yellow dry beans (<i>Phaseolus vulgaris</i> L.) have many quality traits that appeal to consumers, including fast cooking times, creamy texture, and sweet, buttery flavor. They are native to Chile and consumed in regions of South America and Africa but are largely unfamiliar to United States consumers. While cooking time, flavor, and texture have not been prioritized in United States dry bean breeding programs, genetic variability exists such that these traits could be addressed through breeding. In this study, a recombinant inbred line (RIL) population was developed from a cross between Ervilha (Manteca) and PI527538 (Njano), yellow dry beans with contrasting cooking time and sensory attributes. The population and parents were grown for 2 years in Michigan and evaluated for cooking time and sensory attribute intensities, including total flavor, beany, vegetative, earthy, starchy, sweet, bitter, seed-coat perception, and cotyledon texture. Cooking time ranged 19-34 min and exhibited high broad-sense heritability (0.68). Sensory attribute intensities also exhibited variation among RILs, although broad-sense heritability was low, with beany and total flavor exhibiting the highest (0.33 and 0.27). A linkage map of 870 single nucleotide polymorphisms markers across 11 chromosomes was developed for quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping, which revealed QTL for water uptake (3), cooking time (6), sensory attribute intensities (28), color (13), seed-coat postharvest non-darkening (1), seed weight (5), and seed yield (2) identified from data across 2 years. Co-localization was identified for starchy, sweet, and seed-coat perception on Pv01; for total flavor, beany, earthy, starchy, sweet, bitter, seed-coat perception, cotyledon texture, and color on Pv03; water uptake and color on Pv04; total flavor, vegetative, sweet, and cotyledon texture on Pv07; cooking time, starchy, sweet, and color on Pv08; and water uptake, cooking time, total flavor, beany, starchy, bitter, seed-coat perception, cotyledon texture, color, and seed-coat postharvest non-darkening on Pv10. The QTL identified in this work, in particular CT8.2 and CT10.2, can be used to develop molecular markers to improve seed quality traits in future dry bean varieties. Considering yellow dry beans already excel in quality and convenience, they might be an ideal market class to signal a new focus on consumer-valued traits in the United States.

Gene: !affects! Water uptake
Gene: !affects! Cooking time
Gene: !affects! Sensory attribute intensities
Gene: !affects! Color
Gene: !affects! Seed-coat postharvest non-darkening
Gene: !affects! Seed weight
Gene: !affects! Seed yield
Gene: !localizes to! Pv01
Gene: !localizes to! Pv03
Gene: !localizes to! Pv04
Gene: !localizes to! Pv07
Gene: !localizes to! Pv08
Gene: !localizes to! Pv10