In shoot apex cells of rice, a hexameric florigen activation complex (FAC), comprising flowering locus T (FT), 14-3-3 and the basic leucine zipper transcription factor FD, activates downstream target genes and regulates several developmental transitions, including flowering. The allotetraploid cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) contains only one FT locus in both of the A- and D-subgenomes. However, there is limited information regarding cotton FACs. Here, we identified a 14-3-3 protein that interacts strongly with GhFT in the cytoplasm and the nuclei, and five FD homoeologous gene pairs were characterized. In vivo, all five GhFD proteins interacted with Gh14-3-3 and GhFT in the nucleus. GhFT, 14-3-3 and all the GhFDs interacted in the nucleus as well, suggesting that they formed a ternary complex. Virus-induced silencing of GhFD1, -2 and -4 in cotton delayed flowering and inhibited the expression of floral meristem identity genes. Silencing GhFD3 strongly decreased lateral root formation, suggesting a function in lateral root development. GhFD overexpression in Arabidopsis and transcriptional activation assays suggested that FACs containing GhFD1 and GhFD2 function mainly in promoting flowering with partial functional redundancy. Moreover, GhFD3 was specifically expressed in lateral root meristems and dominantly activated the transcription of auxin response factor genes, such as ARF19. Thus, the diverse functions of FACs may depend on the recruited GhFD. Creating targeted genetic mutations in the florigen system using Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) and their associated proteins (Cas) genome editing may fine-tune flowering and improve plant architecture.

GhFT: !interacts with! Gh14-3-3 
GhFDs: !interact with! Gh14-3-3 
GhFDs: !interact with! GhFT 
GhFDs: !form ternary complex with! GhFT & Gh14-3-3 
GhFD1, -2 & -4: !delay flowering & inhibit expression of floral meristem identity genes! 
GhFD3: !inhibits lateral root formation! 
GhFD1 & -2: !promote flowering! 
GhFD3: !specifically expressed in lateral root meristems & activates ARF19 gene!