Most known phytohormones regulate moss development. We present a comprehensive view of the synthesis and signaling pathways for the most investigated of these compounds in mosses, focusing on the model Physcomitrium patens. The last 50 years of research have shown that most of the known phytohormones are synthesized by the model moss Physcomitrium patens (formerly Physcomitrella patens) and regulate its development, in interaction with responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. Biosynthesis and signaling pathways are best described in P. patens for the three classical hormones auxins, cytokinins and abscisic acid. Furthermore, their roles in almost all steps of development, from early filament growth to gametophore development and sexual reproduction, have been the focus of much research effort over the years. Evidence of hormonal roles exist for ethylene and for CLE signaling peptides, as well as for salicylic acid, although their possible effects on development remain unclear. Production of brassinosteroids by P. patens is still debated, and modes of action for these compounds are even less known. Gibberellin biosynthesis and signaling may have been lost in P. patens, while gibberellin precursors such as ent-kaurene derivatives could be used as signals in a yet to discover pathway. As for jasmonic acid, it is not used per se as a hormone in P. patens, but its precursor OPDA appears to play a corresponding role in defense against abiotic stress. We have tried to gather a comprehensive view of the biosynthesis and signaling pathways for all these compounds in mosses, without forgetting strigolactones, the last class of plant hormones to be reported. Study of the strigolactone response in P. patens points to a novel signaling compound, the KAI2-ligand, which was likely employed as a hormone prior to land plant emergence.

auxins: !synthesizes! Physcomitrium patens 
cytokinins: !synthesizes! Physcomitrium patens 
abscisic acid: !synthesizes! Physcomitrium patens 
ethylene: !regulates! development 
CLE signaling peptides: !regulates! development 
salicylic acid: !regulates! development 
brassinosteroids: !regulates! development 
gibberellin: !lost in! Physcomitrium patens 
ent-kaurene derivatives: !signals in! yet to discover pathway 
OPDA: !plays role in! defense against abiotic stress 
strigolactones: !reported in! plant hormones 
KAI2-ligand: !employed as! hormone prior to land plant emergence