Grafting is a means to connect tissues from two individual plants and grow a single chimeric plant through the establishment of both apoplasmic and symplasmic connections. Recent molecular studies using RNA-sequencing data have provided genetic information on the processes involved in tissue reunion, including wound response, cell division, cell-cell adhesion, cell differentiation and vascular formation. Thus, studies on grafting increase our understanding of various aspects of plant biology. Grafting has also been used to study systemic signaling and transport of micromolecules and macromolecules in the plant body. Given that graft viability and molecular transport across graft junctions largely depend on vascular formation, a major focus in grafting biology has been the mechanism of vascular development. In addition, it has been thought that symplasmic connections via plasmodesmata are fundamentally important to share cellular information among newly proliferated cells at the graft interface and to accomplish tissue differentiation correctly. Therefore, this review focuses on plasmodesmata formation during grafting. We take advantage of interfamily grafts for unambiguous identification of the graft interface and summarize morphological aspects of de novo formation of plasmodesmata. Important molecular events are addressed by re-examining the time-course transcriptome of interfamily grafts, from which we recently identified the cell-cell adhesion mechanism. Plasmodesmata-associated genes upregulated during graft healing that may provide a link to symplasm establishment are described. We also discuss future research directions.

Grafting: !connects! tissues 
Wound response: !involves! genetic information 
Vascular formation: !depends on! graft viability 
Symplasmic connections: !fundamentally important for! tissue differentiation 
Interfamily grafts: !unambiguously identify! graft interface 
Plasmodesmata formation: !occurs during! grafting 
Cell-cell adhesion: !mechanism of! vascular development 
Time-course transcriptome: !re-examines! interfamily grafts 
Plasmodesmata-associated genes: !upregulated during! graft healing