Intercropping of legumes and cereals provides many ecological advantages and contributes to a sustainable agriculture. These agricultural systems face ongoing shifts in precipitation patterns and seasonal drought. Although the effect of drought stress on legumes has been frequently studied, knowledge about water deficits influencing legumes under different cropping systems is still limited. Therefore, we investigated the impact of water deficit and re-irrigation on two winter faba bean genotypes (S_004 and S_062) and winter wheat (var. Genius) in pure and intercropped stands under greenhouse conditions. Various physiological and biochemical parameters, such as canopy surface temperature, leaf relative water content and proline content, were collected at three time points (beginning of water deficit, end of water deficit, after re-irrigation). In addition, water use efficiency (WUE) was analyzed at the end of the experiment. The overall drought stress tolerance was determined as conceptual analysis of all measured parameters. Water deficit significantly affected WUE, surface temperature and proline content of both winter faba bean genotypes. Interestingly, intercropping with wheat resulted in an overall high drought tolerance of genotype S_004, while genotype S_062 had a high drought tolerance in pure stands. Under water deficit, pure stands of S_062 substantially increased WUE by 30.5%. Intercropping of genotype S_004 increased the dry matter per plant by 31.7% compared to pure stands under water deficit. Contrary, intercropping of genotype S_062 did not improve the dry matter production. Our findings indicate that genotype S_004 benefits from resource complementarity in intercropping systems with wheat, whereas S_062 is better suitable for pure stands due to competitive effects. Thus, our study highlights that the drought tolerance of winter faba bean genotypes depends on the cropping system, leading to a demand for drought-adapted cultivars specifically selected for intercropping.

genotype S_004: !benefits from! resource complementarity 
genotype S_062: !better suitable for! pure stands 
water deficit: !significantly affects! WUE, surface temperature, proline content 
intercropping with wheat: !increases! drought tolerance of genotype S_004 
pure stands of S_062: !increases! WUE by 30.5% 
intercropping of genotype S_004: !increases! dry matter per plant by 31.7% 
intercropping of genotype S_062: !does not improve! dry matter production