Xyloglucan is the most abundant hemicellulose in the primary cell walls of dicots. Dicot xyloglucan is the XXXG type consisting of repeating units of three consecutive xylosylated Glc residues followed by one unsubstituted Glc. Its xylosylation is catalyzed by xyloglucan 6-xylosyltransferases (XXTs) and there exist five XXTs (AtXXT1-5) in Arabidopsis. While AtXXT1 and AtXXT2 have been shown to add the first two Xyl residues in the XXXG repeat, which XXTs are responsible for the addition of the third Xyl residue remains elusive although AtXXT5 was a proposed candidate. In this report, we generated recombinant proteins of all five Arabidopsis XXTs and one rice XXT (OsXXT1) in the mammalian HEK293 cells and investigated their ability to sequentially xylosylate Glc residues to generate the XXXG xylosylation pattern. We found that like AtXXT1/2, AtXXT4 and OsXXT1 could efficiently xylosylate the cellohexaose (G6) acceptor to produce mono- and di-xylosylated G6, whereas AtXXT5 was only barely capable of adding one Xyl onto G6. When AtXXT1-catalyzed products were used as acceptors, AtXXT1/2/4 and OsXXT1, but not AtXXT5, were able to xylosylate additional Glc residues to generate tri- and tetra-xylosylated G6. Further characterization of the tri- and tetra-xylosylated G6 revealed that they had the sequence of GXXXGG and GXXXXG with three and four consecutive xylosylated Glc residues, respectively. In addition, we have found that although tri-xylosylation occurred on G6, cello-oligomers with a degree of polymerization of 3 to 5 could only be mono- and di-xylosylated. Together, these results indicate that each of AtXXT1/2/4 and OsXXT1 is capable of sequentially adding Xyl onto three contiguous Glc residues to generate the XXXG xylosylation pattern and these findings provide new insight into the biochemical mechanism underlying xyloglucan biosynthesis.

AtXXT1/2: !catalyze! xylosylation 
AtXXT4/OsXXT1: !catalyze! xylosylation 
AtXXT5: !barely catalyzes! xylosylation 
AtXXT1-catalyzed products: !accept! xylosylation 
G6: !accepts! xylosylation 
cello-oligomers: !only accept! mono- and di-xylosylation