This review analyses the most recent scientific research conducted for the purpose of enhancing artemisinin production. It may help to devise better artemisinin enhancement strategies, so that its production becomes cost effective and becomes available to masses. Malaria is a major threat to world population, particularly in South-East Asia and Africa, due to dearth of effective anti-malarial compounds, emergence of quinine resistant malarial strains, and lack of advanced healthcare facilities. Artemisinin, a sesquiterpene lactone obtained from Artemisia annua L., is the most potent drug against malaria and used in the formulation of artemisinin combination therapies (ACTs). Artemisinin is also effective against various types of cancers, many other microbes including viruses, parasites and bacteria. However, this specialty metabolite and its derivatives generally occur in low amounts in the source plant leading to its production scarcity. Considering the importance of this drug, researchers have been working worldwide to develop novel strategies to augment its production both in vivo and in vitro. Due to complex chemical structure, its chemical synthesis is quite expensive, so researchers need to devise synthetic protocols that are economically viable and also work on increasing the in-planta production of artemisinin by using various strategies like use of phytohormones, stress signals, bioinoculants, breeding and transgenic approaches. The focus of this review is to discuss these artemisinin enhancement strategies, understand mechanisms modulating its biosynthesis, and evaluate if roots play any role in artemisinin production. Furthermore, we also have a critical analysis of various assays used for artemisinin measurement. This may help to develop better artemisinin enhancement strategies which lead to decreased price of ACTs and increased profit to farmers.

Gene: !affects! Artemisinin production 
Stress signals: !enhance! Artemisinin production 
Phytohormones: !enhance! Artemisinin production 
Bioinoculants: !enhance! Artemisinin production 
Breeding: !enhances! Artemisinin production 
Transgenic approaches: !enhance! Artemisinin production 
Roots: !influence! Artemisinin production 
Assays: !measure! Artemisinin production