Our results provide insights into heat response mechanisms among Clematis species. Overexpressing CvHSFA2 enhanced the heat resistance of yeast and silencing NbHSFA2 reduced the heat resistance of tobacco. Clematis species are commonly grown in western and Japanese gardens. Heat stress can inhibit many physiological processes mediating plant growth and development. The mechanism regulating responses to heat has been well characterized in Arabidopsis thaliana and some crops, but not in horticultural plants, including Clematis species. In this study, we found that Clematis alpina 'Stolwijk Gold' was heat-sensitive whereas Clematis vitalba and Clematis viticella 'Polish Spirit' were heat-tolerant based on the physiological analyses in heat stress. Transcriptomic profiling identified a set of heat tolerance-related genes (HTGs). Consistent with the observed phenotype in heat stress, 41.43% of the differentially expressed HTGs between heat treatment and control were down-regulated in heat-sensitive cultivar Stolwijk Gold, but only 9.80% and 20.79% of the differentially expressed HTGs in heat resistant C. vitalba and Polish Spirit, respectively. Co-expression network, protein-protein interaction network and phylogenetic analysis revealed that the genes encoding heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) and heat shock proteins (HSPs) may played an essential role in Clematis resistance to heat stress. Two clades of heat-induced CvHSFs were further identified by phylogenetic tree, motif analysis and qRT-PCR. Ultimately, we proposed that overexpressing CvHSFA2-2 could endow yeast with high temperature resistance and silencing its homologous gene NbHSFA2 reduced the heat resistance of tobacco. This study provides first insights into the diversity of the heat response mechanisms among Clematis species.

CvHSFA2: !enhances! Heat Resistance 
NbHSFA2: !reduces! Heat Resistance 
Heat Stress: !inhibits! Physiological Processes 
C. alpina 'Stolwijk Gold': !heat-sensitive! 
C. vitalba & C. viticella 'Polish Spirit': !heat-tolerant! 
HTGs: !down-regulated! in heat-sensitive cultivar 
HSFs & HSPs: !play essential role! in Clematis resistance to heat stress 
CvHSFA2-2: !endows yeast! with high temperature resistance