Plant aquaporins are a recently noted biological resource with a great potential to improve crop growth and defense traits. Here, we report the functional modulation of the rice (Oryza sativa) aquaporin OsPIP1;3 to enhance rice photosynthesis and grain production and to control bacterial blight and leaf streak, the most devastating worldwide bacterial diseases in the crop. We characterize OsPIP1;3 as a physiologically relevant CO<sub>2</sub> -transporting facilitator, which supports 30% of rice photosynthesis on average. This role is nullified by interaction of OsPIP1;3 with the bacterial protein Hpa1, an essential component of the Type III translocon that supports translocation of the bacterial Type III effectors PthXo1 and TALi into rice cells to induce leaf blight and streak, respectively. Hpa1 binding shifts OsPIP1;3 from CO<sub>2</sub> transport to effector translocation, aggravates bacterial virulence, and blocks rice photosynthesis. On the contrary, the external application of isolated Hpa1 to rice plants effectively prevents OsPIP1;3 from interaction with Hpa1 secreted by the bacteria that are infecting the plants. Blockage of the OsPIP1;3-Hpa1 interaction reverts OsPIP1;3 from effector translocation to CO<sub>2</sub> transport, abrogates bacterial virulence, and meanwhile induces defense responses in rice. These beneficial effects can combine to enhance photosynthesis by 29-30%, reduce bacterial disease by 58-75%, and increase grain yield by 11-34% in different rice varieties investigated in small-scale field trials conducted during the past years. Our results suggest that crop productivity and immunity can be coordinated by modulating the physiological and pathological functions of a single aquaporin to break the growth-defense tradeoff barrier.

OsPIP1;3: !enhances! Photosynthesis
OsPIP1;3: !interacts with! Hpa1
Hpa1: !shifts! OsPIP1;3
Hpa1: !aggravates! Virulence
Hpa1: !blocks! Photosynthesis
Hpa1: !secreted by! Bacteria
Isolated Hpa1: !prevents! OsPIP1;3-Hpa1 interaction
OsPIP1;3-Hpa1 interaction: !reverts! OsPIP1;3
OsPIP1;3-Hpa1 interaction: !abrogates! Virulence
OsPIP1;3-Hpa1 interaction: !induces! Defense responses
Modulating aquaporin: !coordinates! Crop productivity and immunity