The analysis of the state of research on the chemical composition, functional nature and structure of the main components of the lignin-carbohydrate matrix allows considering the wood substance as a thermodynamically self-organizing nanobiocomposite system. Features of biosynthesis of the wood matrix main biopolymers, the formation of their functional nature and structure determine the complex hierarchical organization of cell walls. The supramolecular level of biosynthesis considers the interaction of cell wall components. On the one hand, these are questions of dynamics of cell walls synthesis and processes of self-organization that control the formation of chaotic objects of biological origin; on the other hand, it is the question of thermodynamic compatibility of plant tissue components. Various models of structural organization are currently being considered, focusing on various features (biological, chemical, structural) of wood substance. At the same time, the lignin-carbohydrate matrix is a three-component system of natural polymers: lignin-hemicelluloses-cellulose, the state of which is described by specific values of thermodynamic parameters that characterize the degree of its stability. The new approach proposed in this paper allows considering the plant lignin-carbohydrate matrix from the standpoint of physical chemistry of polymer as quasi-equilibrium, thermodynamically limited ordered system of biopolymers. Thus, the biochemical processes of synthesis and self-organization lead to the formation of a complex multicomponent system of wood substance, considered as a nanobiocomposite. This determines the need to study the applicability of the fundamental cycle "structure-functional nature-properties" from the standpoint of physical chemistry of biopolymers both for the investigation of plant objects and for the development of modern technologies for complex processing based on the principles of "green chemistry".

lignin-carbohydrate matrix: !consists of! lignin-hemicelluloses-cellulose 
biopolymers: !form! complex hierarchical organization 
interaction: !controls! formation of chaotic objects 
thermodynamic parameters: !characterize! degree of stability 
quasi-equilibrium: !describes! state of system 
biochemical processes: !lead to! formation of nanobiocomposite