Waterlogging has negative effects on crop yield. Physiological and transcriptome data of two peanut cultivars [Zhongkaihua 1 (ZKH 1) and Huayu 39 (HY 39)] were studied under normal water supply and waterlogging stress for 5 or 10 days at the flowering stage. The results showed that the main stem height, the number of lateral branches, lateral branch length, and the stem diameter increased under waterlogging stress, followed by an increase in dry matter accumulation, which was correlated with the increase in the soil and plant analysis development (SPAD) and net photosynthetic rate (Pn) and the upregulation of genes related to porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism and photosynthesis. However, the imbalance of the source-sink relationship under waterlogging was the main cause of yield loss, and waterlogging caused an increase in the sucrose and soluble sugar contents and a decrease in the starch content; it also decreased the activities of sucrose synthetase (SS) and sucrose phosphate synthetase (SPS), which may be due to the changes in the expression of genes related to starch and sucrose metabolism. However, the imbalance of the source-sink relationship led to the accumulation of photosynthate in the stems and leaves, which resulted in the decrease of the ratio of pod dry weight to total dry weight (PDW/TDW) and yield. Compared with ZKH 1, the PDW of HY 39 decreased more probably because more photosynthate accumulated in the stem and leaves of HY 39 and could not be effectively transported to the pod.

waterlogging: !increases! stem height
waterlogging: !increases! lateral branch length
waterlogging: !increases! dry matter accumulation
waterlogging: !increases! SPAD
waterlogging: !increases! Pn
waterlogging: !upregulates! genes related to porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism
waterlogging: !upregulates! genes related to photosynthesis
waterlogging: !increases! sucrose and soluble sugar contents
waterlogging: !decreases! starch content
waterlogging: !decreases! SS activity
waterlogging: !decreases! SPS activity
waterlogging: !changes! expression of genes related to starch and sucrose metabolism
waterlogging: !accumulates! photosynthate in stems and leaves
waterlogging: !decreases! PDW/TDW
waterlogging: !decreases! yield
ZKH 1: !less affected! by waterlogging than HY 39