Salinity stress is one of the major constraints for plant growth and yield. The salinity stress response of different genotypes of crop plants may largely be governed by DNA polymorphisms. To determine the molecular genetic factors involved in salinity stress tolerance in chickpea, we performed a whole genome resequencing data analysis of three each of salinity-sensitive and salinity-tolerant genotypes. A total of 6173 single nucleotide polymorphisms and 920 insertions and deletions differentiating the chickpea genotypes with contrasting salinity stress responses were identified. Gene ontology analysis revealed the enrichment of functional terms related to stress response and development among the genes harboring DNA polymorphisms in their promoter and/or coding regions. DNA polymorphisms located within the cis-regulatory motifs of the quantitative trait loci (QTL)-associated and abiotic stress related genes were identified, which may influence salinity stress response via modulating binding affinity of the transcription factors. Several genes including QTL-associated and abiotic stress response related genes harboring DNA polymorphisms exhibited differential expression in response to salinity stress especially at the reproductive stage of development in the salinity-tolerant genotype. Furthermore, effects of non-synonymous DNA polymorphisms on mutational sensitivity and structural integrity of the encoded proteins by the candidate QTL-associated and abiotic stress response related genes were revealed. The results suggest that DNA polymorphisms may determine salinity stress response via influencing differential gene expression in genotype and/or stage-dependent manner. Altogether, we provide a high-quality set of DNA polymorphisms and candidate genes that may govern salinity stress tolerance in chickpea.

DNA polymorphisms: !affects! Salinity stress response 
DNA polymorphisms: !localizes to! cis-regulatory motifs 
QTL-associated genes: !harbor! DNA polymorphisms 
Abiotic stress related genes: !harbor! DNA polymorphisms 
DNA polymorphisms: !influence! Differential gene expression 
Non-synonymous DNA polymorphisms: !affect! Mutational sensitivity 
Non-synonymous DNA polymorphisms: !affect! Structural integrity of encoded proteins