Somatic variation has been demonstrated in tissue culture regenerated plants of many species. In the genus <i>Populus</i>, phenotypic variation caused by changes in 5-methylcytosine within the plant genome have been reported. To date, the phenotypic and epigenetic stability of plants regenerated from sequential regeneration has not been tested in trees. In this study, we detected DNA methylation of CCGG sites in regenerated plants of five generations in <i>Populus nigra</i> using methylation-sensitive amplified polymorphisms, and evaluated their growth performance and physiological traits. About 10.86-26.80% of CCGG sites in the regenerated plant genome were demethylated and 5.50-8.45% were methylated, resulting in significantly lower DNA methylation levels among all regenerated plants than among donor plants. We detected a significant difference in methylation levels between first regeneration regenerated plants (G1) and those of the other four generations (G2-G5); there were no significant differences among the four later generations. Therefore, the dramatic decrease in DNA methylation levels occurred only in the first and second poplar regenerations; levels then stabilized later in the regeneration process, indicating that two regeneration events were sufficient to change the methylation statuses of almost all CCGG sites sensitive to regeneration. Differences in growth and physiological traits were observed between regenerated plants and donor plants, but were significant only among plants of certain generations. Significant correlations were detected between methylation level and transpiration rate, net photosynthetic rate, peroxidase activity, and instant water utilization efficiency, indicating the involvement of epigenetic regulation in this unpredictable phenotypic variation.

Somatic variation: !affects! Phenotypic variation 
DNA methylation: !affects! DNA methylation levels 
DNA methylation: !affects! Growth performance 
DNA methylation: !affects! Physiological traits 
DNA methylation: !correlates with! Transpiration rate 
DNA methylation: !correlates with! Net photosynthetic rate 
DNA methylation: !correlates with! Peroxidase activity 
DNA methylation: !correlates with! Instant water utilization efficiency