Brassinosteroids (BRs) are growth-promoting phytohormones that can efficiently function by exogenous application at micromolar concentrations or by endogenous fine-tuning of BR-related gene expression, thus, precisely controlling BR signal strength is a key factor in exploring the agricultural potential of BRs. BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), a BR receptor, is the rate-limiting enzyme in BR signal transduction, and the phosphorylation of each phosphorylation site of SlBRI1 has a distinct effect on BR signal strength and botanic characteristics. We recently demonstrated that modifying the phosphorylation sites of tomato SlBRI1 could improve the agronomic traits of tomato to different extents; however, the associated agronomic potential of SlBRI1 phosphorylation sites in tomato has not been fully exploited. In this research, the biological functions of the phosphorylation site threonine-825 (Thr-825) of SlBRI1 in tomato were investigated. Phenotypic analysis showed that, compared with a tomato line harboring SlBRI1, transgenic tomato lines expressing SlBRI1 with a nonphosphorylated Thr-825 (T825A) exhibited a larger plant size due to a larger cell size and higher yield, including a greater plant height, thicker stems, longer internodal lengths, greater plant expansion, a heavier fruit weight, and larger fruits. Molecular analyses further indicated that the autophosphorylation level of SlBRI1, BR signaling, and gibberellic acid (GA) signaling were elevated when SlBRI1 was dephosphorylated at Thr-825. Taken together, the results demonstrated that dephosphorylation of Thr-825 can enhance the functions of SlBRI1 in BR signaling, which subsequently activates and cooperates with GA signaling to stimulate cell elongation and then leads to larger plants and higher yields per plant. These results also highlight the agricultural potential of SlBRI1 phosphorylation sites for breeding high-yielding tomato varieties through precise control of BR signaling.

BRI1: !regulates! BR signal strength
SlBRI1: !modifies! agronomic traits of tomato
Thr-825: !enhances! SlBRI1 functions
SlBRI1: !activates! GA signaling
GA signaling: !stimulates! cell elongation
cell elongation: !leads to! larger plants and higher yields