Root system architecture (RSA), which is determined by the crown root angle (CRA), crown root diameter (CRD), and crown root number (CRN), is an important factor affecting the ability of plants to obtain nutrients and water from the soil. However, the genetic mechanisms regulating crown root traits in the field remain unclear. In this study, the CRA, CRD, and CRN of 316 diverse maize inbred lines were analysed in three field trials. Substantial phenotypic variations were observed for the three crown root traits in all environments. A genome-wide association study was conducted using two single-locus methods (GLM and MLM) and three multi-locus methods (FarmCPU, FASTmrMLM, and FASTmrEMMA) with 140,421 SNP. A total of 38 QTL including 126 SNPs were detected for CRA, CRD, and CRN. Additionally, 113 candidate genes within 50 kb of the significant SNPs were identified. Combining the gene annotation information and the expression profiles, 3 genes including GRMZM2G141205 (IAA), GRMZM2G138511 (HSP) and GRMZM2G175910 (cytokinin-O-glucosyltransferase) were selected as potentially candidate genes related to crown root development. Moreover, GRMZM2G141205, encoding an AUX/IAA transcriptional regulator, was resequenced in all tested lines. Five variants were identified as significantly associated with CRN in different environments. Four haplotypes were detected based on these significant variants, and Hap1 has more CRN. These findings may be useful for clarifying the genetic basis of maize root system architecture. Furthermore, the identified candidate genes and variants may be relevant for breeding new maize varieties with root traits suitable for diverse environmental conditions.

CRA: !affected by! Genome-wide association study 
CRD: !affected by! Genome-wide association study 
CRN: !affected by! Genome-wide association study 
SNPs: !associated with! CRA, CRD, CRN 
Candidate genes: !identified within! 50kb of SNPs 
GRMZM2G141205: !encodes! AUX/IAA transcriptional regulator 
Variants: !associated with! CRN 
Haplotypes: !detected based on! Variants