NtARF6 overexpression represses nicotine biosynthesis in tobacco. Transcriptome analysis suggests that NtARF6 acts as a regulatory hub that connect different phytohormone signaling pathways to antagonize the jasmonic acid-induced nicotine biosynthesis. Plant specialized metabolic pathways are regulated by a plethora of molecular regulators that form complex networks. In Nicotiana tabacum, nicotine biosynthesis is regulated by transcriptional activators, such as NtMYC2 and the NIC2-locus ERFs. However, the underlying molecular mechanism of the regulatory feedback is largely unknown. Previous research has shown that NbARF1, a nicotine synthesis repressor, reduces nicotine accumulation in N. benthamiana. In this study, we demonstrated that overexpression of NtARF6, an ortholog of NbARF1, was able to reduce pyridine alkaloid accumulation in tobacco. We found that NtARF6 could not directly repress the transcriptional activities of the key nicotine pathway structural gene promoters. Transcriptomic analysis suggested that this NtARF6-induced deactivation of alkaloid biosynthesis might be achieved by the antagonistic effect between jasmonic acid (JA) and other plant hormone signaling pathways, such as ethylene (ETH), salicylic acid (SA), abscisic acid (ABA). The repression of JA biosynthesis is accompanied by the induction of ETH, ABA, and SA signaling and pathogenic infection defensive responses, resulting in counteracting JA-induced metabolic reprogramming and decreasing the expression of nicotine biosynthetic genes in vivo. This study provides transcriptomic evidence for the regulatory mechanism of the NtARF6-mediated repression of alkaloid biosynthesis and indicates that this ARF transcription factor might act as a regulatory hub to connect different hormone signaling pathways in tobacco.

NtARF6: !represses! nicotine biosynthesis
NtARF6: !connects! phytohormone signaling pathways
NtMYC2/NIC2-locus ERFs: !regulate! nicotine biosynthesis
NbARF1: !reduces! nicotine accumulation
NtARF6: !antagonizes! JA-induced nicotine biosynthesis
JA: !induces! metabolic reprogramming
ETH/SA/ABA: !induce! defensive responses
NtARF6: !acts as! regulatory hub