Propagation of angiosperms mostly relies on sexual reproduction, in which gametophytic development is a pre-requisite. Male gametophytic development requires both gametophytic and sporophytic factors, most importantly early secretion and late programmed cell death of the tapetum. In addition to transcriptional factors, proteins at endomembrane compartments, such as receptor-like kinases and vacuolar proteases, control tapetal function. The cellular machinery that regulates their distribution is beginning to be revealed. We report here that ADP-RIBOSYLATION FACTOR-A1s (ArfA1s) are critical for tapetum-controlled pollen development. All six ArfA1s in the Arabidopsis genome are expressed during anther development, among which ArfA1b is specific to the tapetum and developing microspores. Although the ArfA1b loss-of-function mutant showed no pollen defects, probably due to redundancy, interference with ArfA1s by a dominant negative approach in the tapetum resulted in tapetal dysfunction and pollen abortion. We further showed that all six ArfA1s are associated with the Golgi and the trans-Golgi network/early endosome, suggesting that they have roles in regulating post-Golgi trafficking to the plasma membrane or to vacuoles. Indeed, we demonstrated that the expression of ArfA1b<sup>DN</sup> interfered with the targeting of proteins critical for tapetal development. The results presented here demonstrate a key role of ArfA1s in tapetum-controlled pollen development by mediating protein targeting through post-Golgi trafficking routes.

Gametophytic development: !requires! gametophytic and sporophytic factors
Tapetum: !controlled by! transcriptional factors, receptor-like kinases, vacuolar proteases
ArfA1s: !critical for! tapetum-controlled pollen development
ArfA1b: !specific to! tapetum and developing microspores
ArfA1s: !associated with! Golgi and trans-Golgi network/early endosome
ArfA1b<sup>DN</sup>: !interferes with! targeting of proteins critical for tapetal development