Flavonoids are specialized metabolites widely distributed across the plant kingdom. They are involved in the growth and survival of plants, conferring the ability to filter ultra-violet rays, conduct symbiotic partnerships, and respond to stress. While many branches of flavonoid biosynthesis have been resolved, recent discoveries suggest missing auxiliary components. These overlooked elements can guide metabolic flux, enhance production, mediate stereoselectivity, transport intermediates, and exert regulatory functions. This review describes several families of auxiliary proteins from across the plant kingdom, including examples from specialized metabolism. In flavonoid biosynthesis, we discuss the example of chalcone isomerase-like (CHIL) proteins and their non-catalytic role. CHILs mediate the cyclization of tetraketides, forming the chalcone scaffold by interacting with chalcone synthase (CHS). Loss of CHIL activity leads to derailment of the CHS-catalyzed reaction and a loss of pigmentation in fruits and flowers. Similarly, members of the pathogenesis-related 10 (PR10) protein family have been found to differentially bind flavonoid intermediates, guiding the composition of anthocyanins. This role comes within a larger body of PR10 involvement in specialized metabolism, from outright catalysis (e.g., (S)-norcoclaurine synthesis) to controlling stereochemistry (e.g., enhancing cis-trans cyclization in catnip). Both CHILs and PR10s hail from larger families of ligand-binding proteins with a spectrum of activity, complicating the characterization of their enigmatic roles. Strategies for the discovery of auxiliary proteins are discussed, as well as mechanistic models for their function. Targeting such unanticipated components will be crucial in manipulating plants or engineering microbial systems for natural product synthesis.

CHILs: !interact with! CHS 
CHILs: !mediate! cyclization of tetraketides 
PR10s: !bind! flavonoid intermediates 
PR10s: !guide! composition of anthocyanins 
PR10s: !enhance! cis-trans cyclization in catnip