Atractylodes chinensis (DC.) Koidz is a well-known medicinal plant containing the major bioactive compound, atractylodin, a sesquiterpenoid. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis demonstrated that atractylodin was most abundant in 3-year old A. chinensis rhizome, compared with those from 1- and 2-year old rhizomes, however, the molecular mechanisms underlying accumulation of atractylodin in rhizomes are poorly understood. In this study, we characterized the transcriptomes from rhizomes of 1-, 2- and 3-year old (Y1, Y2 and Y3, respectively) A. chinensis, to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). We identified 240, 169 and 131 unigenes encoding the enzyme genes in the mevalonate (MVA), methylerythritol phosphate (MEP), sesquiterpenoid and triterpenoid biosynthetic pathways, respectively. To confirm the reliability of the RNA sequencing analysis, eleven key gene encoding factors involved in the sesquiterpenoid and triterpenoid biosynthetic pathway, as well as in pigment, amino acid, hormone and transcription factor functions, were selected for quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis. The results demonstrated similar expression patterns to those determined by RNA sequencing, with a Pearson's correlation coefficient of 0.9 between qRT-PCR and RNA-seq data. Differential gene expression analysis of rhizomes from different ages revealed 52 genes related to sesquiterpenoid and triterpenoid biosynthesis. Among these, seven DEGs were identified in Y1 vs Y2, Y1 vs Y3 and Y2 vs Y3, of which five encoded four key enzymes, squalene/phytoene synthase (SS), squalene-hopene cyclase (SHC), squalene epoxidase (SE) and dammarenediol II synthase (DS). These four enzymes directly related to squalene biosynthesis and subsequent catalytic action. To validate the result of these seven DEGs, qRT-PCR was performed and indicated most of them displayed lower relative expression in 3-year old rhizome, similar to transcriptomic analysis. The enzymes SS, SHC, SE and DS down-regulated expression in 3-year old rhizome. This data corresponded to the higher content of sesquiterpenoid in 3-year old rhizome, and confirmed by qRT-PCR. The results of comparative transcriptome analysis and identified key enzyme genes laid a solid foundation for investigation of production sesquiterpenoid in A. chinensis.

Atractylodes chinensis: !contains! atractylodin 
HPLC analysis: !demonstrated! higher content in 3-year old rhizome 
RNA sequencing: !identified! 240, 169 and 131 unigenes 
qRT-PCR: !correlated with! RNA-seq data 
Differential gene expression: !revealed! 52 genes related to sesquiterpenoid/triterpenoid biosynthesis 
Seven DEGs: !down-regulated! expression in 3-year old rhizome 
Four enzymes: !directly related to! squalene biosynthesis 
qRT-PCR: !confirmed! lower relative expression in 3-year old rhizome