Mitochondrial uncoupling proteins (UCPs) are mitochondrial inner membrane proteins that dissipate the proton electrochemical gradient generated by the respiratory chain complexes. In plants, these proteins are crucial for maintaining mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis. In this study, single T-DNA insertion mutants for two (AtUCP1 and AtUCP2) out of the three UCP genes present in Arabidopsis thaliana were employed to elucidate their potential roles in planta. Our data revealed a significant increase in the Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)/Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) ratios of both mutants, indicating clear alterations in energy metabolism, and a reduced respiratory rate in atucp2. Phenotypic characterization revealed that atucp1 and atucp2 plants displayed reduced primary root growth under normal and stressed conditions. Moreover, a reduced fertility phenotype was observed in both mutants, which exhibited an increased number of sterile siliques and a lower seed yield compared with wild-type plants. Reciprocal crosses demonstrated that both male fertility and female fertility were compromised in atucp1, while such effect was exclusively observed in the male counterpart in atucp2. Most strikingly, a pronounced accumulation of hydrogen peroxide in the reproductive organs was observed in all mutant lines, indicating a disturbance in ROS homeostasis of mutant flowers. Accordingly, the atucp1 and atucp2 mutants exhibited higher levels of ROS in pollen grains. Further, alternative oxidase 1a was highly induced in mutant flowers, while the expression profiles of transcription factors implicated in gene regulation during female and male reproductive organ/tissue development were perturbed. Overall, these data support the important role for AtUCP1 and AtUCP2 in flower oxidative homeostasis and overall plant fertility.

AtUCP1: !affects! Energy metabolism
AtUCP1: !reduces! Primary root growth
AtUCP1: !compromises! Fertility
AtUCP2: !increases! ATP/ADP ratio
AtUCP2: !reduces! Respiratory rate
AtUCP2: !compromises! Fertility
AtUCP2: !affects! Male fertility
ROS: !accumulates in! Reproductive organs
ROS: !increases in! Pollen grains
Alternative oxidase 1a: !highly induced in! Mutant flowers
Transcription factors: !perturbed in! Gene regulation