Non-canonical AUX/IAA protein, OsIAA29, and ZmMPR-1 homologues, OsMRPLs, are part of an auxin-related signalling cascade operating in the dorsal aleurone during early rice grain development. Endosperm of rice and other cereals accumulates high concentrations of the predominant in planta auxin, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) during early grain development. However, IAA signalling and function during endosperm development are poorly understood. Here, we report that OsYUC12 (an auxin biosynthesis gene) and OsIAA29 (encoding a non-canonical AUX/IAA) are both expressed exclusively in grains, reaching a maximum 5-6 days after pollination. OsYUC12 expression is localised in the aleurone, sub-aleurone and embryo, whereas OsIAA29 expression is restricted to a narrow strip in the dorsal aleurone, directly under the vascular bundle. Although rice has been reported to lack endosperm transfer cells (ETCs), this region of the aleurone is enriched with sugar transporters and is likely to play a key role in apoplastic nutrient transfer, analogous to ETCs in other cereals. OsIAA29 has orthologues only in grass species; expression of which is also specific to early grain development. OsYUC12 and OsIAA29 are temporally co-expressed with two genes (AL1 and OsPR602) previously linked to the development of dorsal aleurone or ETCs. Also up-regulated at the same time is a cluster of MYB-related genes (designated OsMRPLs) homologous to ZmMRP-1, which regulates maize ETC development. Wheat homologues of ZmMRP-1 are similarly expressed in ETCs. Although previous work has suggested that other cereals do not have orthologues of ZmMRP-1, our work suggests OsIAA29 and OsMRPLs and their homologues in other grasses are part of an auxin-regulated, conserved signalling network involved in the differentiation of cells with ETC-like function in developing cereal grains.

OsYUC12: !localizes to! aleurone, sub-aleurone and embryo
OsIAA29: !localizes to! narrow strip in dorsal aleurone
OsYUC12: !co-expressed with! OsIAA29
OsIAA29: !interacts with! OsMRPLs
AL1: !co-expressed with! OsIAA29
OsPR602: !co-expressed with! OsIAA29
OsMRPLs: !homologous to! ZmMRP-1
ZmMRP-1: !regulates! maize ETC development
Wheat homologues of ZmMRP-1: !expressed in! ETCs