High yield is the primary objective of maize breeding. Genomic dissection of grain yield and yield-related traits contribute to understanding the yield formation and improving the yield of maize. In this study, two genome-wide association study (GWAS) methods and genomic prediction were made on an association panel of 309 inbred lines. GWAS analyses revealed 22 significant trait-marker associations for grain yield per plant (GYP) and yield-related traits. Genomic prediction analyses showed that reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) outperformed the other four models based on GWAS-derived markers for GYP, ear weight, kernel number per ear and row, ear length, and ear diameter, whereas genomic best linear unbiased prediction (GBLUP) showed a slight superiority over other modes in most subsets of the trait-associated marker (TAM) for thousand kernel weight and kernel row number. The prediction accuracy could be improved when significant single-nucleotide polymorphisms were fitted as the fixed effects. Integrating information on population structure into the fixed model did not improve the prediction performance. For GYP, the prediction accuracy of TAMs derived from fixed and random model Circulating Probability Unification (FarmCPU) was comparable to that of the compressed mixed linear model (CMLM). For yield-related traits, CMLM-derived markers provided better accuracies than FarmCPU-derived markers in most scenarios. Compared with all markers, TAMs could effectively improve the prediction accuracies for GYP and yield-related traits. For eight traits, moderate- and high-prediction accuracies were achieved using TAMs. Taken together, genomic prediction incorporating prior information detected by GWAS could be a promising strategy to improve the grain yield of maize.

GWAS: !reveals! trait-marker associations
RKHS: !outperforms! other models
GBLUP: !slightly superior to! other models
SNPs: !fitted as! fixed effects
Population structure: !does not improve! prediction performance
FarmCPU: !comparable to! CMLM
CMLM: !provides better accuracies than! FarmCPU
TAMs: !effectively improve! prediction accuracies
Genomic prediction: !promising strategy to! improve grain yield