Heat stress adversely affects an array of molecular and cellular events in plant cells, such as denaturation of protein and lipid molecules and malformation of cellular membranes and cytoskeleton networks. Genome organization and DNA integrity are also disturbed under heat stress, and accordingly, plants have evolved sophisticated adaptive mechanisms that either protect their genomes from deleterious heat-induced damages or stimulate genome restoration responses. In particular, it is emerging that DNA damage responses are a critical defense process that underlies the acquirement of thermotolerance in plants, during which molecular players constituting the DNA repair machinery are rapidly activated. In recent years, thermotolerance genes that mediate the maintenance of genome integrity or trigger DNA repair responses have been functionally characterized in various plant species. Furthermore, accumulating evidence supports that genome integrity is safeguarded through multiple layers of thermoinduced protection routes in plant cells, including transcriptome adjustment, orchestration of RNA metabolism, protein homeostasis, and chromatin reorganization. In this review, we summarize topical progresses and research trends in understanding how plants cope with heat stress to secure genome intactness. We focus on molecular regulatory mechanisms by which plant genomes are secured against the DNA-damaging effects of heat stress and DNA damages are effectively repaired. We will also explore the practical interface between heat stress response and securing genome integrity in view of developing biotechnological ways of improving thermotolerance in crop species under global climate changes, a worldwide ecological concern in agriculture.

Gene: !affects! Denaturation of protein and lipid molecules
Gene: !affects! Malformation of cellular membranes
Gene: !affects! Cytoskeleton networks
Gene: !affects! Genome organization
Gene: !affects! DNA integrity
Gene: !mediates! Thermotolerance
Gene: !triggers! DNA repair responses
Gene: !adjusts! Transcriptome
Gene: !orchestrates! RNA metabolism
Gene: !maintains! Protein homeostasis
Gene: !reorganizes! Chromatin