Plant height is an important architecture trait which is a fundamental yield-determining trait in crops. Variety with dwarf or semi-dwarf phenotype is a major objective in the breeding because dwarfing architecture can help to increase harvest index, increase planting density, enhance lodging resistance, and thus be suitable for mechanization harvest. Although some germplasm or genes associated with dwarfing plant type have been carried out. The molecular mechanisms underlying dwarfism in oilseed rape (Brassica napus L.) are poorly understood, restricting the progress of breeding dwarf varieties in this species. Here, we report a new dwarf mutant Bndwarf2 from our B. napus germplasm. We studied its inheritance and mapped the dwarf locus BnDWARF2. The inheritance analysis showed that the dwarfism phenotype was controlled by one semi-dominant gene, which was mapped in an interval of 787.88 kb on the C04 chromosome of B. napus by Illumina Brassica 60 K Bead Chip Array. To fine-map BnDWARF2, 318 simple sequence repeat (SSR) primers were designed to uniformly cover the mapping interval. Among them, 15 polymorphic primers that narrowed down the BnDWARF2 locus to 34.62 kb were detected using a F<sub>2:3</sub> family population with 889 individuals. Protein sequence analysis showed that only BnaC04.BIL1 (BnaC04g41660D) had two amino acid residues substitutions (Thr187Ser and Gln399His) between ZS11 and Bndwarf2, which encoding a GLYCOGEN SYNTHASE KINASE 3 (GSK3-like). The quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis showed that the BnaC04.BIL1 gene expressed in all tissues of oilseed rape. Subcellular localization experiment showed that BnaC04.BIL1 was localized in the nucleus in tobacco leaf cells. Genetic transformation experiments confirmed that the BnaC04.BIL1 is responsible for the plant dwarf phenotype in the Bndwarf2 mutants. Overexpression of BnaC04.BIL1 reduced plant height, but also resulted in compact plant architecture. A dominant dwarfing gene, BnaC04.BIL1, encodes an GSK3-like that negatively regulates plant height, was mapped and isolated. Our identification of a distinct gene locus may help to improve lodging resistance in oilseed rape.

Bndwarf2: !controlled by! semi-dominant gene
BnDWARF2: !mapped to! C04 chromosome
F<sub>2:3</sub> family population: !narrowed down! BnDWARF2 locus
BnaC04.BIL1: !encodes! GSK3-like 
BnaC04.BIL1: !localized in! nucleus
BnaC04.BIL1: !negatively regulates! plant height