['34351541', 'BACKGROUND: WRKY transcription factor is involved in regulation of plant growth  and development, response to biotic and abiotic stresses, including homologous  WRKY3 and WRKY4 genes which play a vital role in regulating plants defense  response to pathogen and drought stress. METHODS AND RESULTS: To investigate the  function of AtWRKY3 and AtWRKY4 genes in regulating salt and Me-JA stresses, the  loss-of-function mutations were generated by clustered regularly interspaced  short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated 9 (Cas9) system in  Arabidopsis thaliana. Several independent transgenic lines with single or double  mutations were obtained via Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. The knockout  lines of AtWRKY3 and AtWRKY4 genes were successfully achieved and confirmed by  qRT-PCR technology. Expression analysis showed that AtWRKY3 and AtWRKY4 genes had  significantly up-regulated under salt and Me-JA stresses. The growth of double  mutant plants under salt or Me-JA stresses were significantly inhibited compared  with corresponding wild type (WT) plants, especially their root lengths.  Moreover, the double mutant plants displayed salt and Me-JA sensitivity  phenotypic characteristics, such as the increased relative electrolyte leakage  (REL) and a substantial reduce in the activities of antioxidant enzymes,  including superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase (POD) and catalase (CAT)  activities. CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data suggested that the  simultaneous modification of homologous gene copies of WRKY are established using  CRISPR/Cas9 system in A. thaliana and the loss of AtWRKY3 and AtWRKY4 has an  effect on ROS scavenging pathways to reduce stress tolerance.', '2021 Aug', 'Mol Biol Rep', '10.1007/s11033-021-06541-4', 'ORCID:']

AtWRKY3: !upregulates under! salt and Me-JA stresses
AtWRKY4: !upregulates under! salt and Me-JA stresses
AtWRKY3: !interacts with! AtWRKY4
AtWRKY3/AtWRKY4 double mutant: !inhibits growth of! WT plants
AtWRKY3/AtWRKY4 double mutant: !increases! REL
AtWRKY3/AtWRKY4 double mutant: !reduces! SOD, POD, CAT activities