The root rot of fragrant solomonseal (Polygonatum odoratum) has occurred frequently in the traditional P. odoratum cultivating areas in recent years, causing a heavy loss in yield and quality. The phenolic acids in soil, which are the exudates from the P. odoratum root, act as allelochemicals that contribute to the consecutive monoculture problem (CMP) of the medicinal plant. The aim of this study was to get a better understanding of P. odoratum CMP. The phenolic acid contents, the nutrient chemical contents, and the enzyme activities related to the soil nutrient metabolism in the first cropping (FC) soil and continuous cropping (CC) soil were determined, and the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to the regulation of the phenolic acids in roots were analyzed. The results showed that five low-molecule-weight phenolic acids were detected both in the CC soil and FC soil, but the phenolic acid contents in the CC soil were significantly higher than those in the FC soil except vanillic acid. The contents of the available nitrogen, available phosphorus, and available potassium in the CC soil were significantly decreased, and the activities of urease and sucrase in the CC soil were significantly decreased. The genomic analysis showed that the phenolic acid anabolism in P. odoratum in the CC soil was promoted. These results indicated that the phenolic acids were accumulated in the CC soil, the nutrient condition in the CC soil deteriorated, and the nitrogen metabolism and sugar catabolism of the CC soil were lowered. Meantime, the anabolism of phenolic acids was increased in the CC plant. The CC system promoted the phenolic acid anabolism in P. odoratum and made phenolic acids accumulate in the soil.

P. odoratum: !exudes! phenolic acids
phenolic acids: !contribute to! CMP
FC soil: !has lower! phenolic acid content
CC soil: !has lower! nutrient content
CC soil: !has lower! enzyme activities
DEGs: !regulate! phenolic acid anabolism
CC system: !promotes! phenolic acid anabolism
CC plant: !accumulates! phenolic acids