Glycosyltransferases constitute a large family of enzymes across all domains of life, but knowledge of their biochemical function remains largely incomplete, particularly in the context of plant specialized metabolism. The labdane diterpenes represent a large class of phytochemicals with many pharmacological benefits, such as anti-inflammatory, hepatoprotective, and anticarcinogenic. The medicinal plant kalmegh (Andrographis paniculata) produces bioactive labdane diterpenes; notably, the C19-hydroxyl diterpene (andrograpanin) is predominantly found as C19-O-glucoside (neoandrographolide), whereas diterpenes having additional hydroxylation(s) at C3 (14-deoxy-11,12-didehydroandrographolide) or C3 and C14 (andrographolide) are primarily detected as aglycones, signifying scaffold-selective C19-O-glucosylation of diterpenes in planta. Here, we analyzed UDP-glycosyltransferase (UGT) activity and diterpene levels across various developmental stages and tissues and found an apparent correlation of UGT activity with the spatiotemporal accumulation of neoandrographolide, the major diterpene C19-O-glucoside. The biochemical analysis of recombinant UGTs preferentially expressed in neoandrographolide-accumulating tissues identified a previously uncharacterized UGT86 member (ApUGT12/UGT86C11) that catalyzes C19-O-glucosylation of diterpenes with strict scaffold selectivity. ApUGT12 localized to the cytoplasm and catalyzed diterpene C19-O-glucosylation in planta. The substrate selectivity demonstrated by the recombinant ApUGT12 expressed in plant and bacterium hosts was comparable to native UGT activity. Recombinant ApUGT12 showed significantly higher catalytic efficiency using andrograpanin compared with 14-deoxy-11,12-didehydroandrographolide and trivial activity using andrographolide. Moreover, ApUGT12 silencing in plants led to a drastic reduction in neoandrographolide content and increased levels of andrograpanin. These data suggest the involvement of ApUGT12 in scaffold-selective C19-O-glucosylation of labdane diterpenes in plants. This knowledge of UGT86 function might help in developing plant chemotypes and synthesis of pharmacologically relevant diterpenes.

UGT: !catalyzes! C19-O-glucosylation 
ApUGT12: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
ApUGT12: !catalyzes! diterpene C19-O-glucosylation 
ApUGT12: !selectively catalyzes! andrograpanin 
ApUGT12: !silencing in plants! reduces neoandrographolide content