To investigate the importance of light on healing and acclimatization, in the present study, grafted watermelon seedlings were exposed to darkness (D) or light, provided by blue (B), red (R), a mixture of R (68%) and B (RB), or white (W; 35% B, 49% intermediate spectra, 16% R) LEDs for 12 days. Survival ratio, root and shoot growth, soluble carbohydrate content, photosynthetic pigments content, and photosynthetic performance were evaluated. Seedling survival was not only strongly limited in D but the survived seedlings had an inferior shoot and root development, reduced chlorophyll content, and attenuated photosynthetic efficiency. RB-exposed seedlings had a less-developed root system. R-exposed seedlings showed leaf epinasty, and had the smallest leaf area, reduced chlorophyll content, and suppressed photosynthetic apparatus performance. The R-exposed seedlings contained the highest amount of soluble carbohydrate and together with D-exposed seedlings the lowest amount of chlorophyll in their scions. B-exposed seedlings showed the highest chlorophyll content and improved overall PSII photosynthetic functioning. W-exposed seedling had the largest leaf area, and closely resembled the photosynthetic properties of RB-exposed seedlings. We assume that, during healing of grafted seedlings monochromatic R light should be avoided. Instead, W and monochromatic B light may be willingly adopted due to their promoting effect on shoot, pigments content, and photosynthetic efficiency.

Light: !enhances! Survival Ratio
Light: !enhances! Root and Shoot Growth
Light: !enhances! Photosynthetic Pigments Content
Light: !enhances! Photosynthetic Performance
Darkness: !limits! Survival Ratio
Darkness: !inhibits! Root and Shoot Development
Darkness: !reduces! Chlorophyll Content
Darkness: !attenuates! Photosynthetic Efficiency
RB Light: !inhibits! Root System Development
R Light: !causes! Leaf Epinasty
R Light: !reduces! Leaf Area
R Light: !reduces! Chlorophyll Content
R Light: !suppresses! Photosynthetic Apparatus Performance
R Light: !contains! Highest Amount of Soluble Carbohydrate
B Light: !increases! Chlorophyll Content
B Light: !improves! PSII Photosynthetic Functioning
W Light: !increases! Leaf Area
W Light: !resembles! Photosynthetic Properties of RB Light