During antipodal cells PCD, polytene chromosomes rearrangement, segregation of nucleoli components and extrusion of nuclear components occur, cytochrome c is released from the mitochondria and DNA breaks appear. We studied in detail the nuclei of cells of the antipodal complex of wheat embryo sac (Triticum aestivum L.) during programmed cell death (PCD). The antipodal complex has been reported to be formed before double fertilisation of the embryo sac. Polyploidisation leads to the formation of giant polytene chromosomes in the nuclei of antipodal cells. These chromosomes are involved in secretory functions and are important for the development of cellular endosperm. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labelling assay and immunodetection revealed DNA breaks in the nuclei and release of cytochrome c from mitochondria into the cytoplasm of antipodal cells during PCD. We used transmission electron microscopy, immunodetection and histochemistry to analyse the characteristic structural changes in the nuclei of antipodal cells during PCD. These included sequential structural changes in the nuclei containing polytene chromosomes, segregation of some components of the nucleolus into the bodies of polytene chromosomes, extrusion of nucleolar components and parts of chromosomes into the cytoplasm of antipodal cells and then into the endosperm coenocyte. The obtained results expand the understanding of the structural changes of plant cells with giant polytene chromosomes during PCD.

polytene chromosomes: !involved in! secretory functions 
polytene chromosomes: !important for! development of cellular endosperm 
DNA breaks: !revealed by! Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labelling assay and immunodetection 
cytochrome c: !released from! mitochondria 
nuclei: !undergo! structural changes 
nucleoli components: !segregate into! bodies of polytene chromosomes 
nucleolar components: !extrude into! cytoplasm of antipodal cells 
chromosomes: !extrude into! cytoplasm of antipodal cells