Flowering is an important inflection point in the transformation from vegetative to reproductive growth, and premature bolting severely decreases crop yield and quality. In this study, a stable early-bolting mutant, ebm3, was identified in an ethyl methanesulfonate (EMS)-mutagenized population of a Chinese cabbage doubled haploid (DH) line 'FT'. Compared with 'FT', ebm3 showed early bolting under natural cultivation in autumn, and curled leaves. Genetic analysis showed that the early-bolting phenotype was controlled by a single recessive nuclear gene. Modified MutMap sequencing, genotyping analyses and allelism test provide strong evidence that BrEBM3 (BraA04g017190.3 C), encoding the histone methyltransferase CURLY LEAF (CLF), was the strongly candidate gene of the emb3. A C to T base substitution in the 14th exon of BrEBM3 resulted in an amino acid change (S to F) and the early-bolting phenotype of emb3. The mutation occurred in the SET domain (Suppressor of protein-effect variegation 3-9, Enhancer-of-zeste, Trithorax), which catalyzes site- and state-specific lysine methylation in histones. Tissue-specific expression analysis showed that BrEBM3 was highly expressed in the flower and bud. Promoter activity assay confirmed that BrEBM3 promoter was active in inflorescences. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that BrEBM3 localized in the nucleus. Transcriptomic studies supported that BrEBM3 mutation might repress H3K27me3 deposition and activate expression of the AGAMOUS (AG) and AGAMOUS-like (AGL) loci, resulting in early flowering. Our study revealed that an EMS-induced early-bolting mutant ebm3 in Chinese cabbage was caused by a nonsynonymous mutation in BraA04g017190.3 C, encoding the histone methyltransferase CLF. These results improve our knowledge of the genetic and genomic resources of bolting and flowering, and may be beneficial to the genetic improvement of Chinese cabbage.

ebm3: !caused by! mutation
BrEBM3: !encodes! histone methyltransferase CLF
BrEBM3: !localizes to! nucleus
BrEBM3: !activates! AG/AGL loci
BrEBM3: !represses! H3K27me3 deposition
mutation: !affects! flowering