Overexpression of the leaf color (Lc) gene in Ma bamboo substantially increased the accumulation level of anthocyanin, and improved plant tolerance to cold and drought stresses, probably due to the increased antioxidant capacity. Most bamboos, including Ma bamboo (Dendrocalamus latiflorus Munro), are naturally evergreen and sensitive to cold and drought stresses, while it's nearly impossible to make improvements through conventual breeding due to their long and irregular flowering habit. Moreover, few studies have reported bamboo germplasm innovation through genetic engineering as bamboo genetic transformation remains difficult. In this study, we have upregulated anthocyanin biosynthesis in Ma bamboo, to generate non-green Ma bamboo with increased abiotic stress tolerance. By overexpressing the maize Lc gene, a bHLH transcription activator involved in the anthocyanin biosynthesis in Ma bamboo, we generated purple bamboos with increased anthocyanin levels including cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside, peonidin 3-O-rutinoside, and an unknown cyanidin pentaglycoside derivative. The expression levels of 9 anthocyanin biosynthesis genes were up-regulated. Overexpression of the Lc gene improved the plant tolerance to cold and drought stress, probably due to increased antioxidant capacity. The levels of the cold- and drought-related phytohormone jasmonic acid in the transgenic plants were also enhanced, which may also contribute to the plant stress-tolerant phenotypes. High anthocyanin accumulation level did not affect plant growth. Transcriptomic analysis showed higher expressions of genes involved in the flavonoid pathway in Lc transgenic bamboos compared with those in wild-type ones. The anthocyanin-rich bamboos generated here provide an example of ornamental and multiple agronomic trait improvements by genetic engineering in this important grass species.

Lc gene: !overexpresses! anthocyanin biosynthesis
Lc gene: !enhances! plant tolerance to cold and drought stress
Lc gene: !increases! antioxidant capacity
Lc gene: !upregulates! 9 anthocyanin biosynthesis genes
Lc gene: !enhances! jasmonic acid levels
Lc gene: !increases! flavonoid pathway expression
Lc gene: !improves! ornamental and agronomic traits