C. panzhihuaensis is more tolerant to freezing than C. bifida but the mechanisms underlying the different freezing tolerance are unclear. Photosynthesis is one of the most temperature-sensitive processes. Lipids play important roles in membrane structure, signal transduction and energy storage, which are closely related to the stress responses of plants. In this study, the chlorophyll fluorescence parameters and lipid profiles of the two species were characterized to explore the changes in photosynthetic activity and lipid metabolism following low-temperature exposure and subsequent recovery. Photosynthetic activity significantly decreased in C. bifida with the decrease of temperatures and reached zero after recovery. Photosynthetic activity, however, was little affected in C. panzhihuaensis. The lipid composition of C. bifida was more affected by cold and freezing treatments than C. panzhihuaensis. Compared with the control, the proportions of all the lipid categories recovered to the original level in C. panzhihuaensis, but the proportions of most lipid categories changed significantly in C. bifida after 3 d of recovery. In particular, the glycerophospholipids and prenol lipids degraded severely during the recovery period of C. bifida. Changes in acyl chain length and double bond index (DBI) occurred in more lipid classes immediately after low-temperature exposure in C. panzhihuaensis compare with those in C. bifida. DBI of the total main membrane lipids of C. panzhihuaensis was significantly higher than that of C. bifida following all temperature treatments. The results of chlorophyll fluorescence parameters confirmed that the freezing tolerance of C. panzhihuaensis was greater than that of C. bifida. The lipid metabolism of the two species had differential responses to low temperatures. The homeostasis and plastic adjustment of lipid metabolism and the higher level of DBI of the main membrane lipids may contribute to the greater tolerance of C. panzhihuaensis to low temperatures.

C. panzhihuaensis: !more tolerant to! freezing
Photosynthesis: !sensitive to! temperature
Lipids: !play role in! membrane structure, signal transduction, energy storage
C. bifida: !more affected by! cold and freezing treatments
Glycerophospholipids: !degraded severely during! recovery period of C. bifida
Acyl chain length: !changed in! more lipid classes of C. panzhihuaensis
DBI: !higher in! C. panzhihuaensis than C. bifida
Chlorophyll fluorescence parameters: !confirmed greater! tolerance of C. panzhihuaensis