The compatible solute sucrose reduces the efficiency of the enzymatic de-epoxidation of violaxanthin, probably by a direct effect on the protein parts of violaxanthin de-epoxidase which protrude from the lipid phase of the thylakoid membrane. The present study investigates the influence of the compatible solute sucrose on the violaxanthin cycle of higher plants in intact thylakoids and in in vitro enzyme assays with the isolated enzyme violaxanthin de-epoxidase at temperatures of 30 and 10ʡC, respectively. In addition, the influence of sucrose on the lipid organization of thylakoid membranes and the MGDG phase in the in vitro assays is determined. The results show that sucrose leads to a pronounced inhibition of violaxanthin de-epoxidation both in intact thylakoid membranes and the enzyme assays. In general, the inhibition is similar at 30 and 10ʡC. With respect to the lipid organization only minor changes can be seen in thylakoid membranes at 30ʡC in the presence of sucrose. However, sucrose seems to stabilize the thylakoid membranes at lower temperatures and at 10ʡC a comparable membrane organization to that at 30ʡC can be observed, whereas control thylakoids show a significantly different membrane organization at the lower temperature. The MGDG phase in the in vitro assays is not substantially affected by the presence of sucrose or by changes of the temperature. We conclude that the presence of sucrose and the increased viscosity of the reaction buffers stabilize the protein part of the enzyme violaxanthin de-epoxidase, thereby decreasing the dynamic interactions between the catalytic site and the substrate violaxanthin. This indicates that sucrose interacts with those parts of the enzyme which are accessible at the membrane surface of the lipid phase of the thylakoid membrane or the MGDG phase of the in vitro enzyme assays.

sucrose: !reduces efficiency of! violaxanthin de-epoxidation
sucrose: !stabilizes! thylakoid membrane
sucrose: !interacts with! enzyme parts accessible at membrane surface
sucrose: !decreases dynamic interactions between! catalytic site and substrate