Parthenocarpic tomato can set fruit and develop without pollination and exogenous hormone treatments under unfavorable environmental conditions, which is beneficial to tomato production from late fall to early spring in greenhouses. In this study, the endogenous hormones in the ovaries of the parthenocarpic tomato line "R35-P" (stigma removed or self-pollination) and the non-parthenocarpic tomato line "R35-N" (self-pollination) at four stages between preanthesis and postanthesis investigated, using high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). A nearly twofold IAA (indoleacetic acid) content was found in "R35-P" rather than in "R35-N" at -2 and 0 days after anthesis (DAA). Except at -2 DAA, a lower ABA (abscisic acid) content was observed in Pe (stigma removed in "R35-P") compared to that in Ps (self-pollination in "R35-P") or CK (self-pollination in "R35-N"). After pollination, although the content of GA<sub>1</sub> (gibberellins acid 1) in CK increased, the levels of GAs (gibberellins acids) were notably low. At all four stages, a lower SA (salicylic acid) content was found in Ps and CK than in Pe, while the content and the change trend were similar in Ps and CK. The variation tendencies of JA (jasmonic acid) varied among Pe, Ps, and CK at the studied periods. Furthermore, KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) enrichment analyses of transcriptomic data identified 175 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to plant hormone signal transduction, including 63 auxin-related genes, 27 abscisic acid-related genes, 22 ethylene-related genes, 16 cytokinin-related genes, 16 salicylic acid-related genes, 14 brassinosteroid-related genes, 13 jasmonic acid-related genes, and 4 gibberellin-related genes at -2 DAA and 0 DAA. Our results suggest that the fate of a fruit set or degeneration occurred before anthesis in tomato. Auxins, whose levels were independent of pollination and fertilization, play prominent roles in controlling a fruit set in "R35-P," and other hormones are integrated in a synergistic or antagonistic way.

Gene: !affects! Fruit set
Gene: !enhances! Auxin
Gene: !represses! ABA
Gene: !synthesizes! GA1
Gene: !interacts with! Ethylene
Gene: !interacts with! Cytokinin
Gene: !interacts with! Salicylic acid
Gene: !interacts with! Brassinosteroid
Gene: !interacts with! Jasmonic acid
Gene: !interacts with! Gibberellin