The expression of full-length cDNAs encoding lavender AGAMOUS-like (LaAG-like) and SEPALLATA3-like (LaSEP3-like) transcription factors induces early flowering and impacts the leaf morphology at a strong expression level in Arabidopsis. Lavandula angustifolia is widely cultivated as an ornamental plant due to its attractive flower structure, and as a source of valuable essential oils for use in cosmetics, alternative medicines, and culinary products. We recently employed RNA-Seq and transcript profiling to describe a number of transcription factors (TFs) that potentially control flower development in this plant. In this study, we investigated the roles of two TFs, LaAGAMOUS-like (LaAG-like) and LaSEPALLATA3-like (LaSEP3-like), that exhibited substantial homology to Arabidopsis thaliana floral development genes, AGAMOUS and SEPALLATA3, respectively, in flowering initiation in Arabidopsis. We stably and constitutively expressed LaAG-like and LaSEP3-like cDNAs in separate Arabidopsis plants. All transgenic plants flowered earlier than the wild-type controls. However, plants that modestly overexpressed the gene were phenotypically normal, while those that strongly expressed the transgene developed curly leaves. We also assessed the expression of five endogenous flowering time regulating genes, from which high expression of Flowering Locus T (AtFT) mRNA in both LaAG-like (type-I and -II) and LaSEP3-like (type-I), and Leafy (AtLFY) mRNAs in LaSEP3-like (type-I) transgenic plants were detected, compared to wild-type controls. Our results suggest that with controlled expression, lavender AG-like and SEP3-like genes are potentially useful for the regulation of flowering time in commercial lavender species, and could be used for plant improvement studies through molecular genetics and targeted breeding programs.

LaAG-like: !induces! early flowering 
LaSEP3-like: !induces! early flowering 
LaAG-like: !impacts! leaf morphology 
LaSEP3-like: !impacts! leaf morphology 
AtFT: !expressed in! LaAG-like & LaSEP3-like 
AtLFY: !expressed in! LaSEP3-like