Phosphoglycerate Dehydrogenase 1 of the phosphorylated pathway of serine biosynthesis, active in heterotrophic plastids, is required for the synthesis of serine to enable plant growth at high rates of indolic glucosinolate biosynthesis. Plants have evolved effective strategies to defend against various types of pathogens. The synthesis of a multitude of specialized metabolites represents one effective approach to keep plant attackers in check. The synthesis of those defense compounds is cost intensive and requires extensive interaction with primary metabolism. However, how primary metabolism is adjusted to fulfill the requirements of specialized metabolism is still not completely resolved. Here, we studied the role of the phosphorylated pathway of serine biosynthesis (PPSB) for the synthesis of glucosinolates, the main class of defensive compounds in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. We show that major genes of the PPSB are co-expressed with genes required for the synthesis of tryptophan, the unique precursor for the formation of indolic glucosinolates (IG). Transcriptional and metabolic characterization of loss-of-function and dominant mutants of ALTERED TRYPTOPHAN1-like transcription factors revealed demand driven activation of PPSB genes by major regulators of IG biosynthesis. Trans-activation of PPSB promoters by ATR1/MYB34 transcription factor in cultured root cells confirmed this finding. The content of IGs were significantly reduced in plants compromised in the PPSB and these plants showed higher sensitivity against treatment with 5-methyl-tryptophan, a characteristic behavior of mutants impaired in IG biosynthesis. We further found that serine produced by the PPSB is required to enable plant growth under conditions of high demand for IG. In addition, PPSB-deficient plants lack the growth promoting effect resulting from interaction with the beneficial root-colonizing fungus Colletotrichum tofieldiae.

PPSB: !synthesizes! serine 
ATR1/MYB34: !trans-activates! PPSB promoters 
PPSB: !enables! plant growth 
PPSB: !required for! IG biosynthesis 
IGs: !reduced in! PPSB-deficient plants 
PPSB: !promotes! interaction with beneficial fungus