This work reveals potentially multiple and integrated roles in flower and fruit development of floral C-class MADS-box genes in Physalis. The Physalis fruit features a morphological novelty, the Chinese lantern. Floral C-class MADS-domain AGAMOUS-like (AG-like) proteins can interact with the identified regulators of this novel structure. However, the developmental role of the floral C-class genes is unknown in Physalis. Here, we characterized two AG-like genes from Physalis floridana, designated PFAG1 and PFAG2. The two paralogous genes shared around 61.0% of sequence identity and had similar expression domains, with different expression levels in the floral and berry development. However, the genes had distinct expression patterns in leaf and calyx development. Protein-protein interaction analyses revealed that PFAG1 and PFAG2 could commonly or specifically dimerize with certain floral MADS-domain proteins as well as non-MADS-domain proteins involved in various floral developmental processes. Gene downregulation analyses demonstrated that PFAG1 may repress PFAG2, but PFAG2 did not affect PFAG1. Downregulating PFAG1 led to incomplete floral homeotic variation in the stamens and carpels, and alteration of petal coloration pattern, while downregulating PFAG2 did not result in any floral homeotic variation. PFAG1 affected pollen maturation, while PFAG2 affected female fertility. However, simultaneously downregulating PFAG1 and PFAG2 caused loss of the complete C-function, indicating that the two PFAG genes interact to determine the identity and functionality of androecia and gynoecia organs. Their potential roles in regulating fruit size and the Chinese lantern are also discussed. Our results reveal functional divergence of floral C-class MADS-box genes in Physalis, demonstrating that they may play multiple and integrated roles in flower and fruit development.

PFAG1: !interacts with! PFAG2
PFAG1: !represses! PFAG2
PFAG1: !affects! pollen maturation
PFAG2: !affects! female fertility
PFAG1: !enhances! petal coloration pattern
PFAG1: !synthesizes! complete C-function