Bagging can improve the appearance of fruits and increase the food safety and commodification, it also has effects on intrinsic quality of the fruits, which was commonly reported negative changes. Fig can be regarded as a new model fruit with its relatively small genome size and long fruit season. In this study, widely targeted metabolomics based on HPLC MS/MS and RNA-seq of the fruit tissue of the 'Zibao' fig before and after bagging were analyzed to reveal the metabolites changes of the edible part of figs and the underneath gene expression network changes. A total of 771 metabolites were identified in the metabolome analysis using fig female flower tissue. Of these, 88 metabolites (including one carbohydrate, eight organic acids, seven amino acids, and two vitamins) showed significant differences in fruit tissue before and after bagging. Changes in 16 structural genes, 13 MYB transcription factors, and endogenous hormone (ABA, IAA, and GA) metabolism and signal transduction-related genes in the biosynthesis pathway of flavonoids after bagging were analyzed by transcriptome analysis. KEGG enrichment analysis also determined significant differences in flavonoid biosynthesis pathways in female flower tissue before and after bagging. This work provided comprehensive information on the composition and abundance of metabolites in the female flower tissue of fig. The results showed that the differences in flavor components of the fruit before and after bagging could be explained by changes in the composition and abundance of carbohydrates, organic acids, amino acids, and phenolic compounds. This study provides new insights into the effects of bagging on changes in the intrinsic and appearance quality of fruits.

Gene: !affects! Metabolites 
Metabolites: !change in! Fruit tissue 
Gene: !regulates! Flavonoid biosynthesis 
Gene: !synthesizes! Carbohydrates 
Gene: !synthesizes! Organic acids 
Gene: !synthesizes! Amino acids 
Gene: !synthesizes! Phenolic compounds 
Gene: !influences! Flavor components