22 nt siRNAs applied to leaves induce production of transitive sRNAs for targeted genes and can enhance local silencing. Systemic silencing was only observed for a GFP transgene. RNA interference (RNAi) is a gene silencing mechanism important in regulating gene expression during plant development, response to the environment and defense. Better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of this pathway may lead to future strategies to improve crop traits of value. An abrasion method to deliver siRNAs into leaf cells of intact plants was used to investigate the activities of 21 and 22 nt siRNAs in silencing genes in Nicotiana benthamiana and Amaranthus cruentus. We confirmed that both 21 and 22 nt siRNAs were able to silence a green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgene in treated leaves of N. benthamiana, but systemic silencing of GFP occurred only when the guide strand contained 22 nt. Silencing in the treated leaves of N. benthamiana was demonstrated for three endogenous genes: magnesium cheletase subunit I (CHL-I), magnesium cheletase subunit H (CHL-H), and GENOMES UNCOUPLED4 (GUN4). However, systemic silencing of these endogenous genes was not observed. Very high levels of transitive siRNAs were produced for GFP in response to treatment with 22 nt siRNAs but only low levels were produced in response to a 21 nt siRNA. The endogenous genes tested also produced transitive siRNAs in response to 22 nt siRNAs. 22 nt siRNAs produced greater local silencing phenotypes than 21 nt siRNAs for three of the genes. These special properties of 22 nt siRNAs were also observed for the CHL-H gene in A. cruentus. These experiments suggest a functional role for transitive siRNAs in amplifying the RNAi response.

22 nt siRNAs: !induce! transitive sRNAs 
transitive sRNAs: !amplify! RNAi response 
GFP transgene: !silenced by! 22 nt siRNAs 
CHL-I, CHL-H, GUN4 genes: !silenced locally by! 22 nt siRNAs 
GFP transgene: !produce! transitive siRNAs 
CHL-I, CHL-H, GUN4 genes: !produce! transitive siRNAs