Plant-associated beneficial strains inhabiting plants grown under harsh ecosystems can help them cope with abiotic stress factors by positively influencing plant physiology, development, and environmental adaptation. Previously, we isolated a potential plant growth promoting strain (AXSa06) identified as <i>Pseudomonas oryzihabitans</i>, possessing 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase activity, producing indole-3-acetic acid and siderophores, as well as solubilizing inorganic phosphorus. In this study, we aimed to further evaluate the effects of AXSa06 seed inoculation on the growth of tomato seedlings under excess salt (200 mM NaCl) by deciphering their transcriptomic and metabolomic profiles. Differences in transcript levels and metabolites following AXSa06 inoculation seem likely to have contributed to the observed difference in salt adaptation of inoculated plants. In particular, inoculations exerted a positive effect on plant growth and photosynthetic parameters, imposing plants to a primed state, at which they were able to respond more robustly to salt stress probably by efficiently activating antioxidant metabolism, by dampening stress signals, by detoxifying Na<sup>+</sup>, as well as by effectively assimilating carbon and nitrogen. The primed state of AXSa06-inoculated plants is supported by the increased leaf lipid peroxidation, ascorbate content, as well as the enhanced activities of antioxidant enzymes, prior to stress treatment. The identified signatory molecules of AXSa06-mediated salt tolerance included the amino acids aspartate, threonine, serine, and glutamate, as well as key genes related to ethylene or abscisic acid homeostasis and perception, and ion antiporters. Our findings represent a promising sustainable solution to improve agricultural production under the forthcoming climate change conditions.

AXSa06: !enhances! Plant Growth 
AXSa06: !promotes! Photosynthetic Parameters 
AXSa06: !activates! Antioxidant Metabolism 
AXSa06: !dampens! Stress Signals 
AXSa06: !detoxifies! Na+ 
AXSa06: !assimilates! Carbon & Nitrogen 
AXSa06: !increases! Leaf Lipid Peroxidation 
AXSa06: !enhances! Ascorbate Content 
AXSa06: !activates! Antioxidant Enzymes 
AXSa06: !produces! Amino Acids 
AXSa06: !regulates! Ethylene/Abscisic Acid Homeostasis & Perception 
AXSa06: !controls! Ion Antiporters