Dietary supplements of anthocyanin-rich vegetables have been known to increase potential health benefits for humans. The optimization of environmental conditions to increase the level of anthocyanin accumulations in vegetables during the cultivation periods is particularly important in terms of the improvement of agricultural values in the indoor farm using artificial light and climate controlling systems. This study reports on the measurement of variations in anthocyanin accumulations in leaf tissues of four different cultivars in <i>Brassica rapa</i> var. <i>chinensis</i> (bok choy) grown under the different environmental conditions of the indoor farm using hyperspectral imaging. Anthocyanin accumulations estimated by hyperspectral imaging were compared with the measured anthocyanin accumulation obtained by destructive analysis. Between hyperspectral imaging and destructive analysis values, no significant differences in anthocyanin accumulation were observed across four bok choy cultivars grown under the anthocyanin stimulation environmental condition, whereas the estimated anthocyanin accumulations displayed cultivar-dependent significant differences, suggesting that hyperspectral imaging can be employed to measure variations in anthocyanin accumulations of different bok choy cultivars. Increased accumulation of anthocyanin under the stimulation condition for anthocyanin accumulation was observed in "purple magic" and "red stem" by both hyperspectral imaging and destructive analysis. In the different growth stages, no significant differences in anthocyanin accumulation were found in each cultivar by both hyperspectral imaging and destructive analysis. These results suggest that hyperspectral imaging can provide comparable analytic capability with destructive analysis to measure variations in anthocyanin accumulation that occurred under the different light and temperature conditions of the indoor farm. Leaf image analysis measuring the percentage of purple color area in the total leaf area displayed successful classification of anthocyanin accumulation in four bok choy cultivars in comparison to hyperspectral imaging and destructive analysis, but it also showed limitation to reflect the level of color saturation caused by anthocyanin accumulation under different environmental conditions in "red stem," "white stem," and "green stem." Finally, our hyperspectral imaging system was modified to be applied onto the high-throughput plant phenotyping system, and its test to analyze the variation of anthocyanin accumulation in four cultivars showed comparable results with the result of the destructive analysis.

Anthocyanin: !accumulates in! leaf tissues 
Hyperspectral imaging: !measures! anthocyanin accumulations 
Destructive analysis: !measures! anthocyanin accumulations 
Leaf image analysis: !classifies! anthocyanin accumulation 
High-throughput plant phenotyping system: !analyzes! variation of anthocyanin accumulation