Thirty CcMYB were identified to involve in flavonoid and lignin biosynthesis in pigeon pea genome. A comprehensive analysis of gene structure, phylogenetic relationships, distribution on chromosomes, gene duplication, and expression patterns was performed. MYB transcription factor is one of the largest gene families in plants and plays critical roles in plant growth and development, as well as resistance to biotic and abiotic stress. However, the function of MYB genes in pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan) remains largely unknown. Here, 30 R2R3-MYB which involved flavonoid and lignin biosynthesis were identified in the pigeon pea genome and were classified into five groups based on phylogenetic analysis. Simultaneously, another 122 key enzyme genes from biosynthetic pathways of flavonoid and lignin were identified and all of them were mapped on 11 chromosomes with the co-linearity relationship. Among these genes, the intron/exon organization and motif compositions were conserved and they have undergone a strong purifying selection and tandem duplications during evolution. Expression profile analysis demonstrated most of these genes were expressed in different tissues and responded significantly to MeJA, RNA-seq analysis revealed clear details of genes varied with time of induction. Ten key genes from the phenylpropanoid pathway were selected to further verify whether they responded to induction under different abiotic stress conditions (UV-B, cold, heat, salt, drought, and GA<sub>3</sub>). This study elaborates on potential regulatory relationships between R2R3-MYB genes and some key genes involved in flavonoid and lignin biosynthesis under MeJA treatment, as well as adding to the understanding of improving abiotic stress tolerance and regulating the secondary metabolism in woody crops. A simplified discussion model for the different regulation networks involved with flavonoid and lignin biosynthesis in pigeon pea is proposed.

MYB: !regulates! flavonoid and lignin biosynthesis
MYB: !classifies into! five groups
MYB: !maps to! 11 chromosomes
MYB: !undergoes! purifying selection
MYB: !responds to! MeJA
MYB: !varies with! time of induction
MYB: !responds to! abiotic stress