Enhanced levels of indole-3-acetic and raised auxin to cytokinin ratios in the stem base contribute to the positive acropetal gradient in rooting capacity of leafy single-node stem cuttings of rose. Cuttings excised from different nodal positions in stock plants can differ in subsequent adventitious root formation. We investigated the involvement of the auxin-cytokinin balance in position-affected rooting of Rosa hybrida. Leafy single-node stem cuttings of two rose cultivars were excised from top versus bottom positions. Concentrations of IAA and cytokinins were monitored in the bud region and the stem base during 8 days after planting using chromatography-MS/MS technology. The effects of nodal position and external supply of indole-butyric acid on rooting were analyzed. Most cytokinins increased particularly in the bud region and peaked at day two before the bud break was recorded. IAA increased in both tissues between day one and day eight. Top versus bottom cuttings revealed higher levels of isopentenyladenosine (IPR) in both tissues as well as higher concentrations of IAA and a higher ratio of IAA to cytokinins particularly in the stem base. The dynamic of hormones and correlation analysis indicated that the higher IPR contributed to the enhanced IAA in the bud region which served as auxin source for the auxin homeostasis in the stem base, where IAA determined the auxin-cytokinin balance. Bottom versus top cuttings produced lower numbers and lengths of roots, whereas this deficit was counterbalanced by auxin application. Further considering other studies of rose, it is concluded that cytokinin-, sucrose- and zinc-dependent auxin biosynthesis in the outgrowing buds is an important factor that contributes to the enhanced IAA levels and auxin/cytokinin ratios in the stem base of apical cuttings, promoting root induction.

Nodal position: !affects! Auxin-cytokinin balance
Indole-butyric acid: !counterbalances! Root induction deficit
Cytokinins: !increase in! Bud region
IIAA: !increases in! Both tissues
IPR: !contributes to! Enhanced IAA in bud region
Auxin biosynthesis: !promotes! Root induction