In this review, we have focused on the CRISPR/Cas9 technology for improving the agronomic traits in plants through point mutations, knockout, and single base editing, and we highlighted the recent progress in plant metabolic engineering. CRISPR/Cas9 technology has immense power to reproduce plants with desired characters and revolutionizing the field of genome engineering by erasing the barriers in targeted genome editing. Agriculture fields are using this advance genome editing tool to get the desired traits in the crops plants such as increase yield, improve product quality attributes, and enhance resistance against biotic and abiotic stresses by identifying and editing genes of interest. This review focuses on CRISPR/Cas-based gene knockout for trait improvement and single base editing to boost yield, quality, stress tolerance, and disease resistance traits in crops. Use of CRISPR/Cas9 system to facilitate crop domestication and hybrid breeding are also touched. We summarize recent developments and up-gradation of delivery mechanism (nanotechnology and virus particle-based delivery system) and progress in multiplex gene editing. We also shed lights in advances and challenges of engineering the important metabolic pathways that contain a variety of dietary metabolites and phytochemicals. In addition, we endorsed substantial technical hurdles and possible ways to overcome the unpredictability of CRISPR/Cas technology for broader application across various crop species. We speculated that by making a strong interconnection among all genomic fields will give a gigantic bunt of knowledge to develop crop expressing desired traits.

CRISPR/Cas9: !improves! agronomic traits
CRISPR/Cas9: !erases! barriers in targeted genome editing
CRISPR/Cas9: !identifies and edits! genes of interest
CRISPR/Cas9: !increases! yield
CRISPR/Cas9: !improves! product quality attributes
CRISPR/Cas9: !enhances! resistance against biotic and abiotic stresses
CRISPR/Cas9: !facilitates! crop domestication
CRISPR/Cas9: !facilitates! hybrid breeding
CRISPR/Cas9: !delivers! nanotechnology and virus particle-based delivery system
CRISPR/Cas9: !edits! multiplex genes
CRISPR/Cas9: !engineers! metabolic pathways
CRISPR/Cas9: !overcomes! unpredictability