High-molecular-weight glutenin subunits (HMW-GS) are major components of seed storage proteins (SSPs) and largely determine the processing properties of wheat (Triticum aestivum) flour. HMW-GS are encoded by the GLU-1 loci and regulated at the transcriptional level by interaction between cis-elements and transcription factors (TFs). We recently validated the function of conserved cis-regulatory modules (CCRMs) in GLU-1 promoters, but their interacting TFs remained uncharacterized. Here we identified a CCRM-binding NAM-ATAF-CUC (NAC) protein, TaNAC100, through yeast one-hybrid (Y1H) library screening. Transactivation assays demonstrated that TaNAC100 could bind to the GLU-1 promoters and repress their transcription activity in tobacco (Nicotiana benthamiana). Overexpression of TaNAC100 in wheat significantly reduced the contents of HMW-GS and other SSPs as well as total seed protein. This was confirmed by transcriptome analyses. Conversely, enhanced expression of TaNAC100 increased seed starch contents and expression of key starch synthesis-related genes, such as TaGBSS1 and TaSUS2. Y1H assays also indicated TaNAC100 binding with the promoters of TaGBSS1 and TaSUS2. These results suggest that TaNAC100 functions as a hub controlling seed protein and starch synthesis. Phenotypic analyses showed that TaNAC100 overexpression repressed plant height, increased heading date, and promoted seed size and thousand kernel weight. We also investigated sequence variations in a panel of cultivars, but did not identify significant association of TaNAC100 haplotypes with agronomic traits. The findings not only uncover a useful gene for wheat breeding but also provide an entry point to reveal the mechanism underlying metabolic balance of seed storage products.

GLU-1: !encodes! HMW-GS 
TaNAC100: !binds to! GLU-1 promoters 
TaNAC100: !represses! transcription activity 
TaNAC100: !reduces! HMW-GS and SSPs 
TaNAC100: !increases! starch contents 
TaGBSS1/TaSUS2: !binds to! TaNAC100 
TaNAC100: !controls! seed protein and starch synthesis 
TaNAC100: !represses! plant height 
TaNAC100: !promotes! heading date, seed size, thousand kernel weight