DNA methylation is changed and associates with gene expression alterations in plant response to phosphate starvation (Pi-), a common stress that impacts plant growth and productivity. However, in the horticultural model species Solanum lycopersicum (tomato), the dynamics of DNA methylation and its relationship with changes in gene transcription and alternative splicing (AS) under Pi- are unknown. Here, we performed integrative methylome and transcriptome analyses of tomato seedlings under Pi-deficient and -sufficient conditions. We found Pi- caused a slight increase in the overall methylation level, with millions of differentially methylated cytosines (DmCs) and a few hundred differentially methylated regions (DMRs). We also identified thousands of differentially expressed (DE) and differential AS (DAS) genes induced by Pi-, and found that DmCs were more abundant in non-expressed genes than in DE or DAS genes. Moreover, DNA methylation alterations weakly correlated with transcription changes but not with DAS events, and hyper-CHH-DMRs overlapping with transposable elements (TEs) were enriched in a subset of Pi starvation response (PSR) genes. We propose that changes in DNA methylation may be associated with the differential expression of some PSR genes, but that most of these changes probably control the expression of nearby TEs, rather than directly affecting the transcription or AS of PSR genes. Besides, the pattern of methylation changes upon Pi- may largely be shaped by TE distributions. Together, our study provides comprehensive insights into the association of DNA methylation with gene transcription and AS under Pi- in tomato and may contribute to unveiling novel roles of epigenetic mechanisms in plant stress response.

DNA methylation: !associates with! gene expression alterations 
Pi-deficient conditions: !causes! slight increase in overall methylation level 
DmCs: !more abundant in! non-expressed genes 
DNA methylation alterations: !weakly correlate with! transcription changes 
hyper-CHH-DMRs: !overlap with! transposable elements 
DNA methylation: !associated with! differential expression of PSR genes 
pattern of methylation changes: !shaped by! TE distributions