Transcriptomic and volatile component analyses showed that high expression levels of genes from the terpenoid backbone biosynthesis pathway and the monoterpene metabolic pathway can strengthen the floral fragrance of tree peony. Floral fragrance is a crucial ornamental trait whose improvement is one of the primary objectives of tree peony breeding. So far, exploration of the floral fragrance of tree peony has focused on the identification of its volatile components, but the molecular mechanisms responsible for their formation remain unclear. Here, we identified 128 volatile components from the petals of tree peony and found that they consisted primarily of terpenes, alcohols, and esters. Based on the distribution pattern of these major fragrance components, 24 tree peony cultivars were classified into 4 types: grassy scent (ocimene), woody scent (longifolene), lily of the valley scent (linalool), and fruity scent (2-ethyl hexanol). We used RNA-seq to explore the mechanistic basis of terpenoid metabolism in tree peony petals with various scents. The expression levels of AACT, HMGR, PMK, DXS, DXR, HDS, HDR, and GGPS, which encode key enzymes of terpenoid backbone biosynthesis, were upregulated in 'Huangguan' (strong fragrance) compared to 'Fengdan' (faint fragrance). Moreover, the transcript abundance of LIS and MYS, two monoterpene synthase genes, was also enhanced in petals of 'Huangguan' compared to those of 'Fengdan'. Together, these results demonstrate that differences in the expression of genes from the monoterpene synthesis and terpenoid backbone pathways are associated with differences in the fragrance of tree peony. This research provides crucial genetic resources for fragrance improvement and also lays a foundation for further clarification of the mechanisms that underlie tree peony fragrance.

AACT: !enhances! floral fragrance 
HMGR: !enhances! floral fragrance 
PMK: !enhances! floral fragrance 
DXS: !enhances! floral fragrance 
DXR: !enhances! floral fragrance 
HDS: !enhances! floral fragrance 
HDR: !enhances! floral fragrance 
GGPS: !enhances! floral fragrance 
LIS: !enhances! floral fragrance 
MYS: !enhances! floral fragrance