In land plants and algae, cellulose is important for strengthening cell walls and preventing breakage due to physical forces. Though our understanding of cellulose production by cellulose synthases (CESAs) has seen significant advances for several land plant and bacterial species, functional characterization of this fundamental protein is absent in red algae. Here we identify CESA gene candidates in the calcifying red alga Calliarthron tuberculosum using sequence similarity-based approaches, and elucidate their phylogenetic relationship with other CESAs from diverse taxa. One gene candidate, CtCESA1, was closely related to other putative red algal CESA genes. To test if CtCESA1 encoded a true cellulose synthase, CtCESA1 protein was expressed and purified from insect and yeast expression systems. CtCESA1 showed glucan synthase activity in glucose tracer assays. CtCESA1 activity was relatively low when compared with plant and bacterial CESA activity. In an in vitro assay, a predicted N-terminal starch-binding domain from CtCESA1 bound red algal floridean starch extracts, representing a unique domain in red algal CESAs not present in CESAs from other lineages. When the CtCESA1 gene was introduced into Arabidopsis thaliana cesa mutants, the red algal CtCESA1 partially rescued the growth defects of the primary cell wall cesa6 mutant, but not cesa3 or secondary cell wall cesa7 mutants. A fluorescently tagged CtCESA1 localized to the plasma membrane in the Arabidopsis cesa6 mutant background. This study presents functional evidence validating the sequence annotation of red algal CESAs. The relatively low activity of CtCESA1, partial complementation in Arabidopsis, and presence of unique protein domains suggest that there are probably functional differences between the algal and land plant CESAs.

CtCESA1: !encodes! cellulose synthase
CtCESA1: !binds! red algal floridean starch extracts
CtCESA1: !localizes to! plasma membrane
CtCESA1: !partially rescues! Arabidopsis cesa6 mutant
CtCESA1: !has unique domains! compared to other lineages