Arabidopsis non-host resistance against non-adapted fungal pathogens including Colletotrichum fungi consists of pre-invasive and post-invasive immune responses. Here we report that non-host resistance against non-adapted Colletotrichum spp. in Arabidopsis leaves requires CURLY LEAF (CLF), which is critical for leaf development, flowering and growth. Microscopic analysis of pathogen behavior revealed a requirement for CLF in both pre- and post-invasive non-host resistance. The loss of a functional SEPALLATA3 (SEP3) gene, ectopically expressed in clf mutant leaves, suppressed not only the defect of the clf plants in growth and leaf development but also a defect in non-host resistance against the non-adapted Colletotrichum tropicale. However, the ectopic overexpression of SEP3 in Arabidopsis wild-type leaves did not disrupt the non-host resistance. The expression of multiple plant defensin (PDF) genes that are involved in non-host resistance against C. tropicale was repressed in clf leaves. Moreover, the Octadecanoid-responsive Arabidopsis 59 (ORA59) gene, which is required for PDF expression, was also repressed in clf leaves. Notably, when SEP3 was overexpressed in the ora59 mutant background, C. tropicale produced clear lesions in the inoculated leaves, indicating an impairment in non-host resistance. Furthermore, ora59 plants overexpressing SEP3 exhibited a defect in leaf immunity to the adapted Colletotrichum higginsianum. Since the ora59 plants overexpressing SEP3 did not display obvious leaf curling or reduced growth, in contrast to the clf mutants, these results strongly suggest that concomitant SEP3 repression and ORA59 induction via CLF are required for Arabidopsis leaf immunity to Colletotrichum fungi, uncoupled from CLF's function in growth and leaf development.

CLF: !affects! Non-host resistance
SEP3: !suppresses! Non-host resistance
CLF: !induces! ORA59
ORA59: !induces! PDF expression
SEP3: !represses! ORA59
PDF: !involved in! Non-host resistance
ORA59: !required for! PDF expression
SEP3: !impairs! Leaf immunity