Salinity stress tolerance is a complex polygenic trait involving multi-molecular pathways. This study aims to demonstrate an effective transcriptomic approach for identifying genes regulating salt tolerance in rice. The chromosome segment substitution lines (CSSLs) of "Khao Dawk Mali 105 (KDML105)" rice containing various regions of DH212 between markers RM1003 and RM3362 displayed differential salt tolerance at the booting stage. CSSL16 and its nearly isogenic parent, KDML105, were used for transcriptome analysis. Differentially expressed genes in the leaves of seedlings, flag leaves, and second leaves of CSSL16 and KDML105 under normal and salt stress conditions were subjected to analyses based on gene co-expression network (GCN), on two-state co-expression with clustering coefficient (CC), and on weighted gene co-expression network (WGCN). GCN identified 57 genes, while 30 and 59 genes were identified using CC and WGCN, respectively. With the three methods, some of the identified genes overlapped, bringing the maximum number of predicted salt tolerance genes to 92. Among the 92 genes, nine genes, <i>OsNodulin, OsBTBZ1, OsPSB28, OsERD, OsSub34, peroxidase precursor</i> genes, and three expressed protein genes, displayed SNPs between CSSL16 and KDML105. The nine genes were differentially expressed in CSSL16 and KDML105 under normal and salt stress conditions. <i>OsBTBZ1</i> and <i>OsERD</i> were identified by the three methods. These results suggest that the transcriptomic approach described here effectively identified the genes regulating salt tolerance in rice and support the identification of appropriate QTL for salt tolerance improvement.

Gene: !affects! Salinity stress tolerance 
Gene: !localizes to! Chromosome segment substitution lines 
Gene: !interacts with! Gene co-expression network 
Gene: !enhances! Two-state co-expression with clustering coefficient 
Gene: !represses! Weighted gene co-expression network 
Gene: !synthesizes! OsNodulin 
Gene: !synthesizes! OsBTBZ1 
Gene: !synthesizes! OsPSB28 
Gene: !synthesizes! OsERD 
Gene: !synthesizes! OsSub34 
Gene: !synthesizes! Peroxidase precursor 
Gene: !synthesizes! Expressed protein