Natural rubber (cis-1,4-polyioprene, NR) is an indispensable industrial raw material obtained from the Pará rubber tree (H. brasiliensis). Natural rubber cannot be replaced by synthetic rubber compounds because of the superior resilience, elasticity, abrasion resistance, efficient heat dispersion, and impact resistance of NR. In NR production, latex is harvested by periodical tapping of the trunk bark. Ethylene enhances and prolongs latex flow and latex regeneration. Ethephon, which is an ethylene-releasing compound, applied to the trunk before tapping usually results in a 1.5- to 2-fold increase in latex yield. However, intense mechanical damage to bark tissues by excessive tapping and/or over-stimulation with ethephon induces severe oxidative stress in laticifer cells, which often causes tapping panel dryness (TPD) syndrome. To enhance NR production without causing TPD, an improved understanding of the molecular mechanism of the ethylene response in the Pará rubber tree is required. Therefore, we investigated gene expression in response to ethephon treatment using Pará rubber tree seedlings as a model system. After ethephon treatment, 3270 genes showed significant differences in expression compared with the mock treatment. Genes associated with carotenoids, flavonoids, and abscisic acid biosynthesis were significantly upregulated by ethephon treatment, which might contribute to an increase in latex flow. Genes associated with secondary cell wall formation were downregulated, which might be because of the reduced sugar supply. Given that sucrose is an important molecule for NR production, a trade-off may arise between NR production and cell wall formation for plant growth and for wound healing at the tapping panel. Dynamic changes in gene expression occur specifically in response to ethephon treatment. Certain genes identified may potentially contribute to latex production or TPD suppression. These data provide valuable information to understand the mechanism of ethylene stimulation, and will contribute to improved management practices and/or molecular breeding to attain higher yields of latex from Pará rubber trees.

ethylene: !enhances! latex flow
ethelphon: !induces! oxidative stress
carotenoids/flavonoids/abscisic acid biosynthesis: !upregulated by! ethephon
secondary cell wall formation: !downregulated by! ethephon
sucrose: !trade-off between! NR production and cell wall formation