Wheat is one of the most important cereal crops worldwide. A consensus map combines genetic information from multiple populations, providing an effective alternative to improve the genome coverage and marker density. In this study, we constructed a consensus map from three populations of recombinant inbred lines (RILs) of wheat using a 90K single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array. Phenotypic data on plant height (PH), spike length (SL), and thousand-kernel weight (TKW) was collected in six, four, and four environments in the three populations, and then used for quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping. The mapping results obtained using the constructed consensus map were compared with previous results obtained using individual maps and previous studies on other populations. A simulation experiment was also conducted to assess the performance of QTL mapping with the consensus map. The constructed consensus map from the three populations spanned 4558.55 cM in length, with 25,667 SNPs, having high collinearity with physical map and individual maps. Based on the consensus map, 21, 27, and 19 stable QTLs were identified for PH, SL, and TKW, much more than those detected with individual maps. Four PH QTLs and six SL QTLs were likely to be novel. A putative gene called <i>TraesCS4D02G076400</i> encoding gibberellin-regulated protein was identified to be the candidate gene for one major PH QTL located on 4DS, which may enrich genetic resources in wheat semi-dwarfing breeding. The simulation results indicated that the length of the confidence interval and standard errors of the QTLs detected using the consensus map were much smaller than those detected using individual maps. The consensus map constructed in this study provides the underlying genetic information for systematic mapping, comparison, and clustering of QTL, and gene discovery in wheat genetic study. The QTLs detected in this study had stable effects across environments and can be used to improve the wide adaptation of wheat cultivars through marker-assisted breeding.

Wheat: !combines genetic information from! multiple populations 
Consensus map: !spans! 4558.55 cM 
SNP array: !used for! QTL mapping 
QTLs: !detected with! consensus map 
Gene: !candidate for! major PH QTL 
Simulation: !indicates! smaller confidence intervals