Jasmonate (JA)-induced plant senescence has been mainly studied with a dark/starvation-promoted system using detached leaves; yet, the induction of whole-plant senescence by JA remains largely unclear. This work reports the finding of a JA-induced whole-plant senescence of tobacco under light/non-starvation conditions and the investigation of underlying regulations. Methyl jasmonate (MeJA) treatment induces the whole-plant senescence of tobacco in a light-intensity-dependent manner, which is suppressed by silencing of NtCOI1 that encodes the receptor protein of JA-Ile (the bioactive derivative of JA). MeJA treatment could induce the senescence-specific cysteine protease gene SAG12 and another cysteine protease gene SAG-L1 to high expression levels in the detached leaf patches under dark conditions but failed to induce their expression in tobacco whole plants under light conditions. Furthermore, MeJA attenuates the RuBisCo activase (RCA) level in the detached leaves but has no effect on this protein in the whole plant under light conditions. A genome-wide transcriptional assay also supports the presence of a differential regulatory pattern of senescence-related genes during MeJA-induced whole-plant senescence under non-starvation conditions and results in the finding of a chlorophylase activity increase in this process. We also observed that the MeJA-induced senescence of tobacco whole plants is reversible, which is accompanied by a structural change of chloroplasts. This work provides novel insights into JA-induced plant senescence under non-starvation conditions and is helpful to dissect the JA-synchronized process of whole-plant senescence.

Methyl jasmonate (MeJA): !induces! Whole-plant senescence 
NtCOI1: !encodes receptor protein of! JA-Ile 
SAG12: !induced to high expression levels by! MeJA 
SAG-L1: !induced to high expression levels by! MeJA 
MeJA: !attenuates! RuBisCo activase level 
Chlorophylase activity: !increased by! MeJA 
MeJA: !reversible in! Tobacco whole plants