Our previous study has shown that nitrogen plays an important role in dealing with significantly increased chalkiness caused by elevated temperature. However, the role of nitrogen metabolites has not been given sufficient attention, and its regulatory mechanism is not clear. This study investigated the effects of high temperature and nitrogen fertilizer on the synthesis of grain storage protein and further explored the quality mechanism under the actual scenario of field warming. Results showed that increased temperature and nitrogen fertilizer could affect the activities of nitrogen metabolism enzymes, namely, glutamate synthetase, glutamine synthetase, glutamic pyruvic transaminase, and glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, and the expressions of storage protein synthesis factor genes, namely, <i>GluA</i> and <i>GluB</i>, and subfamily genes, namely, <i>pro14, BiP1</i>, and <i>PDIL1</i>, which co-induced the changes of storage protein synthesis in rice grains. Furthermore, the increased temperature changed the balance of grain storage substances which may lead to the significantly increased chalky rate (197.67%) and chalkiness (532.92%). Moreover, there was a significant negative correlation between prolamin content and chalkiness, indicating that nitrogen fertilizer might regulate the formation of chalkiness by affecting the synthesis of prolamin. Results suggested that nitrogen application could regulate the related core factors involved in nitrogen metabolism pathways, which, in turn, affects the changes in the storage protein components in the grain and further affects quality. Therefore, as a conventional cultivation measure, nitrogen application would have a certain value in future rice production in response to climate warming.

GluA: !synthesizes! Storage Protein
GluB: !synthesizes! Storage Protein
pro14: !synthesizes! Storage Protein
BiP1: !synthesizes! Storage Protein
PDIL1: !synthesizes! Storage Protein
Glutamate Synthetase: !affects! Nitrogen Metabolism Enzymes
Glutamine Synthetase: !affects! Nitrogen Metabolism Enzymes
Glutamic Pyruvic Transaminase: !affects! Nitrogen Metabolism Enzymes
Glutamic Oxaloacetic Transaminase: !affects! Nitrogen Metabolism Enzymes
Nitrogen Fertilizer: !regulates! Chalkiness
Prolamin Content: !correlates with! Chalkiness