Overexpression of SaAQP can improve the salt tolerance of transgenic soybean hairy roots and A. thaliana. Salt stress severely affects crop yield and food security. There is a need to improve the salt tolerance of crops, but the discovery and utilization of salt-tolerance genes remains limited. Owing to its strong stress tolerance, Sophora alopecuroides is ideal for the identification of salt-tolerance genes. Therefore, we aimed to screen and identify the salt-tolerance genes in S. alopecuroides. With a yeast expression library of seedlings, salt-tolerant genes were screened using a salt-containing medium to simulate salt stress. By combining salt-treatment screening and transcriptome sequencing, 11 candidate genes related to salt tolerance were identified, including genes for peroxidase, inositol methyltransferase, aquaporin, cysteine synthase, pectinesterase, and WRKY. The expression dynamics of candidate genes were analyzed after salt treatment of S. alopecuroides, and salt tolerance was verified in yeast BY4743. The candidate genes participated in the salt-stress response in S. alopecuroides, and their overexpression significantly improved the salt tolerance of yeast. Salt tolerance mediated by SaAQP was further verified in soybean hairy roots and Arabidopsis thaliana, and it was found that SaAQP might enhance the salt tolerance of A. thaliana by participating in a reactive oxygen species scavenging mechanism. This result provides new genetic resources in plant breeding for salt resistance.

SaAQP: !improves! salt tolerance 
S. alopecuroides: !identifies! salt-tolerance genes 
Yeast expression library: !screens! salt-tolerant genes 
Salt-treatment screening: !combines with! transcriptome sequencing 
Candidate genes: !related to! salt tolerance 
Salt treatment: !analyzes! expression dynamics of candidate genes 
Yeast BY4743: !verifies! salt tolerance 
Candidate genes: !participate in! salt-stress response 
Overexpression: !significantly improves! salt tolerance 
SaAQP: !enhances! salt tolerance of A. thaliana 
Reactive oxygen species scavenging mechanism: !participates in! SaAQP