The Catharanthus roseus RLK1-like kinase (CrRLK1L) is a subfamily of the RLK gene family, and members are sensors of cell wall integrity and regulators of cell polarity growth. Recent studies have also shown that members of this subfamily are involved in plant immunity. Nicotiana benthamiana is a model plant widely used in the study of plant-pathogen interactions. However, the members of the NbCrRLK1L subfamily and their response to pathogens have not been reported. In this study, a total of 31 CrRLK1L members were identified in the N. benthamiana genome, and these can be divided into 6 phylogenetic groups (I-VI). The members in each group have similar exon-intron structures and conserved motifs. NbCrRLK1Ls were predicted to be regulated by cis-acting elements such as STRE, TCA, ABRE, etc., and to be the target of transcription factors such as Dof and MYB. The expression profiles of the 16 selected NbCrRLK1Ls were determined by quantitative PCR. Most NbCrRLK1Ls were highly expressed in leaves but there were different and diverse expression patterns in other tissues. Inoculation with the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae or with Turnip mosaic virus significantly altered the transcript levels of the tested genes, suggesting that NbCrRLK1Ls may be involved in the response to pathogens. This study systematically identified the CrRLK1L members in N. benthamiana, and analyzed their tissue-specific expression and gene expression profiles in response to different pathogens and two pathogens associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). This research lays the foundation for exploring the function of NbCrRLK1Ls in plant-microbe interactions.

CrRLK1L: !regulates! Cell polarity growth
CrRLK1L: !involved in! Plant immunity
NbCrRLK1L: !divided into! 6 phylogenetic groups
NbCrRLK1L: !regulated by! Cis-acting elements
NbCrRLK1L: !target of! Transcription factors
NbCrRLK1L: !highly expressed in! Leaves
NbCrRLK1L: !altered by! Pseudomonas syringae
NbCrRLK1L: !altered by! Turnip mosaic virus
NbCrRLK1L: !function in! Plant-microbe interactions