Cryopreservation is one of the key technologies for the mass propagation of conifers via somatic embryogenesis. Cryotolerance and embryogenecity of conifer somatic embryos (SEs) could be affected by different temperature treatments, for which the underlying mechanisms were unknown. In this study, the developing SEs of <i>Picea glauca</i> obtained their cryotolerance with a survival rate of 100% when cultured on maturation medium at either 23°C for 4 weeks or 4°C for 10 weeks. However, only the embryos that underwent 4°C acclimation remained high embryogenicity, i.e., 91.7% based on cryovials or 29.3% on the plant tissue. Analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) revealed that both 23 and 4°C treatments led to drastic changes in the gene expression, i.e., 21,621 and 14,906 genes, respectively, and the general increase in many oligosaccharides and flavonoids, in addition to the content change of proline (1.9- and 2.3-fold at 23 or 4°C) and gallic acid (6,963- and 22,053-fold). There were 249 significantly different metabolites between the samples of 23 and 4°C treatments and the changing trend of the sorbitol, fatty acids, and monosaccharides differed between these samples. During 4°C-acclimation, the metabolites of the arginine biosynthesis pathway increased between 2.4- and 8.1-fold, and the expression of antioxidant genes was up-regulated significantly. At 4°C, the up-regulated genes were for germ-like proteins, instead of seed storage proteins at 23°C. Concentrations of abscisic acid and jasmonic acid increased up to 2- and 1.5-fold, respectively, in the cold-acclimated embryos. After 10 weeks at 4°C, the embryos stayed at pre-cotyledonary stage with 17.1% less DNA methylation and fewer storage substances than those at 23°C for 4 weeks, which developed cotyledons. This research provides new insights into mechanisms underlying the response of SEs to different culture temperatures and benefits method development for germplasm conservation in conifers.

Temperature: !affects! Gene Expression 
Temperature: !influences! Metabolites 
Gene Expression: !enhances! Cryotolerance 
Gene Expression: !regulates! Embryogenicity 
Oligosaccharides/Flavonoids: !increases! with Temperature 
Proline/Gallic Acid: !changes! with Temperature 
Arginine Biosynthesis Pathway: !up-regulated! at 4°C 
Antioxidant Genes: !up-regulated! at 4°C 
Germ-like Proteins: !expressed! at 4°C 
Abscisic Acid/Jasmonic Acid: !increased! at 4°C 
DNA Methylation: !decreased! at 4°C 
Storage Substances: !decreased! at 4°C