Phenotypic plasticity, the capacity of an organism to generate alternative phenotypes in response to different environments, is a particularly important characteristic to enable sessile plants to adapt to rapid changes in their surroundings. Leaf anatomical and physiological traits exhibit plasticity in response to growth irradiances, but it is relatively unclear if the plasticity varies among genotypes for a species. Equally importantly, empirical results on how leaf-level plasticity influences whole-plant growth are largely absent. We conducted an integrated investigation into the light-introduced plasticity by measuring 48 traits involving plant growth, leaf anatomy, leaf biochemistry, and leaf physiology of five rice genotypes grown under two irradiances. More than half of the estimated traits were significantly affected by growth light intensities, and the sizes of the cumulative effect of growth light ranged from -25.04% (stomatal conductance at high measurement light) to 135.2% (tiller number). Growth irradiance levels dramatically shifted the relationship between photosynthetic rate and stomatal conductance. However, the relationship between photosynthetic rate and mesophyll conductance was rarely influenced by growth light levels. Importantly, the present study highlights the significant variation in trait plasticity across rice genotypes and that the light-introduced biomass changes were rarely predicted by leaf photosynthetic plasticity. Our findings imply that the genotypes with high productivity at the low growth light conditions do not necessarily have high productivity under high light conditions.

Growth irradiance: !affects! Leaf anatomical and physiological traits 
Growth light: !influences! Photosynthetic rate and stomatal conductance 
Growth light: !shifts! Relationship between photosynthetic rate and stomatal conductance 
Growth light: !rarely affects! Relationship between photosynthetic rate and mesophyll conductance 
Genotypes: !vary in! Trait plasticity 
Genotypes: !predict! Biomass changes