Brassinosteroid (BR) synthesis genes in different cotton species was comprehensively identified, and the participation of GhCPD-3 in the BR synthesis signaling pathway for regulating plant development was verified. Brassinosteroid is a natural steroidal phytohormone that plays fundamental roles in plant growth and development. In cotton, detailed characterization and functional validation of BR biosynthesis genes remain rare. Here, 16, 8 and 9 BR biosynthesis genes were identified in Gossypium hirsutum, Gossypium raimondii and Gossypium arboreum, respectively, and their phylogenetic relationships, gene structures, conserved motifs of the encoded proteins, chromosomal locations were determined and a synteny analysis was performed. Gossypium hirsutum and Arabidopsis BR biosynthesis genes closely clustered in the phylogenetic tree and fragment duplication was likely the primary cause promoting gene family expansion in G. hirsutum. Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) enrichment analysis showed their relevance as BR biosynthesis genes. GhCPD-3 was highly expressed in roots and stems and the loci of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were significantly associated with these traits.Ectopic overexpression of GhCPD-3 in the cpd91 Arabidopsis mutant rescued the mutant phenotype by increasing plant height and leaf size in comparison to those of cpd91 and WT plants. Moreover, overexpressed GhCPD-3 in cpd91 mutants showed greater hypocotyl and root lengths than those of cpd91 and WT plants under light and dark conditions, respectively, indicating that BR actively promotes hypocotyl and root growth. Similar to CPD (CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC DWARF), GhCPD-3 restores BR biosynthesis thereby mediating plant growth and development.

Gossypium hirsutum: !synthesizes! Brassinosteroid
GhCPD-3: !localizes to! Roots and Stems
GhCPD-3: !enhances! Plant Height and Leaf Size
GhCPD-3: !promotes! Hypocotyl and Root Growth
GhCPD-3: !restores! BR Biosynthesis