Soil salinity severely affects plant growth and development and imparts inevitable losses to crop productivity. Increasing the concentration of salts in the vicinity of plant roots has severe consequences at the morphological, biochemical, and molecular levels. These include loss of chlorophyll, decrease in photosynthetic rate, reduction in cell division, ROS generation, inactivation of antioxidative enzymes, alterations in phytohormone biosynthesis and signaling, and so forth. The association of microorganisms, viz. plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria, endophytes, and mycorrhiza, with plant roots constituting the root microbiome can confer a greater degree of salinity tolerance in addition to their inherent ability to promote growth and induce defense mechanisms. The mechanisms involved in induced stress tolerance bestowed by these microorganisms involve the modulation of phytohormone biosynthesis and signaling pathways (including indole acetic acid, gibberellic acid, brassinosteroids, abscisic acid, and jasmonic acid), accumulation of osmoprotectants (proline, glycine betaine, and sugar alcohols), and regulation of ion transporters (SOS1, NHX, HKT1). Apart from this, salt-tolerant microorganisms are known to induce the expression of salt-responsive genes via the action of several transcription factors, as well as by posttranscriptional and posttranslational modifications. Moreover, the potential of these salt-tolerant microflora can be employed for sustainably improving crop performance in saline environments. Therefore, this review will briefly focus on the key responses of plants under salinity stress and elucidate the mechanisms employed by the salt-tolerant microorganisms in improving plant tolerance under saline environments.

microorganisms: !modulate! phytohormone biosynthesis and signaling pathways
microorganisms: !accumulate! osmoprotectants
microorganisms: !regulate! ion transporters
microorganisms: !induce! expression of salt-responsive genes
microorganisms: !employ! potential for improving crop performance