Glucoraphanin (GRA) is found in the seeds and vegetative organs of broccoli (<i>Brassica oleracea</i> L. var. <i>italica</i> Planch) as the precursor of anti-carcinogen sulforaphane (SF). The yield of GRA obtained from these materials is weak and the cost is high. In recent years, the production of plant secondary metabolites by large-scale hairy roots culture in vitro has succeeded in some species. Melatonin (MT) is a natural hormone which existed in numerous organisms. Studies have demonstrated that MT can improve the synthesis of secondary metabolites in plants. At present, it has not been reported that MT regulates the biosynthesis of glucoraphanin in broccoli hairy roots. In this study, the broccoli hairy roots that grew for 20 d were respectively treated by 500 µM MT for 0, 6, 12, 20 and 32. To explore the reason of changes in secondary metabolites and reveal the biosynthetic pathway of glucoraphanin at transcriptional level. Compared with 0 h, the yield of GRA under other treatments was increased, and the overall trend was firstly increased and then decreased. The total yield of GRA reached the highest at 12 h, which was 1.22-fold of 0 h. Then, the genome of broccoli as the reference, a total of 13234 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in broccoli hairy roots under treatment with 500 µM MT for 0, 6, 12, 20 and 32 h, respectively. Among these DEGs, 6266 (47.35%) were upregulated and 6968 (52.65%) were downregulated. It was found that the pathway of 'Glucosinolates biosynthesis (ko00966)' was enriched in the 16th place by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis of the upregulated DEGs. The expression of key genes in the GRA biosynthesis pathway was upregulated at all time points, and a deduced GRA biosynthesis pathway map was constructed for reference.

Melatonin: !enhances! Glucoraphanin synthesis
Glucosinolates biosynthesis: !enriched by! Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis
Key genes: !upregulated in! GRA biosynthesis pathway
GRA biosynthesis pathway: !constructed for! reference