['34549791', 'WD40-repeat-containing proteins (WDRs) are highly abundant in all eukaryotes.  Several have been implicated as subunits of multi-protein CRL E3 ligase complexes  that regulate ubiquitination mediated protein degradation and thus various  cellular and developmental processes. Impairment of the WDR protein ULCS1 from  Arabidopsis causes pleiotropic phenotypes during plant development, including  reduced lignification, anther indehiscence, and sterility. Here we show that  RNAi-mediated downregulation of ULCS1 results in a fast-growing phenotype during  vegetative development. Due to accelerated growth, ulcs1i mutants reach their  vegetative to reproductive transition point earlier than WT plants. However,  their comparable germination rate and their similar number of secondary branches  and rosette leaves at bolting indicate that ulcs1i is not an early flowering time  mutant. GUS staining of progeny, obtained from crosses between ulcs1i and  CYCB1::GUS plants, revealed an increased number of mitotic cell divisions in the  root meristems of ulcs1i compared to WT. Immunolabeling of homogalacturonans  (HGAs) epitopes showed significant fluorescent signal differences at the cell  walls and the mucilage of the seeds between ulcs1i and WT. Furthermore, we  demonstrate that ULCS1 interacts with the UBA-like protein in a yeast two-hybrid  assay, suggesting a direct or indirect physical coupling of these proteins in  Arabidopsis.', '2022', 'Int J Dev Biol', '10.1387/ijdb.210114kh', 'Haralampidis']

WDRs: !implicated in! multi-protein CRL E3 ligase complexes 
ULCS1: !causes! pleiotropic phenotypes 
RNAi-mediated downregulation of ULCS1: !results in! fast-growing phenotype 
ulcs1i mutants: !reach! vegetative to reproductive transition point earlier than WT plants 
CYCB1::GUS plants: !reveal! increased number of mitotic cell divisions in root meristems of ulcs1i 
HGAs epitopes: !show! fluorescent signal differences at cell walls and mucilage of seeds between ulcs1i and WT 
ULCS1: !interacts with! UBA-like protein