Genome-wide annotation reveals that the gene birth-death process of the Cucurbita R family is associated with a species-specific diversification of TNL and CNL protein classes. The Cucurbitaceae family includes nearly 1000 plant species known universally as cucurbits. Cucurbita genus includes many economically important worldwide crops vulnerable to more than 200 pathogens. Therefore, the identification of pathogen-recognition genes is of utmost importance for this genus. The major class of plant-resistance (R) genes encodes nucleotide-binding site and leucine-rich repeat (NLR) proteins, and is divided into three sub-classes namely, TIR-NB-LRR (TNL), CC-NB-LRR (CNL) and RPW8-NB-LRR (RNL). Although the characterization of the NLR gene family has been carried out in important Cucurbita species, this information is still linked to the availability of sequenced genomes. In this study, we analyzed 40 de novo transcriptomes and 5 genome assemblies, which were explored to investigate the Cucurbita expressed-NLR (eNLR) and NLR repertoires using an ad hoc gene annotation approach. Over 1850 NLR-encoding genes were identified, finely characterized and compared to 96 well-characterized plant R-genes. The maximum likelihood analyses revealed an unusual diversification of CNL/TNL genes and a strong RNL conservation. Indeed, several gene gain and loss events have shaped the Cucurbita NLR family. Finally, to provide a first validation step Cucurbita, eNLRs were explored by real-time PCR analysis. The NLR repertories of the 12 Cucurbita species presented in this paper will be useful to discover novel R-genes.

Genome-wide annotation: !reveals! species-specific diversification of TNL and CNL protein classes
Cucurbitaceae family: !includes! nearly 1000 plant species
Cucurbita genus: !vulnerable to! more than 200 pathogens
Major class of plant-resistance (R) genes: !encodes! nucleotide-binding site and leucine-rich repeat (NLR) proteins
NLR gene family: !characterized in! important Cucurbita species
Ad hoc gene annotation approach: !identifies! over 1850 NLR-encoding genes
Maximum likelihood analyses: !reveals! unusual diversification of CNL/TNL genes
Gene gain and loss events: !shape! Cucurbita NLR family
Real-time PCR analysis: !validates! Cucurbita eNLRs