The global electric circuit and the marine layer in coastal regions result in the presence of atmospheric negative polarity ions within the canopy of plants. This leads to the hypothesis:In the presence of negative polarity atmospheric ions plants activate a plant wide system to absorb and utilize these negative polarity ions.This plant wide system, termed Extracellular Transport System (ETS), is focused on nitrate movement. The object of this paper is to verify the existence of ETS by characterizing 1) how ETS absorbs ion from the atmosphere and 2) within the plant how ETS moves ions from source to destination. Over the past 2-years characteristics of ETS were examined in pecans, pistachios, lemons, wine grapes, cotton, corn, avocados and chili peppers in production agriculture fields in Arizona and California. Nitrate movement was separated into three physical locations: Location I, in the atmosphere outside the plant; Location II, in the interfacial volume between the atmosphere and the plant surface; Location III, in the plant itself. The paper is divided into three parts. Each part is concerned with a particular location of nitrate movement. The major tool of verification is presentation of simultaneous patterns of nitrate ion arrival rate on a simulated plant surface and subsequent movement of nitrate within the extracellular region of the plant. Use of this tool is illustrated in corn, lemons, chili peppers and avocados.A base functionality of ETS has been developed: ETS is a transient, plant wide system wherein 1) nitrate ions are putatively absorbed by a variety of epidermal structures including trichomes and transferred into the extracellular region, 2) hydrated pathways are produced in the extracellular region through which these nitrate ions pass 3) electrical potential gradients are created in the extracellular region which provide a force field to provoke movement of nitrate ions through these pathways. Anthropomorphic climate has three dimensions: light, temperature and moisture. Phytomorphic climate has five dimensions: light, temperature, moisture, earth tides and atmospheric ion presence. ETS is a natural adaptation of plants to the transient nature of atmospheric negative polarity ion presence. It provides a mechanism for plants to utilize this ubiquitous and renewable source of nitrate.

Atmospheric ions: !activate! ETS 
ETS: !absorbs! ions 
ETS: !moves! ions 
ETS: !creates! electrical potential gradients 
Anthropomorphic climate: !has! 3 dimensions 
Phytomorphic climate: !has! 5 dimensions 
ETS: !provides! mechanism for plants to utilize atmospheric ions