Kernel development and starch formation are the primary determinants of maize yield and quality, which are considerably influenced by drought stress. To clarify the response of maize kernel to drought stress, we established well-watered (WW) and water-stressed (WS) conditions at 1-30 days after pollination (dap) on waxy maize (Zea mays L. sinensis Kulesh). Kernel development, starch accumulation, and activities of starch biosynthetic enzymes were significantly reduced by drought stress. The morphology of starch granules changed, whereas the grain filling rate was accelerated. A comparative proteomics approach was applied to analyze the proteome change in kernels under two treatments at 10 dap and 25 dap. Under the WS conditions, 487 and 465 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were identified at 10 dap and 25 dap, respectively. Drought induced the downregulation of proteins involved in the oxidation-reduction process and oxidoreductase, peroxidase, catalase, glutamine synthetase, abscisic acid stress ripening 1, and lipoxygenase, which might be an important reason for the effect of drought stress on kernel development. Notably, several proteins involved in waxy maize endosperm and starch biosynthesis were upregulated at early-kernel stage under WS conditions, which might have accelerated endosperm development and starch synthesis. Additionally, 17 and 11 common DAPs were sustained in the upregulated and downregulated DAP groups, respectively, at 10 dap and 25 dap. Among these 28 proteins, four maize homologs (i.e., A0A1D6H543, B4FTP0, B6SLJ0, and A0A1D6H5J5) were considered as candidate proteins that affected kernel development and drought stress response by comparing with the rice genome. The proteomic changes caused by drought were highly correlated with kernel development and starch accumulation, which were closely related to the final yield and quality of waxy maize. Our results provided a foundation for the enhanced understanding of kernel development and starch formation in response to drought stress in waxy maize.

Kernel development: !influenced by! Drought stress
Starch accumulation: !reduced by! Drought stress
Oxidation-reduction process: !downregulated by! Drought stress
Oxidoreductase, peroxidase, catalase, glutamine synthetase, abscisic acid stress ripening 1, and lipoxygenase: !downregulated by! Drought stress
Proteins involved in waxy maize endosperm and starch biosynthesis: !upregulated by! Drought stress
A0A1D6H543, B4FTP0, B6SLJ0, and A0A1D6H5J5: !considered as candidate proteins that affect! Kernel development and drought stress response