Seed yield is a complex trait for many crop species including oilseed rape (OSR) (<i>Brassica napus</i>), the second most important oilseed crop worldwide. Studies have focused on the contribution of distinct factors in seed yield such as environmental cues, agronomical practices, growth conditions, or specific phenotypic traits at the whole plant level, such as number of pods in a plant. However, how female reproductive traits contribute to whole plant level traits, and hence to seed yield, has been largely ignored. Here, we describe the combined contribution of 33 phenotypic traits within a <i>B. napus</i> diversity set population and their trade-offs at the whole plant and organ level, along with their interaction with plant level traits. Our results revealed that both Winter OSR (WOSR) and Spring OSR (SOSR); the two more economically important OSR groups in terms of oil production; share a common dominant reproductive strategy for seed yield. In this strategy, the main inflorescence is the principal source of seed yield, producing a good number of ovules, a large number of long pods with a concomitantly high number of seeds per pod. Moreover, we observed that WOSR opted for additional reproductive strategies than SOSR, presenting more plasticity to maximise seed yield. Overall, we conclude that OSR adopts a key strategy to ensure maximal seed yield and propose an ideal ideotype highlighting crucial phenotypic traits that could be potential targets for breeding.

Seed yield: !contributes to! Whole plant level traits 
Environmental cues: !affects! Seed yield 
Agronomical practices: !affects! Seed yield 
Growth conditions: !affects! Seed yield 
Phenotypic traits: !contribute to! Seed yield 
Female reproductive traits: !contribute to! Whole plant level traits 
Winter OSR: !shares! Common dominant reproductive strategy 
Spring OSR: !shares! Common dominant reproductive strategy 
Winter OSR: !presents! Additional reproductive strategies 
Spring OSR: !presents! Less plasticity