Nitrogen, as a limiting factor for net primary productivity in grassland ecosystems, is an important link in material cycles in grassland ecosystems. However, the nitrogen assimilation efficiency and mechanisms of grassland plants under grazing disturbance are still unclear. This study investigated Stipa breviflora desert steppe which had been grazed for 17 years and sampled the root system and leaf of the constructive species Stipa breviflora during the peak growing season under no grazing, light grazing, moderate grazing and heavy grazing treatments. The activities of enzymes related to nitrogen assimilation in roots and leaves were measured. Compared with no grazing, light grazing and moderate grazing significantly increased the activities of nitrate reductase (NR), glutamine synthetase (GS), glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (GOT) and glutamic pyruvate transaminase (GPT) in leaves, and GS, GOT and GPT in roots of Stipa breviflora, while heavy grazing significantly decreased the activities of GS in leaves and NR in roots of Stipa breviflora. NR, GOT and GPT activities in leaves and roots of Stipa breviflora were positively correlated with nitrogen content, soluble protein, free amino acid and nitrate content. Grazing disturbance changed the activities of nitrogen assimilation related enzymes of grassland plants, and emphasized that light grazing and moderate grazing were beneficial for nitrogen assimilation by grassland plants. Therefore, establishing appropriate stocking rates is of great significance for material flows in this grassland ecosystem and for the stability and sustainable utilization of grassland resources.

NR: !increases with! light grazing, moderate grazing
GS: !increases with! light grazing, moderate grazing; !decreases with! heavy grazing
GOT: !increases with! light grazing, moderate grazing
GPT: !increases with! light grazing, moderate grazing
Nitrogen content: !correlated with! NR, GOT, GPT activities
Soluble protein: !correlated with! NR, GOT, GPT activities
Free amino acid: !correlated with! NR, GOT, GPT activities
Nitrate content: !correlated with! NR, GOT, GPT activities