The GAF1 transcription factor is shown to bind to the promoter of the Arabidopsis GA-biosynthetic enzyme GA20ox1 and, in association with DELLA protein, promotes GA20ox1 expression, thereby contributing to its feedback regulation and tissue specificity. Gibberellins (GAs) are phytohormones that promote plant growth and development, including germination, elongation, flowering, and floral development. Homeostasis of endogenous GA levels is controlled by GA feedback regulation. DELLAs are negative regulators of GA signaling that are rapidly degraded in the presence of GAs. DELLAs regulate several target genes, including AtGA20ox2 and AtGA3ox1, encoding the GA-biosynthetic enzymes GA 20-oxidase and GA 3-oxidase, respectively. Previous studies have identified GAI-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 1 (GAF1) as a DELLA interactor, with which DELLAs act as transcriptional coactivators; furthermore, AtGA20ox2, AtGA3ox1, and AtGID1b were identified as target genes of the DELLA-GAF1 complex. Among the five Arabidopsis GA20ox genes, AtGA20ox1 is the most highly expressed gene during vegetative growth; its expression is controlled by GA feedback regulation. Here, we investigated whether AtGA20ox1 is regulated by the DELLA-GAF1 complex. The electrophoretic mobility shift and transactivation assays showed that three GAF1-binding sites exist in the AtGA20ox1 promoter. Using transgenic plants, we further evaluated the contribution of the DELLA-GAF1 complex to GA feedback regulation and tissue-specific expression. Mutations in two GAF1-binding sites obliterated the negative feedback regulation and tissue-specific expression of AtGA20ox1 in transgenic plants. Thus, our results showed that GAF1-binding sites are involved in GA feedback regulation and tissue-specific expression of AtGA20ox1 in Arabidopsis, suggesting that the DELLA-GAF1 complex is involved in both processes.

GAF1: !binds to! AtGA20ox1 promoter
DELLA: !interacts with! GAF1
GAF1: !promotes! AtGA20ox1 expression
DELLA: !regulates! AtGA20ox2 & AtGA3ox1
GAF1: !contributes to! GA feedback regulation & tissue specificity
GAF1-binding sites: !control! GA feedback regulation & tissue-specific expression of AtGA20ox1