Spring, especially the freeze-thaw season, is considered the key period for the growth and carbon sequestration of desert mosses. It is not clear how the change in environment water and temperature affects the physiological characteristics of desert mosses in freeze-thaw season. In this study, the effects of water and freeze-thaw cycles on the physiological characteristics of Syntrichia caninervis were assessed by manipulating the increase or removal of 65% snow and changes in the freeze-thaw cycles. The results showed that the changes in snow depth, freeze-thaw cycles, and their interaction significantly affected the plant water content, osmoregulatory substances content, antioxidant substance, and antioxidant enzyme activities. The contents of free proline, soluble sugar, ascorbic acid (AsA), reduced glutathione (GSH), and malondialdehyde (MDA), and superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase (POD), and catalase (CAT) activities increased significantly with the decrease in snow depth and freeze-thaw cycles. POD and free proline were the most sensitive to the snow depth and freeze-thaw cycles, while SOD and CAT were the least sensitive. Therefore, compared with the increase in freeze-thaw cycles, the reduction in freeze-thaw cycles weakened the physiological sensitivity of S. caninervis to snow depth changes.

Snow Depth: !affects! Plant Water Content
Snow Depth: !affects! Osmoregulatory Substances Content
Snow Depth: !affects! Antioxidant Substance
Snow Depth: !affects! Antioxidant Enzyme Activities
Freeze-Thaw Cycles: !affects! Plant Water Content
Freeze-Thaw Cycles: !affects! Osmoregulatory Substances Content
Freeze-Thaw Cycles: !affects! Antioxidant Substance
Freeze-Thaw Cycles: !affects! Antioxidant Enzyme Activities
Free Proline: !increases with! Decrease in Snow Depth
Free Proline: !increases with! Decrease in Freeze-Thaw Cycles
Soluble Sugar: !increases with! Decrease in Snow Depth
Soluble Sugar: !increases with! Decrease in Freeze-Thaw Cycles
Ascorbic Acid (AsA): !increases with! Decrease in Snow Depth
Ascorbic Acid (AsA): !increases with! Decrease in Freeze-Thaw Cycles
Reduced Glutathione (GSH): !incre