<i>Camellia sinensis</i> cv. 'Yanlingyinbiancha' is a leaf-variegated mutant with stable genetic traits. The current study aimed to reveal the differences between its albino and green tissues, and the molecular mechanism underlying the variegation. Anatomic analysis showed the chloroplasts of albino tissues to have no intact lamellar structure. Photosynthetic pigment in albino tissues was significantly lower than that in green tissues, whereas all catechin components were more abundant in the former. Transcriptome analysis revealed most differentially expressed genes involved in the biosynthesis of photosynthetic pigment, photosynthesis, and energy metabolism to be downregulated in albino tissues while most of those participating in flavonoid metabolism were upregulated. In addition, it was found cryptochrome 1 (CRY1) and phytochrome B (PHYB) genes that encode blue and red light photoreceptors to be downregulated. These photoreceptors mediate chloroplast protein gene expression, chloroplast protein import and photosynthetic pigment biosynthesis. Simultaneously, SUS gene, which was upregulated in albino tissues, encodes sucrose synthase considered a biochemical marker for sink strength. Collectively, we arrived to the following conclusions: (1) repression of the biosynthesis of photosynthetic pigment causes albinism; (2) destruction of photoreceptors in albino tissues suppresses photomorphogenesis, leading to abnormal chloroplast development; (3) albino tissues receive sucrose from the green tissues and decompose their own storage substances to obtain the energy needed for survival; and (4) UV-B signal and brassinosteroids promote flavonoid biosynthesis.

CRY1: !downregulated in! albino tissues
PHYB: !downregulated in! albino tissues
photosynthetic pigment: !lower in! albino tissues
catechin components: !more abundant in! albino tissues
photosynthesis genes: !downregulated in! albino tissues
energy metabolism genes: !downregulated in! albino tissues
flavonoid metabolism genes: !upregulated in! albino tissues
SUS gene: !upregulated in! albino tissues
photoreceptors: !repress! photomorphogenesis
sucrose: !received from! green tissues
UV-B signal: !promotes! flavonoid biosynthesis
brassinosteroids: !promote! flavonoid biosynthesis