['34571915', 'Salt stress is considered to be the most severe abiotic stress. High soil  salinity leads to osmotic and ionic toxicity, resulting in reduced plant growth  and crop production. The role of G-proteins during salt stresses is well  established. AGB1, a G-protein subunit, not only plays an important role during  regulation of Na(+) fluxes in roots, but is also involved in the translocation of  Na(+) from roots to shoots. N-Myc Downregulated like 1 (NDL1) is an interacting  partner of G protein betagamma subunits and C-4 domain of RGS1 in Arabidopsis. Our  recent in-planta expression analysis of NDL1 reported changes in patterns during  salt stress. Based on these expression profiles, we have carried out functional  characterization of the AGB1-NDL1 module during salinity stress. Using various  available mutant and overexpression lines of NDL1 and AGB1, we found that NDL1  acts as a negative regulator during salt stress response at the seedling stage,  an opposite response to that of AGB1. On the other hand, during the germination  phase of the plant, this role is reversed, indicating developmental and tissue  specific regulation. To elucidate the mechanism of the AGB1-NDL1 module, we  investigated the possible role of the three NDL1 stress specific interactors,  namely ANNAT1, SLT1, and IDH-V, using yeast as a model. The present study  revealed that NDL1 acts as a modulator of salt stress response, wherein it can  have both positive as well as negative functions during salinity stress. Our  findings suggest that the NDL1 mediated stress response depends on its  developmental stage-specific expression patterns as well as the differential  presence and interaction of the stress-specific interactors.', '2021 Aug 31', 'Cells', '10.3390/cells10092261', 'ORCID:']

AGB1: !plays role in! Na(+) flux regulation 
NDL1: !interacts with! G protein betagamma subunits 
NDL1: !interacts with! C-4 domain of RGS1 
NDL1: !acts as! negative regulator during salt stress response 
NDL1: !acts as! positive regulator during salt stress response 
NDL1: !interacts with! ANNAT1 
NDL1: !interacts with! SLT1 
NDL1: !interacts with! IDH-V