Under extreme environmental conditions such as ultraviolet and ionizing radiation, plants may suffer DNA damage. If these damages are not repaired accurately and rapidly, they may lead to chromosomal abnormalities or even cell death. Therefore, organisms have evolved various DNA repair mechanisms to cope with DNA damage which include gene transcription and post-translational regulation. MicroRNA (miRNA) is a type of non-coding single-stranded RNA molecule encoded by endogenous genes. They can promote DNA damage repair by regulating target gene transcription. Here, roots from seedlings of the <i>japonica</i> rice cultivar 'Yandao 8' that were treated with bleomycin were collected for transcriptome-level sequencing, using non-treated roots as controls. A total of 14,716,232 and 17,369,981 reads mapping to miRNAs were identified in bleomycin-treated and control groups, respectively, including 513 known and 72 novel miRNAs. Compared with the control group, 150 miRNAs showed differential expression levels. Target predictions of these differentially expressed miRNAs yielded 8731 potential gene targets. KEGG annotation and a gene ontology analysis indicated that the highest-ranked target genes were classified into metabolic processes, RNA degradation, DNA repair, and so on. Notably, the DNA repair process was significantly enriched in both analyses. Among these differentially expressed miRNAs, 58 miRNAs and 41 corresponding potential target genes were predicted to be related to DNA repair. RT-qPCR results confirmed that the expression patterns of 20 selected miRNAs were similar to those from the sequencing results, whereas four miRNAs gave opposite results. The opposing expression patterns of several miRNAs with regards to their target genes relating to the DNA repair process were also validated by RT-qPCR. These findings provide valuable information for further functional studies of miRNA involvement in DNA damage repair in rice.

miRNA: !regulates! target gene transcription
miRNA: !promotes! DNA damage repair
miRNA: !enriches! DNA repair process
miRNA: !corresponds to! potential target genes
miRNA: !opposes! expression patterns of target genes