Soybean is an economically important crop which flowers predominantly in response to photoperiod. Several major loci controlling the quantitative trait for reproductive timing have been identified, of which allelic combinations at three of these loci, E1, E2, and E3, are the dominant factors driving time to flower and reproductive period. However, functional genomics studies have identified additional loci which affect reproductive timing, many of which are less understood. A better characterization of these genes will enable fine-tuning of adaptation to various production environments. Two such genes, E1La and E1Lb, have been implicated in flowering by previous studies, but their effects have yet to be assessed under natural photoperiod regimes. Natural and induced variants of E1La and E1Lb were identified and introgressed into lines harboring either E1 or its early flowering variant, e1-as. Lines were evaluated for days to flower and maturity in a Maturity Group (MG) III production environment. These results revealed that variation in E1La and E1Lb promoted earlier flowering and maturity, with stronger effects in e1-as background than in an E1 background. The geographic distribution of E1La alleles among wild and cultivated soybean revealed that natural variation in E1La likely contributed to northern expansion of wild soybean, while breeding programs in North America exploited e1-as to develop cultivars adapted to northern latitudes. This research identified novel alleles of the E1 paralogues, E1La and E1Lb, which promote flowering and maturity under natural photoperiods. These loci represent sources of genetic variation which have been under-utilized in North American breeding programs to control reproductive timing, and which can be valuable additions to a breeder's molecular toolbox.

E1La: !promotes! Flowering 
E1Lb: !promotes! Flowering 
E1La: !contributes to! Northern Expansion 
e1-as: !enhances! Effects of E1La/E1Lb 
E1La: !under-utilized in! North American Breeding Programs