The seed coat gene VviAGL11 coordinates with endosperm development genes FIS2, PHERESE1 and IKU2 and functions as the key regulator in seed development and abortion processes in grapevine. Seed development is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants. Seed abortion is a specific characteristic that produces seedless berries and is often observed in cultivated grapevines. Although seedlessness is an important trait for table and dried grapevine production, the mechanism of seed abortion remains poorly understood. This research aimed to analyze the co-expression of the seed coat development gene VviAGL11 and the endosperm development genes FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT SEED2 (FIS2), PHERESE1 and HAIKU2 (IKU2) that regulate seedless fruit development in grapevine. The transcript levels of VviAGL11, FIS2, PHERESE1 and IKU2 all decreased during seed abortion in the seedless grape 'Thompson Seedless' plants, compared to those of the seeded grape 'Pinot Noir'. The transcript levels of the salicylic acid (SA)-dependent defense response genes EDS1, NPR1, NDR1 and SID2 were higher in 'Thompson Seedless' than 'Pinot Noir' during seed development. Also, WRKY3, WRKY6 and WRKY52, which participate in the SA pathway, were higher expressed in 'Thompson Seedless' than in 'Pinot Noir', indicating that SA-dependent defense responses may regulate seed abortion. The genes related to synthesis and metabolism of gibberellic acid (GA) and abscisic acid (ABA) also showed differential expression between 'Thompson Seedless' and 'Pinot Noir'. Exogenous applications of plant growth regulators (PGRs) to inflorescences of three stenospermocarpy grapevines before flowering showed that GA<sub>3</sub> was critical prominently in seed development. Therefore, the co-expression of seed coat and endosperm development-related genes, SA pathway genes, and genes for the synthesis and metabolism of GA<sub>3</sub> together enhance seed abortion in seedless grapes.

VviAGL11: !coordinates with! FIS2, PHERESE1, IKU2
VviAGL11: !regulates! seed development, abortion
FIS2, PHERESE1, IKU2: !regulate! seedless fruit development
EDS1, NPR1, NDR1, SID2: !higher expressed in! Thompson Seedless
WRKY3, WRKY6, WRKY52: !participate in! SA pathway
GA, ABA: !differentially expressed between! Thompson Seedless, Pinot Noir
PGRs: !enhance! seed abortion