Arabidopsis MYC2 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that works both as a negative and positive regulator of light and multiple hormonal signaling pathways, including jasmonic acid and abscisic acid. Recent studies have suggested the role of MYC2 as a negative regulator of salicylic acid (SA)-mediated defense against bacterial pathogens. By using myc2 mutant and constitutively MYC2-expressing plants, we further show that MYC2 also positively influences SA-mediated defense; whereas, myc2 mutant plants are resistant to virulent pathogens only, MYC2 over-expressing plants are hyper-resistant to multiple virulent and avirulent strains of bacterial pathogens. MYC2 promotes pathogen-induced callose deposition, SA biosynthesis, expression of PR1 gene, and SA-responsiveness. Using bacterially produced MYC2 protein in electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), we have shown that MYC2 binds to the promoter of several important defense regulators, including PEPR1, MKK4, RIN4, and the second intron of ICS1. MYC2 positively regulates the expression of RIN4, MKK4, and ICS1; however, it negatively regulates the expression of PEPR1. Pathogen inoculation enhances MYC2 association at ICS1 intron and RIN4 promoter. Mutations of MYC2 binding site at ICS1 intron or RIN4 promoter abolish the associated GUS reporter expression. Hyper-resistance of MYC2 over-expressing plants is largely light-dependent, which is in agreement with the role of MYC2 in SA biosynthesis. The results altogether demonstrate that MYC2 possesses dual regulatory roles in SA biosynthesis, SA signaling, pattern-triggered immunity (PTI), and effector-triggered immunity (ETI) in Arabidopsis.

MYC2: !regulates! light and hormonal signaling pathways
MYC2: !promotes! pathogen-induced callose deposition
MYC2: !binds to! promoters of defense regulators
MYC2: !positively regulates! RIN4, MKK4, ICS1
MYC2: !negatively regulates! PEPR1
MYC2: !enhances! SA biosynthesis
MYC2: !influences! SA-mediated defense
MYC2: !hyper-resistance! multiple virulent and avirulent strains