GhDRP1 acts as a negatively regulator to participate in response to drought stress possibly by modulating ABA signaling pathway and flavonoid biosynthesis pathway which affects stomata movement and thus water loss, ROS scavenging enzymes, and proline accumulation in cotton. Type-2C protein phosphatases (PP2C) may play important roles in plant stress signal transduction. Here, we show the evidence that a cotton PP2C protein GhDRP1 participates in plant response to drought stress. GhDRP1 gene encodes an active type-2C protein phosphatase (PP2C) and its expression is significantly induced in cotton by drought stress. Compared with wild type, the GhDRP1 overexpression (OE) transgenic cotton and Arabidopsis displayed reduced drought tolerance, whereas GhDRP1-silenced (RNAi) cotton showed enhanced drought tolerance. Under drought stress, malondialdehyde content was lower, whereas superoxide dismutase and peroxidase activities, proline content, stomata closure and relative water content were higher in GhDRP1 RNAi plants compared with those in wild type. In contrast, GhDRP1 OE plants showed the opposite phenotype under the same conditions. Expression levels of some stress-related and flavonoid biosynthesis-related genes were altered in GhDRP1 transgenic plants under drought stress. Additionally, GhDRP1 protein could interact with other proteins such as PYLs, SNF1-related protein kinase and GLK1-like protein. Collectively, these data suggest that GhDRP1 participates in plant response to drought stress possibly by modulating ABA signaling pathway and flavonoid biosynthesis pathway which affects stomata movement and thus water loss, ROS scavenging enzymes, and proline accumulation in cotton.

GhDRP1: !regulates! ABA signaling pathway 
GhDRP1: !regulates! flavonoid biosynthesis pathway 
ABA signaling pathway: !affects! stomata movement 
flavonoid biosynthesis pathway: !affects! stomata movement 
stomata movement: !affects! water loss 
stomata movement: !affects! ROS scavenging enzymes 
stomata movement: !affects! proline accumulation 
GhDRP1: !interacts with! PYLs 
GhDRP1: !interacts with! SNF1-related protein kinase 
GhDRP1: !interacts with! GLK1-like protein