['34592024', 'Lipid anchors are common post-translational modifications for proteins engaged in  signaling and vesicular transport in eukaryotic cells. Rab proteins are  geranylgeranylated at their C-termini, a modification which is important for  their stable binding to lipid bilayers. The Rab escort protein (REP) is an  accessory protein of the Rab geranylgeranyl transferase (RGT) complex and it is  obligatory for Rab prenylation. While REP-Rab interactions have been studied by  biochemical, structural, and genetic methods in animals and yeast, data on the  plant RGT complex are still limited. Here we use hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass  spectrometry (HDX-MS) to describe the structural basis of plant REP-Rab binding.  The obtained results show that the interaction of REP with Rabs is highly dynamic  and involves specific structural changes in both partners. In some cases the Rab  and REP regions involved in the interaction are molecule-specific, and in other  cases they are common for a subset of Rabs. In particular, the C-terminus of REP  is not involved in binding of unprenylated Rab proteins in plants, in contrast to  mammalian REP. In line with this, a C-terminal REP truncation does not have  pronounced phenotypic effects in planta. On the contrary, a complete lack of  functional REP leads to male sterility in Arabidopsis: pollen grains develop in  the anthers, but they do not germinate efficiently and hence are unable to  transmit the mutated allele. The presented data show that the mechanism of action  of REP in the process of Rab geranylgeranylation is different in plants than in  animals or yeast.', '2021 Dec', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.15519', 'ORCID:']

Rab: !interacts with! REP 
REP: !obligatory for! Rab prenylation 
REP: !structural changes in! Rab 
REP: !molecule-specific interaction with! subset of Rabs 
REP C-terminus: !not involved in binding of! unprenylated Rab proteins 
C-terminal REP truncation: !no pronounced phenotypic effects in! planta 
Complete lack of functional REP: !leads to! male sterility in Arabidopsis