Phytochromes are red-light photoreceptors that play an important role in regulating many responses of plants, including its nutritional control. Nutrient deficiency in plants has become a constraint for agricultural production; thus, we investigated the role of phytochromes B1 and B2 in the nutritional, physiological, and growth changes of the control genotype (WT) and both phyB1 and phyB2 tomato mutants (deficient in phyB1 and phyB2) under nutritional sufficiency and individual deficiency of N, P, and K. Under complete solution, the plants of phyB1 and phyB2 had a decreased N, P, and K accumulation compared with WT and consequently a reduced content of chlorophyll and carotenoids, and dry weight production. In the condition of N deficiency, phyB1 had decreased N absorption, pigments concentration, and plant dry weight, while increased oxidative stress of membranes (MDA content). Similarly, phyB2 also had reduced N absorption. The deficiency of phyB1 mitigated the effects of P deficiency as phyB1 mutant had improved nutritional and physiological responses, increasing plant dry weight production. In contrast, phyB2 reduced N accumulation, quantum efficiency of photosystem II (Fv/Fm), and the concentration of pigments, while it increased MDA. Under K deficiency, phyB1 displayed a reduced P accumulation, as well as the total concentration of chlorophylls and carotenoids and K use efficiency. An increased concentration of MDA was found in phyB2 plants, as well as a reduction in chlorophylls concentration and in the use efficiency of K. Together, these results indicate a new perspective on the control of phytochromes in the nutrition of tomato plants under nutritional stress.

phytochromes B1: !regulate! responses of plants
phyB1: !affects! N absorption
phyB2: !affects! N absorption
phyB1: !mitigates! effects of P deficiency
phyB2: !reduces! quantum efficiency of photosystem II
phyB1: !reduces! P accumulation
phyB2: !increases! MDA concentration
phyB1: !reduces! total concentration of chlorophylls and carotenoids
phyB2: !reduces! use efficiency of K