Grafting has been adopted for a wide range of crops to enhance productivity and resilience; for example, grafting of Solanaceous crops couples disease-resistant rootstocks with scions that produce high-quality fruit. However, incompatibility severely limits the application of grafting and graft incompatibility remains poorly understood. In grafts, immediate incompatibility results in rapid death, but delayed incompatibility can take months or even years to manifest, creating a significant economic burden for perennial crop production. To gain insight into the genetic mechanisms underlying this phenomenon, we developed a model system using heterografting of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) and pepper (Capsicum annuum). These grafted plants express signs of anatomical junction failure within the first week of grafting. By generating a detailed timeline for junction formation, we were able to pinpoint the cellular basis for this delayed incompatibility. Furthermore, we inferred gene regulatory networks for compatible self-grafts and incompatible heterografts based on these key anatomical events, which predict core regulators for grafting. Finally, we examined the role of vascular development in graft formation and uncovered SlWOX4 as a potential regulator of graft compatibility. Following this predicted regulator up with functional analysis, we show that Slwox4 homografts fail to form xylem bridges across the junction, demonstrating that indeed, SlWOX4 is essential for vascular reconnection during grafting, and may function as an early indicator of graft failure.

Grafting: !enhances! Productivity 
Solanaceous crops: !couples! Disease-resistant rootstocks 
Graft incompatibility: !limits! Application 
Grafted plants: !express! Signs of anatomical junction failure 
Gene regulatory networks: !inferred from! Key anatomical events 
Vascular development: !examined for! Graft formation 
SlWOX4: !predicted as! Potential regulator of graft compatibility 
SlWOX4: !essential for! Vascular reconnection