Purine degradation products have been shown to play roles in plant response to stresses such as drought, salinity, extended dark, nitrogen deficiency, and pathogen infection. In this study, we used Arabidopsis wild-type (WT) and an Atxdh1-knockout mutant defective in xanthine dehydrogenase1 (XDH1) to examine the role of degraded purine metabolites in the responses to wounding or UV-C stress applied to the middle leaves of the plant. Wounding or UV-C stress in the mutant resulted in lower fresh-weight, increased senescence symptoms, and increased cell death compared to WT plants. In addition, WT plants exhibited lower levels of oxidative stress indicators, reactive oxygen species, and malondialdehyde in their leaves than the mutant. Notably, transcripts and proteins functioning in the purine degradation pathway were regulated in such a way that it led to enhanced ureide levels in WT leaves 24h after applying the UV-C or wound stress. However, different remobilization of the accumulated ureides was observed after 72h of stress. In plants treated with UV-C, the concentration of allantoin was highest in young leaves, whereas in wounded plants it was lowest in these leaves and instead accumulated mainly in the middle leaves that had been wounded. These results indicated that in WT plants treated with UV-C, ureides were remobilized from the lower older and damaged leaves to support young leaf growth during the recovery period from stress. After wounding, however, whilst some ureides were remobilized to the young leaves, more remained in the wounded middle leaves to function as antioxidants and/or healing agents.

XDH1: !affects! Plant response to stress 
Wounding/UV-C Stress: !increases! Senescence symptoms 
Wounding/UV-C Stress: !increases! Cell death 
WT Plants: !exhibit lower! Oxidative stress indicators 
Purine degradation pathway: !regulated in such a way that it leads to! Enhanced ureide levels 
UV-C Stress: !results in! Ureides remobilized from lower leaves 
Wounded Plants: !results in! Ureides remaining in wounded middle leaves