Woody bamboo is environmentally friendly, abundant, and an alternative to conventional timber. Degree of lignification and lignin content and deposition affect timber properties. However, the lignification regulatory network in monocots is poorly understood. To elucidate the regulatory mechanism of lignification in moso bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis), we conducted integrated analyses using transcriptome, small RNA, and degradome sequencing followed by experimental verification. The lignification degree and lignin content increased with increased bamboo shoot height, whereas phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and Laccase activities first increased and then decreased with shoot growth. Moreover, we identified 11,504 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in different portions of the 13th internodes of different height shoots; most DEGs associated with cell wall and lignin biosynthesis were upregulated, whereas some DEGs related to cell growth were downregulated. We identified a total of 1,502 miRNAs, of which 687 were differentially expressed. Additionally, in silico and degradome analyses indicated that 5,756 genes were targeted by 691 miRNAs. We constructed a regulatory network of lignification, including 11 miRNAs, 22 transcription factors, and 36 enzyme genes, in moso bamboo. Furthermore, PeLAC20 overexpression increased lignin content in transgenic Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants. Finally, we proposed a reliable miRNA-mediated "MYB-PeLAC20" module for lignin monomer polymerization. Our findings provide definite insights into the genetic regulation of bamboo lignification. In addition to providing a platform for understanding related mechanisms in other monocots, these insights could be used to develop strategies to improve bamboo timber properties.

DEGs: !associated with! cell wall and lignin biosynthesis
miRNAs: !targeted! 5,756 genes
miRNAs: !regulated! 11 transcription factors
PeLAC20: !overexpressed! increased lignin content
MYB-PeLAC20: !mediated! lignin monomer polymerization