Basic helix-loop-helix/helix-loop-helix (bHLH/HLH) transcription factors play substantial roles in plant cell elongation. In this study, two bHLH/HLH homologous proteins leaf related protein 1 and leaf-related protein 2 (AtLP1 and AtLP2) were identified in Arabidopsis thaliana. LP1 and LP2 play similar positive roles in longitudinal cell elongation. Both LP1 and LP2 overexpression plants exhibited long hypocotyls, elongated cotyledons, and particularly long leaf blades. The elongated leaves resulted from increased longitudinal cell elongation. lp1 and lp2 loss-of-function single mutants did not display distinct phenotypes, but the lp1lp2 double mutant showed decreased leaf length associated with less longitudinal polar cell elongation. Furthermore, the phenotype of lp1lp2 could be rescued by the expression of LP1 or LP2. Expression of genes related to cell elongation was upregulated in LP1 and LP2 overexpression plants but downregulated in lp1lp2 double mutant plants compared with that of wild type. LP1 and LP2 proteins could directly bind to the promoters of Longifolia1 (LNG1) and LNG2 to activate the expression of these cell elongation related genes. Both LP1 and LP2 could interact with two other bHLH/HLH proteins, IBH1 (ILI1 binding BHLH Protein1) and IBL1 (IBH1-like1), thereby suppressing the transcriptional activation of LP1 and LP2 to the target genes LNG1 and LNG2. Thus, our data suggested that LP1 and LP2 act as positive regulators to promote longitudinal cell elongation by activating the expression of LNG1 and LNG2 genes in Arabidopsis. Moreover, homodimerization of LP1 and LP2 may be essential for their function, and interaction between LP1/LP2 and other bHLH/HLH proteins may obstruct transcriptional regulation of target genes by LP1 and LP2.

LP1: !activates! LNG1
LP2: !activates! LNG2
LP1: !interacts with! IBH1
LP2: !interacts with! IBL1
LP1: !enhances! cell elongation
LP2: !enhances! cell elongation
LP1: !synthesizes! homodimer
LP2: !synthesizes! homodimer