Appropriate flowering time is very important to the success of modern agriculture. Maize (Zea mays L.) is a major cereal crop, originated in tropical areas, with photoperiod sensitivity. Which is an important obstacle to the utilization of tropical/subtropical germplasm resources in temperate regions. However, the study on the regulation mechanism of photoperiod sensitivity of maize is still in the early stage. Although it has been previously reported that ZmCCT is involved in the photoperiod response and delays maize flowering time under long-day conditions, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Here, we showed that ZmCCT overexpression delays flowering time and confers maize drought tolerance under LD conditions. Implementing the Gal4-LexA/UAS system identified that ZmCCT has a transcriptional inhibitory activity, while the yeast system showed that ZmCCT has a transcriptional activation activity. DAP-Seq analysis and EMSA indicated that ZmCCT mainly binds to promoters containing the novel motifs CAAAAATC and AAATGGTC. DAP-Seq and RNA-Seq analysis showed that ZmCCT could directly repress the expression of ZmPRR5 and ZmCOL9, and promote the expression of ZmRVE6 to delay flowering under long-day conditions. Moreover, we also demonstrated that ZmCCT directly binds to the promoters of ZmHY5, ZmMPK3, ZmVOZ1 and ZmARR16 and promotes the expression of ZmHY5 and ZmMPK3, but represses ZmVOZ1 and ZmARR16 to enhance stress resistance. Additionally, ZmCCT regulates a set of genes associated with plant development. ZmCCT has dual functions in regulating maize flowering time and stress response under LD conditions. ZmCCT negatively regulates flowering time and enhances maize drought tolerance under LD conditions. ZmCCT represses most flowering time genes to delay flowering while promotes most stress response genes to enhance stress tolerance. Our data contribute to a comprehensive understanding of the regulatory mechanism of ZmCCT in controlling maize flowering time and stress response.

ZmCCT: !delays! flowering time 
ZmCCT: !promotes! stress tolerance 
ZmCCT: !represses! ZmPRR5 
ZmCCT: !promotes! ZmRVE6 
ZmCCT: !binds to! CAAAAATC/AAATGGTC motifs 
ZmCCT: !promotes! ZmHY5/ZmMPK3 
ZmCCT: !represses! ZmVOZ1/ZmARR16