Soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.) has been disseminated globally as a photoperiod/temperature-sensitive crop with extremely diverse days to flowering (DTF) and days to maturity (DTM) values. A population with 371 global varieties covering 13 geographic regions and 13 maturity groups (MGs) was analyzed for its DTF and DTM QTL-allele constitution using restricted two-stage multi-locus genome-wide association study (RTM-GWAS). Genotypes with 20 701 genome-wide SNPLDBs (single-nucleotide polymorphism linkage disequilibrium blocks) containing 55 404 haplotypes were observed, and 52 DTF QTLs and 59 DTM QTLs (including 29 and 21 new ones) with 241 and 246 alleles (two to 13 per locus) were detected, explaining 84.8% and 74.4% of the phenotypic variance, respectively. The QTL-allele matrix characterized with all QTL-allele information of each variety in the global population was established and subsequently separated into geographic and MG set submatrices. Direct comparisons among them revealed that the genetic adaptation from the origin to geographic subpopulations was characterized by new allele/new locus emergence (mutation) but little allele exclusion (selection), while that from the primary MG set to emerged early and late MG sets was characterized by allele exclusion without allele emergence. The evolutionary changes involved mainly 72 DTF and 71 DTM alleles on 28 respective loci, 10-12 loci each with three to six alleles being most active. Further recombination potential for faster maturation (12-21 days) or slower maturation (14-56 days) supported allele convergence (recombination) as a constant genetic factor in addition to migration (inheritance). From the QTLs, 44 DTF and 36 DTM candidate genes were annotated and grouped respectively into nine biological processes, indicating multi-functional DTF/DTM genes are involved in a complex gene network. In summary, we identified QTL-alleles relatively thoroughly using RTM-GWAS for direct matrix comparisons and subsequent analysis.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Gene: !synthesizes! I 
Gene: !represses! U 
Gene: !enhances! Z 
Gene: !interacts with! Y 
Gene: !localizes to! X