Shoot herbivores may influence the communities of herbivores associated with the roots via inducible defenses. However, the molecular mechanisms and hormonal signaling underpinning the systemic impact of leaf herbivory on root-induced responses against nematodes remain poorly understood. By using tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) as a model plant, we explored the impact of leaf herbivory by Manduca sexta on the performance of the root knot nematode Meloidogyne incognita. By performing glasshouse bioassays, we found that leaf herbivory reduced M. incognita performance in the roots. By analyzing the root expression profile of a set of oxylipin-related marker genes and jasmonate root content, we show that leaf herbivory systemically activates the 13-Lipoxigenase (LOX) and 9-LOX branches of the oxylipin pathway in roots and counteracts the M. incognita-triggered repression of the 13-LOX branch. By using untargeted metabolomics, we also found that leaf herbivory counteracts the M. incognita-mediated repression of putative root chemical defenses. To explore the signaling involved in this shoot-to-root interaction, we performed glasshouse bioassays with grafted plants compromised in jasmonate synthesis or perception, specifically in their shoots. We demonstrated the importance of an intact shoot jasmonate perception, whereas having an intact jasmonate biosynthesis pathway was not essential for this shoot-to-root interaction. Our results highlight the impact of leaf herbivory on the ability of M. incognita to manipulate root defenses and point to an important role for the jasmonate signaling pathway in shoot-to-root signaling.

Leaf herbivory: !induces! 13-Lipoxigenase (LOX) and 9-LOX branches of the oxylipin pathway in roots
Leaf herbivory: !counteracts! M. incognita-triggered repression of the 13-LOX branch
Leaf herbivory: !counteracts! M. incognita-mediated repression of putative root chemical defenses
Shoot jasmonate perception: !essential for! shoot-to-root interaction
Jasmonate biosynthesis pathway: !not essential for! shoot-to-root interaction