Glutenin contents and compositions are crucial factors influencing the end-use quality of wheat. Although the composition of glutenin fractions is well known, there has been relatively little research on the genetic basis of glutenin fractions in wheat. To elucidate the genetic basis for the contents of glutenin and its fractions, a population comprising 196 recombinant inbred lines (RILs) was constructed from two parents, Luozhen No.1 and Zhengyumai 9987, which differ regarding their total glutenin and its fraction contents (except for the By fraction). Forty-one additive Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) were detected in four environments over two years. These QTL explained 1.3% - 53.4% of the phenotypic variation in the examined traits. Forty-three pairs of epistatic QTL (E-QTL) were detected in the RIL population across four environments. The QTL controlling the content of total glutenin and its seven fractions were detected in clusters. Seven clusters enriched with QTL for more than three traits were identified, including a QTL cluster 6AS-3, which was revealed as a novel genetic locus for glutenin and related traits. Kompetitive Allele-Specific PCR (KASP) markers developed from the main QTL cluster 1DL-2 and the previously developed KASP marker for the QTL cluster 6AS-3 were validated as significantly associated with the target traits in the RIL population and in natural varieties. This study identified novel genetic loci related to glutenin and its seven fractions. Additionally, the developed KASP markers may be useful for the marker-assisted selection of varieties with high glutenin fraction content and for identifying individuals in the early developmental stages without the need for phenotyping mature plants. On the basis of the results of this study and the KASP markers described herein, breeders will be able to efficiently select wheat lines with favorable glutenin properties and develop elite lines with high glutenin subunit contents.

Gene: !affects! Glutenin content
Gene: !localizes to! QTL cluster 6AS-3
Gene: !interacts with! KASP markers
Gene: !enhances! Phenotypic variation
Gene: !represses! Natural varieties
Gene: !synthesizes! Elite lines