Stomata are adjustable pores on leaf surfaces that regulate the tradeoff of CO2 uptake with water vapor loss, thus having critical roles in controlling photosynthetic carbon gain and plant water use. The lack of easy, rapid methods for phenotyping epidermal cell traits have limited discoveries about the genetic basis of stomatal patterning. A high-throughput epidermal cell phenotyping pipeline is presented here and used for quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping in field-grown maize (Zea mays). The locations and sizes of stomatal complexes and pavement cells on images acquired by an optical topometer from mature leaves were automatically determined. Computer estimated stomatal complex density (SCD; R2 = 0.97) and stomatal complex area (SCA; R2 = 0.71) were strongly correlated with human measurements. Leaf gas exchange traits were genetically correlated with the dimensions and proportions of stomatal complexes (rg = 0.39-0.71) but did not correlate with SCD. Heritability of epidermal traits was moderate to high (h2 = 0.42-0.82) across two field seasons. Thirty-six QTL were consistently identified for a given trait in both years. Twenty-four clusters of overlapping QTL for multiple traits were identified, with univariate versus multivariate single marker analysis providing evidence consistent with pleiotropy in multiple cases. Putative orthologs of genes known to regulate stomatal patterning in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) were located within some, but not all, of these regions. This study demonstrates how discovery of the genetic basis for stomatal patterning can be accelerated in maize, a C4 model species where these processes are poorly understood.

Stomata: !regulate! CO2 uptake and water vapor loss
Epidermal cell traits: !limited! discoveries about genetic basis of stomatal patterning
Optical topometer: !determines! locations and sizes of stomatal complexes and pavement cells
Leaf gas exchange traits: !genetically correlated with! dimensions and proportions of stomatal complexes
Heritability of epidermal traits: !moderate to high! across two field seasons
QTL: !consistently identified for! a given trait in both years
Clusters of overlapping QTL: !identified for! multiple traits
Putative orthologs of genes: !located within! some regions