['34618095', "Two decades ago, large cation currents were discovered in the envelope membranes  of Pisum sativum L. (pea) chloroplasts. The deduced K+-permeable channel was  coined fast-activating chloroplast cation channel but its molecular identity  remained elusive. To reveal candidates, we mined proteomic datasets of isolated  pea envelopes. Our search uncovered distant members of the nuclear POLLUX ion  channel family. Since pea is not amenable to molecular genetics, we used  Arabidopsis thaliana to characterize the two gene homologs. Using several  independent approaches, we show that both candidates localize to the chloroplast  envelope membrane. The proteins, designated PLASTID ENVELOPE ION CHANNELS  (PEC1/2), form oligomers with regulator of K+ conductance domains protruding into  the intermembrane space. Heterologous expression of PEC1/2 rescues yeast mutants  deficient in K+ uptake. Nuclear POLLUX ion channels cofunction with Ca2+ channels  to generate Ca2+ signals, critical for establishing mycorrhizal symbiosis and  root development. Chloroplasts also exhibit Ca2+ transients in the stroma,  probably to relay abiotic and biotic cues between plastids and the nucleus via  the cytosol. Our results show that pec1pec2 loss-of-function double mutants fail  to trigger the characteristic stromal Ca2+ release observed in wild-type plants  exposed to external stress stimuli. Besides this molecular abnormality, pec1pec2  double mutants do not show obvious phenotypes. Future studies of PEC proteins  will help to decipher the plant's stress-related Ca2+ signaling network and the  role of plastids. More importantly, the discovery of PECs in the envelope  membrane is another critical step towards completing the chloroplast ion  transport protein inventory.", '2021 Dec 4', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1093/plphys/kiab424', 'ORCID:']

PEC1/2: !localizes to! chloroplast envelope membrane 
PEC1/2: !forms oligomers with! regulator of K+ conductance domains 
PEC1/2: !rescues yeast mutants deficient in K+ uptake! 
nuclear POLLUX ion channels: !cofunction with! Ca2+ channels 
Ca2+ signals: !critical for! establishing mycorrhizal symbiosis and root development 
external stress stimuli: !triggers! stromal Ca2+ release 
pec1pec2 double mutants: !fail to trigger! stromal Ca2+ release