Many high-yielding rice cultivars with large sink size (total number of spikelet per unit area × mean grain weight) have been developed, but some japonica cultivars developed in Japan often fail to attain the expected high yield due to low sink strength of spikelets. Although there is natural variation in sink strength of spikelets among high-yielding cultivars, metabolic factors involved in the natural variation and relationships of sink strength in spikelets with final percentage of filled spikelets are not fully understood. In the present study, we examined cultivar differences in sink strength for superior and inferior spikelets (i.e. earlier fertilizing spikelets with faster growth and later fertilizing ones with slower growth, respectively) in a panicle, using each spikelet at 10 d after the onset of development (10 DAD) when starch accumulation in endosperm was actively proceeding. Nine high-yielding cultivars were used: five japonica-dominant and four indica-dominant cultivars. Cultivar differences were observed in starch contents at 10 DAD in each spikelet type, and indica cultivars had higher starch contents than japonica cultivars in both superior and inferior spikelets. In addition, starch contents at 10 DAD were closely related to percentage of filled grains at maturity in both spikelet types. The activities of sucrose synthase (SUS) and uridine diphosphoglucose pyrophosphorylase (UGP), and the protein levels of phosphorylase 1 (Pho1), were higher in indica than japonica cultivars, and were positively correlated with starch contents at 10 DAD for both superior and inferior spikelets; although metabolic states, revealed from relations between intermediate metabolites and starch contents, differed among spikelet types. Consequently, it was considered that SUS and UGP at the step from sucrose cleavage to adenosine diphosphoglucose synthesis, and Pho1 at the starch biosynthesis step, were key metabolic factors involved in cultivar differences of sink strength (ability to synthesize starch).

SUS: !enhances! Starch content 
UGP: !enhances! Starch content 
Pho1: !enhances! Starch content 
Indica cultivars: !have higher! SUS, UGP, Pho1 
Japonica cultivars: !have lower! SUS, UGP, Pho1 
Starch content: !correlates with! Percentage of filled grains