Gene expression is delicately controlled via multilayered genetic and/or epigenetic regulatory mechanisms. Rapid development of the high-throughput sequencing (HTS) technology and its derivative methods including chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) and DNA affinity purification sequencing (DAP-seq) have generated a large volume of data on DNA-protein interactions (DPIs) and histone modifications on a genome-wide scale. However, the ability to comprehensively retrieve empirically validated upstream regulatory networks of genes of interest (GOIs) and genomic regions of interest (ROIs) remains limited. Here, we present integrative Regulatory Network (iRegNet), a web application that analyzes the upstream regulatory network for user-queried GOIs or ROIs in the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome. iRegNet covers the largest empirically proven DNA-binding profiles of Arabidopsis transcription factors (TFs) and non-TF proteins, and histone modifications obtained from all currently available Arabidopsis ChIP-seq and DAP-seq data. iRegNet not only catalogs upstream regulomes and epigenetic chromatin states for single-query gene/genomic region but also suggests significantly overrepresented upstream genetic regulators and epigenetic chromatin states of user-submitted multiple query genes/genomic regions. Furthermore, gene-to-gene coexpression index and protein-protein interaction information were also integrated into iRegNet for a more reliable identification of upstream regulators and realistic regulatory networks. Thus, iRegNet will help discover upstream regulators as well as molecular regulatory networks of GOI(s) and/or ROI(s), and is freely available at http://chromatindynamics.snu.ac.kr:8082/iRegNet_main.

Gene: !affects! Expression 
ChIP-seq: !generates! Data 
iRegNet: !analyzes! Regulatory Network 
TFs: !catalogs! Upstream Regulomes 
Histone Modifications: !catalogs! Upstream Regulomes 
Gene: !coexpresses with! Gene 
Protein: !interacts with! Protein