Thioredoxins (Trxs) are disulfide oxidoreductases that regulate many biological processes. The m-type thioredoxin (TrxA) is the only Trx present in all oxygenic photosynthetic organisms. Extensive biochemical and proteomic analyses have identified many TrxA target proteins in different photosynthetic organisms. However, the precise function of this essential protein in vivo is still poorly known. In this study, we generated a conditional Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 mutant strain (STXA2) using an on-off promoter that is able to survive with only 2% of the TrxA level of the wild-type (WT) strain. STXA2 characterization revealed that TrxA depletion results in growth arrest and pronounced impairment of photosynthesis and the Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle. Analysis of the in vivo redox state of the bifunctional enzyme fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase/sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase showed higher levels of oxidation that affected enzyme activity in STXA2. This result implies that TrxA-mediated redox regulation of the CBB cycle is conserved in both cyanobacteria and chloroplasts, although the targets have different evolutionary origins. The STXA2 strain also accumulated more reactive oxygen species and was more sensitive to oxidative stress than the WT. Analysis of the in vivo redox state of 2-Cys peroxiredoxin revealed full oxidation, corresponding with TrxA depletion. Overall, these results indicate that depletion of TrxA in STXA2 greatly alters the cellular redox state, interfering with essential processes such as photosynthetic machinery operativity, carbon assimilation, and oxidative stress response. The TrxA regulatory role appears to be conserved along the evolution of oxygenic photosynthetic organisms.

TrxA: !regulates! Biological Processes 
TrxA: !affects! Photosynthesis 
TrxA: !impacts! CBB Cycle 
TrxA: !alters! Redox State 
TrxA: !regulates! Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase/sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase 
TrxA: !influences! Reactive Oxygen Species 
TrxA: !controls! Oxidative Stress Response