Light-dependent activation of chloroplast enzymes is required for the rapid induction of photosynthesis after a shift from dark to light. The thioredoxin (Trx) system plays a central role in this process. In chloroplasts, the Trx system consists of two pathways: the ferredoxin (Fd)/Trx pathway and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-Trx reductase C (NTRC) pathway. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mutants defective in either pathway, the photoreduction of thiol enzymes was impaired, resulting in decreased carbon fixation. The close relationship between the Fd/Trx pathway and proton gradient regulation 5 (PGR5)-dependent photosystem I cyclic electron transport (PSI CET) in the induction of photosynthesis was recently elucidated. However, how the PGR5-dependent pathway is involved in the NTRC pathway is unclear, although NTRC has been suggested to physically interact with PGR5. In this study, we analyzed Arabidopsis mutants lacking either the PGR5 or the chloroplast NADH dehydrogenase-like complex (NDH)-dependent PSI CET pathway in the ntrc mutant background. The ntrc pgr5 double mutant suppressed both the growth defects and the high non-photochemical quenching phenotype of the ntrc mutant when grown under long-day conditions. By contrast, the inactivation of NDH activity with the chlororespiratory reduction 2-2 mutant failed to suppress either phenotype. We discovered that the phenotypic rescue of ntrc by pgr5 is caused by the partial restoration of Trx-dependent reduction of thiol enzymes. These results suggest that electron partitioning to the PGR5-dependent pathway and the Trx system needs to be properly regulated for the activation of the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle enzymes during the induction of photosynthesis.

Fd/Trx pathway: !activates! photosynthesis
NTRC pathway: !activates! photosynthesis
PGR5: !interacts with! NTRC
PGR5: !partially restores! Trx-dependent reduction of thiol enzymes
NDH: !fails to suppress! growth defects and high non-photochemical quenching phenotype