MoSDT1, a rice blast fungus transcription factor, is as an inducer to activate defense response through mainly mediating phosphorylated proteins in rice. Pathogen effector proteins play a dual role in infecting the host or triggering a defense response. Our previous research found a Magnaporthe oryzae effector, MoSDT1, which could activate the rice defense response when it was overexpressed in rice. However, we still know little about the mechanisms on how MoSDT1 in vivo or in vitro influences the resistance ability of rice. Our results showed that decreased ROS and increased lignin contents appeared along with significant upregulation of defense-related genes, raffinose synthesis gene, and phenylalanine ammonialyase gene. Moreover, we revealed that the contents of lignin were increased, which was in accordance with the upregulation of its precursor phenylalanine gene despite the fact that the glutamate-/thiamine-responsive genes were inhibited in MoSDT1 transgenic rice, and these indicated that MoSDT1 triggered the defense system of rice in vivo. Interestingly, in vitro studies, we further found that MoSDT1 induced the defense system by ROS synthesis, callose deposition, PR gene expression and SA/JA synthesis/signal genes using the purified prokaryotic expression system in rice plants. In addition, this defense response was confirmed to be activated by the zinc finger domain of MoSDT1 via prokaryotic expression of MoSDT1 truncated mutants in rice plants. To elucidate the regulative effects of MoSDT1 on protein phosphorylation in rice, phosphoproteome analysis was performed in both MoSDT1-transgenic and wild type  rice. We found that MoSDT1 specifically up-regulated the expression levels of a few phosphorylated proteins, which were involved in multiple functions, such as biotic/abiotic stress and growth. In addition, the motifs in these specific proteins ranked the top among the top-five conserved motifs in the MoSDT1-transgenic rice. MoSDT1 played a crucial role in enhancing rice resistance by modulating several genes and signaling pathways.

MoSDT1: !activates! defense response 
MoSDT1: !induces! ROS 
MoSDT1: !increases! lignin content 
MoSDT1: !upregulates! defense-related genes 
MoSDT1: !triggers! defense system 
MoSDT1: !induces! callose deposition 
MoSDT1: !induces! PR gene expression 
MoSDT1: !induces! SA/JA synthesis/signal genes 
MoSDT1: !modulates! several genes and signaling pathways