Nodule Inception (NIN) is one of the most important root nodule symbiotic genes as it is required for both infection and nodule organogenesis in legumes. Unlike most legumes with a sole NIN gene, there are four putative orthologous NIN genes in soybean (Glycine max). Whether and how these NIN genes contribute to soybean-rhizobia symbiotic interaction remain unknown. In this study, we found that all four GmNIN genes are induced by rhizobia and that conserved CE and CYC binding motifs in their promoter regions are required for their expression in the nodule formation process. By generation of multiplex Gmnin mutants, we found that the Gmnin1a nin2a nin2b triple mutant and Gmnin1a nin1b nin2a nin2b quadruple mutant displayed similar defects in rhizobia infection and root nodule formation, Gmnin2a nin2b produced fewer nodules but displayed a hyper infection phenotype compared to wild type (WT), while the Gmnin1a nin1b double mutant nodulated similar to WT. Overexpression of GmNIN1a, GmNIN1b, GmNIN2a, and GmNIN2b reduced nodule numbers after rhizobia inoculation, with GmNIN1b overexpression having the weakest effect. In addition, overexpression of GmNIN1a, GmNIN2a, or GmNIN2b, but not GmNIN1b, produced malformed pseudo-nodule-like structures without rhizobia inoculation. In conclusion, GmNIN1a, GmNIN2a, and GmNIN2b play functionally redundant yet complicated roles in soybean nodulation. GmNIN1b, although expressed at a comparable level with the other homologs, plays a minor role in root nodule symbiosis. Our work provides insight into the understanding of the asymmetrically redundant function of GmNIN genes in soybean.

GmNIN1a: !enhances! nodule formation
GmNIN1b: !enhances! nodule formation
GmNIN2a: !enhances! nodule formation
GmNIN2b: !enhances! nodule formation
GmNIN1a: !represses! nodule formation
GmNIN2a: !represses! nodule formation
GmNIN2b: !represses! nodule formation
GmNIN1a: !synthesizes! pseudo-nodule-like structures
GmNIN2a: !synthesizes! pseudo-nodule-like structures
GmNIN2b: !synthesizes! pseudo-nodule-like structures
GmNIN1b: !has minor role in! root nodule symbiosis