An important and interesting feature of rice is that it can germinate under anoxic conditions. Though several biochemical adaptive mechanisms play an important role in the anaerobic germination of rice but the role of phytoglobin-nitric oxide cycle and alternative oxidase pathway is not known, therefore in this study we investigated the role of these pathways in anaerobic germination. Under anoxic conditions, deepwater rice germinated much higher and rapidly than aerobic condition and the anaerobic germination and growth were much higher in the presence of nitrite. The addition of nitrite stimulated NR activity and NO production. Important components of phytoglobin-NO cycle such as methaemoglobin reductase activity, expression of Phytoglobin1, NIA1 were elevated under anaerobic conditions in the presence of nitrite. The operation of phytoglobin-NO cycle also enhanced anaerobic ATP generation, LDH, ADH activities and in parallel ethylene levels were also enhanced. Interestingly nitrite suppressed the ROS production and lipid peroxidation. The reduction of ROS was accompanied by enhanced expression of mitochondrial alternative oxidase protein and its capacity. Application of AOX inhibitor SHAM inhibited the anoxic growth mediated by nitrite. In addition, nitrite improved the submergence tolerance of seedlings. Our study revealed that nitrite driven phytoglobin-NO cycle and AOX are crucial players in anaerobic germination and growth of deepwater rice.

Phytoglobin1: !enhances! anaerobic germination
NIA1: !enhances! anaerobic germination
NR activity: !stimulated by! nitrite
NO production: !stimulated by! nitrite
Methaemoglobin reductase activity: !elevated under! anaerobic conditions
ATP generation: !enhanced by! phytoglobin-NO cycle
LDH: !enhanced by! phytoglobin-NO cycle
ADH activities: !enhanced by! phytoglobin-NO cycle
Ethylene levels: !enhanced by! phytoglobin-NO cycle
ROS production: !suppressed by! nitrite
Lipid peroxidation: !suppressed by! nitrite
Mitochondrial alternative oxidase protein: !enhanced by! nitrite
AOX inhibitor SHAM: !inhibits! anoxic growth