Dongxiang common wild rice is a precious rice germplasm resource for the study and improvement of salt tolerance in rice.The metabolism profile of Dongxiang wild rice (DXWR) under salinity was determined by high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) to find differential metabolites and screen potential biomarkers for salt-tolerant rice varieties. A global untargeted metabolism analysis showed 4,878 metabolites accumulated in seedlings of Dongxiang wild rice. Principal component analysis (PCA) and orthogonal partial least squares-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) results provided a clear metabolism discrimination between DXWR under control and DXWR under salinity. A total of 90 metabolites were significantly changed (49 upregulated and 41 downregulated) under salinity, of which the largest increase was in DL-2-Aminoadipic acid (27.08-fold) and the largest decrease was in L-Carnitine (0.014-fold). Amino acids and nuclear glycosides were mainly upregulated, while carbohydrates and organic acids were mainly downregulated in the salt-treated group. Among the top 10 upregulated metabolites, five kinds of differential metabolites were amino acids. According to the survival rates of the seedlings under salinity, we selected three backcross inbred lines of DXWR with survival rates above 80% as salt-tolerant progenies (pro-DS) and three backcross inbred lines with survival rates below 10% as non-salt-tolerant progenies (pro-NDS) for an amino acid change analysis. This analysis found that the change in L-Asparagine (2.59-fold) was the biggest between pro-DS and pro-NDS under salinity, revealing that the contents of L-Asparagine may be one of the indices we can use to evaluate the salt tolerance of rice varieties.

Gene: !affects! Metabolism
Metabolite: !accumulates in! DXWR
DXWR: !discriminates between! Control/Salinity
Metabolite: !increases! DL-2-Aminoadipic acid
Metabolite: !decreases! L-Carnitine
Amino Acids: !mainly upregulated! Under Salinity
Carbohydrates: !mainly downregulated! Under Salinity
L-Asparagine: !changes most! Between Pro-DS/Pro-NDS