Bacterial infections of skin and wounds may seriously decrease the quality of life and even cause death in some patients. One of the largest concerns in their treatment is the growing antimicrobial resistance of bacterial infectious agents and the spread of resistant strains not only in the hospitals but also in the community. This trend encourages researchers to seek for new effective and safe therapeutical agents. The pharmaceutical industry, focusing mainly on libraries of synthetic compounds as a drug discovery source, is often failing in the battle with bacteria. In contrast, many of the natural compounds, and/or the whole and complex plants extracts, are effective in this field, inactivating the resistant bacterial strains or decreasing their virulence. Natural products act comprehensively; many of them have not only antibacterial, but also anti-inflammatory effects and may support tissue regeneration and wound healing. The European legislative is in the field of natural products medicinal use formed by European Medicines Agency (EMA), based on the scientific work of its Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC). HMPC establishes EU monographs covering the therapeutic uses and safe conditions for herbal substances and preparations, mostly based on folk medicine, but including data from scientific research. In this review, the medicinal plants and their active constituents recommended by EMA for skin disorders are discussed in terms of their antibacterial effect. The source of information about these plant products in the review is represented by research articles listed in scientific databases (Science Direct, PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, etc.) published in recent years.

Gene: !affects! Bacterial infections 
Bacteria: !develops! Antimicrobial resistance 
Pharmaceutical industry: !focuses on! Synthetic compounds 
Natural products: !inactivate! Resistant bacterial strains 
Natural products: !decrease! Virulence 
European Medicines Agency: !establishes! EU monographs 
Medicinal plants: !recommended for! Skin disorders 
Research articles: !provide information about! Plant products