Soybean (Glycine max), a major grain crop worldwide, is susceptible to severe yield loss due to drought. Soybean plants over-expressing and downregulating the soybean Phytoblobin1 (GmPgb1) were evaluated for their ability to cope with polyethylene glycol (PEG)-induced water deficit. Sense transformation of GmPgb1, which was more expressed in shoot tissue relative to roots, increased overall plant performance and tolerance to water stress by attenuating the PEG depression of photosynthetic gas exchange parameters and chlorophyll content, as well as reducing leaf injury and promoting root growth. The higher plant relative water content, as a result of GmPgb1 over-expression, was associated with higher transcript levels of three aquaporins: GmTIP1;5 and GmTIP2;5 GmPIP2;9, known to confer water stress tolerance. Opposite results were observed in plants suppressing GmPgb1, which were highly susceptible to PEG-induced stress. Transcriptional and metabolic analyses revealed higher ABA synthesis in dehydrating leaves of plants over-expressing GmPgb1 relative to those suppressing the same gene. The latter plants exhibited a transcriptional induction of ABA catabolic enzymes and higher accumulation of the ABA catabolite dehydrophaseic acid (DPA). Administration of 8'-acetylene ABA, an ABA agonist resistant to the ABA catabolic activity, was sufficient to restore tolerance in the GmPgb1 down-regulating plants suggesting that regulation of ABA catabolism is as important as ABA synthesis in conferring PEG-induced water stress tolerance. Screening of natural soybean germplasm also revealed a rapid and transient increase in foliar GmPgb1 in tolerant plants relative to their susceptible counterparts, thus confirming the key role exercised by this gene during water stress.

GmPgb1: !over-expresses! plant performance 
GmPgb1: !downregulates! water stress susceptibility 
GmTIP1;5: !localizes to! shoot tissue 
GmTIP2;5 GmPIP2;9: !synthesizes! water stress tolerance 
ABA synthesis: !enhances! GmPgb1 over-expression 
ABA catabolic enzymes: !induce! GmPgb1 down-regulation 
DPA: !accumulates! ABA catabolism 
8'-acetylene ABA: !restores! tolerance in GmPgb1 down-regulating plants 
natural soybean germplasm: !reveals! rapid increase in foliar GmPgb1