Global climatic instabilities have become the main reason for drastic yield losses in chickpea. This shift in climate could be a great threat in the future for food security in developing countries. Chickpea production is badly hampered by heat stress coupled with drought stress, and these factors can reduce yields by 40-45%. To mitigate yield losses due these abiotic factors, irrigation supplementation could be the best strategy. The present study aimed to (i) investigate the tolerance response of 9 desi chickpea genotypes against heat stress (H), irrigation (I), and a combination of both (I+H) through morphophysiological and biochemical indices at early growth stage, and (ii) assess yield performance across multiple locations of the country. Results revealed that under irrigation treatment, all genotypes perform well, but the genotypes D-09027 and D-09013 showed best performance because, as compared to control, they retained root length, seedling fresh weight, root fresh weight, root dry weight, esterase activity, Malondialdehyde (MDA) content, total chlorophyll, and total carotenoids. Shoot length and total phenolic contents (TPC) increased in both genotypes. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) and peroxidase (POD) increased in D-09027 and retained in D-09013. Catalase activity increased in D-09013 and retained in D-09027. Protease activity, total water potential and osmotic potential decreased in both genotypes and depicted high yield potential with 27 and 30% increase in yield over Bhakhar-2011 (check), respectively. In case of heat stress, maximum tolerance was found in genotypes CH104/06 and D-09013 with no change in shoot and root length, seedling dry weight, shoot fresh and dry weight, root dry weight, relative water content, turgor water potential, catalase (CAT) activity, esterase activity, increased root fresh weight, peroxidase activity (POD), ascorbate peroxidase activity (APX), and lycopene with low accumulation of protease and Malondialdehyde content (MDA). Both genotypes depicted high yield potential with 30 and 43% increase in yield over check across multiple locations of the country. Under the combined treatment, most genotypes showed good performance, while CH104/06 was selected as best performer genotype because significant of its increased root fresh weight, lycopene content, chlorophyll b, total carotenoids, total chlorophyll, retained shoot length, root length, seedling fresh and dry weight, total water potential, osmotic potential, relative water content, peroxidase activity (POD), catalase, esterase, and its ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity and total soluble proteins (TSP) showed highest yield potential with 43% increase over check. Identified best performing and tolerant genotypes can further be employed for breeding climate-smart chickpea genotypes for sustainable production under changing climate.

genotype: !retains! root length
genotype: !increases! shoot length
genotype: !increases! total phenolic contents
genotype: !increases! superoxide dismutase
genotype: !retains! peroxidase
genotype: !increases! catalase activity
genotype: !decreases! protease activity
genotype: !increases! total carotenoids
genotype: !increases! lycopene content
genotype: !increases! total chlorophyll
genotype: !increases! ascorbate peroxidase activity
genotype: !increases! total soluble proteins
genotype: !increases! yield potential