Root rot is a major constraint to snap bean (<i>Phaseolus vulgaris</i>) production in the United States and around the world. Genetic resistance is needed to effectively control root rot disease because cultural control methods are ineffective, and the pathogen will be present at the end of one season of production on previously clean land. A diversity panel of 149 snap bean pure lines was evaluated for resistance to <i>Fusarium</i> root rot in Oregon. Morphological traits potentially associated with root rot resistance, such as aboveground biomass, adventitious roots, taproot diameter, basal root diameter, deepest root angle, shallowest root angle, root angle average, root angle difference, and root angle geometric mean were evaluated and correlated to disease severity. A genome wide association study (GWAS) using the Fixed and random model Circulating Probability Unification (FarmCPU) statistical method, identified five associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for disease severity and two SNPs for biomass. The SNPs were found on Pv03, Pv07, Pv08, Pv10, and Pv11. One candidate gene for disease reaction near a SNP on Pv03 codes for a peroxidase, and two candidates associated with biomass SNPs were a 2-alkenal reductase gene cluster on Pv10 and a Pentatricopeptide repeat domain on Pv11. Bean lines utilized in the study were ranked by genomic estimated breeding values (GEBV) for disease severity, biomass, and the root architecture traits, and the observed and predicted values had high to moderate correlations. Cross validation of genomic predictions showed slightly lower correlational accuracy. Bean lines with the highest GEBV were among the most resistant, but did not necessarily rank at the very top numerically. This study provides information on the relationship of root architecture traits to root rot disease reaction. Snap bean lines with genetic merit for genomic selection were identified and may be utilized in future breeding efforts.

SNP: !associated with! Disease severity
SNP: !associated with! Biomass
Peroxidase gene: !near! SNP on Pv03
2-alkenal reductase gene cluster: !on! Pv10
Pentatricopeptide repeat domain: !on! Pv11
Bean lines: !ranked by! Genomic estimated breeding values
Observed values: !correlated to! Predicted values
Cross validation: !showed! Lower correlational accuracy