Photosynthetic organisms in nature often experience light fluctuations. While low light conditions limit the energy uptake by algae, light absorption exceeding the maximal rate of photosynthesis may go along with enhanced formation of potentially toxic reactive oxygen species. To preempt high light-induced photodamage, photosynthetic organisms evolved numerous photoprotective mechanisms. Among these, energy-dependent fluorescence quenching (qE) provides a rapid mechanism to dissipate thermally the excessively absorbed energy. Diatoms thrive in all aquatic environments and thus belong to the most important primary producers on earth. qE in diatoms is provided by a concerted action of Lhcx proteins and the xanthophyll cycle pigment diatoxanthin. While the exact Lhcx activation mechanism of diatom qE is unknown, two lumen-exposed acidic amino acids within Lhcx proteins were proposed to function as regulatory switches upon light-induced lumenal acidification. By introducing a modified Lhcx1 lacking these amino acids into a Phaeodactylum tricornutum Lhcx1-null qE knockout line, we demonstrate that qE is unaffected by these two amino acids. Based on sequence comparisons with Lhcx4, being incapable of providing qE, we perform domain swap experiments of Lhcx4 with Lhcx1 and identify two peptide motifs involved in conferring qE. Within one of these motifs, we identify a tryptophan residue with a major influence on qE establishment. This tryptophan residue is located in close proximity to the diadinoxanthin/diatoxanthin-binding site based on the recently revealed diatom Lhc crystal structure. Our findings provide a structural explanation for the intimate link of Lhcx and diatoxanthin in providing qE in diatoms.

Lhcx proteins: !provide! qE
Lumen-exposed acidic amino acids: !regulate! Lhcx activation
Modified Lhcx1: !unaffected by! lumenal acidification
Lhcx4: !swapped with! Lhcx1
Peptide motifs: !confer! qE
Tryptophan residue: !influences! qE establishment
Diatoxanthin: !binds to! Lhcx