Overexpression of forage sorghum oleosin genes in Arabidopsis oleosin-deficient mutant and yeast showed increased germination rate, triacylglycerol content, and protection against lipase-mediated TAG degradation. Plant lipids are an important source of ration for cattle or other livestock animals to fulfil their energy needs. Poor energy containing green forages are still one of the major sources of food for livestock animals, leaving the animals undernourished. This lowers the milk and meat production efficiency, thereby affecting human consumption. Oleosin, an essential oil body surface protein, is capable of enhancing and stabilizing the lipid content in plants. We identified and functionally characterized three forage sorghum oleosin genes (SbOle1, SbOle2, and SbOle3) in Arabidopsis and yeast. Phylogenetic analysis of SbOle proteins showed a close relationship with rice and maize oleosins. Expression analysis of SbOle genes determined a higher expression pattern in embryo followed by endosperm, while its expression in the non-seed tissues remained negligible. Overexpression of SbOle genes in Arabidopsis ole1-deficient mutants showed restoration of normal germination whereas control mutant seeds showed lower germination rates. Heterologous overexpression of SbOle in yeast cells resulted in increased TAG accumulation. Additionally, the TAG turnover assay showed the effectiveness of SbOle genes in reducing the yeast endogenous and rumen bacterial lipase-mediated TAG degradation. Taken together, our findings not only provide insights into forage sorghum oleosin for increasing the energy content in non-seed organs but also opened up the direction towards implication of oleosin in rumen protection of fodders.

SbOle1: !enhances! Germination rate
SbOle2: !enhances! Triacylglycerol content
SbOle3: !protects against! Lipase-mediated TAG degradation
Oleosin: !enhances and stabilizes! Lipid content in plants
SbOle genes: !express higher in! Embryo and endosperm
SbOle genes: !restore normal germination in! Ole1-deficient mutants
SbOle genes: !increase TAG accumulation in! Yeast cells
SbOle genes: !reduce TAG degradation by! Rumen bacterial lipases