Heavy metal-rich toxic soils and ordinary soils are both natural habitats of Arabidopsis halleri, a diploid perennial and obligate outcrosser in the sister clade of the genetic model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The molecular divergence underlying survival in sharply contrasting environments is unknown. Here we comparatively address metal physiology and transcriptomes of A. halleri originating from the most highly heavy metal-contaminated soil in Europe, Ponte Nossa, Italy (Noss), and from non-metalliferous (NM) soils. Plants from Noss exhibit enhanced hypertolerance and attenuated accumulation of cadmium (Cd), and their transcriptomic Cd responsiveness is decreased, compared to plants of NM soil origin. Among the condition-independent transcriptome characteristics of Noss, the most highly overrepresented functional class of 'meiotic cell cycle' comprises 21 transcripts with elevated abundance in vegetative tissues, in particular Argonaute 9 (AGO9) and the synaptonemal complex transverse filament protein-encoding ZYP1a/b. Increased AGO9 transcript levels in Noss are accompanied by decreased long terminal repeat retrotransposon expression. Similar to Noss, plants from other highly metalliferous sites in Poland and Germany share elevated somatic AGO9 transcript levels in comparison to plants originating from NM soils in their respective geographic regions. Transcript levels of Iron-Regulated Transporter 1 (IRT1) are very low and transcript levels of Heavy Metal ATPase 2 (HMA2) are strongly elevated in Noss, which can account for its altered Cd handling. We conclude that in plants adapted to the most extreme abiotic stress, broadly enhanced functions comprise genes with likely roles in somatic genome integrity maintenance, accompanied by few alterations in stress-specific functional networks.

AGO9: !elevates! transcript levels 
ZYP1a/b: !elevates! transcript levels 
Noss: !exhibits! enhanced hypertolerance 
Noss: !attenuates! Cd accumulation 
Noss: !decreases! Cd responsiveness 
IRT1: !low! transcript levels 
HMA2: !elevates! transcript levels