Bacterial canker of tomato (Solanum lycopersicon) caused by the Gram-positive bacterium Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis (Cmm) is an economically important disease. To understand the host defense response to Cmm infection, transcriptome sequences in tomato cotyledons were analyzed by RNA-seq. Overall, 1788 and 540 genes were upregulated and downregulated upon infection, respectively. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis revealed that genes involved in the defense response, phosphorylation, and hormone signaling were over-represented by the infection. Induced expression of defense-associated genes suggested that the tomato response to Cmm showed similarities to common plant disease responses. After infection, many resistance gene analogs (RGAs) were transcriptionally upregulated, including the expressions of some receptor-like kinases (RLKs) involved in pattern-triggered immunity. The expressions of WRKYs, NACs, HSFs, and CBP60s encoding transcription factors (TFs) reported to regulate defense-associated genes were induced after infection with Cmm. Tomato genes orthologous to Arabidopsis EDS1, EDS5/SID1, and PAD4/EDS9, which are causal genes of salicylic acid (SA)-deficient mutants, were upregulated after infection with Cmm. Furthermore, Cmm infection drastically stimulated SA accumulation in tomato cotyledons. Genes involved in the phenylalanine ammonia lyase pathway were upregulated, whereas metabolic enzyme gene expression in the isochorismate synthase pathway remained unchanged. Exogenously applied SA suppressed bacterial growth and induced the expression of WRKYs, suggesting that some Cmm-responsive genes are regulated by SA signaling, and SA signaling activation should improve tomato immunity against Cmm.

Cmm: !causes! Bacterial canker of tomato 
defense-associated genes: !induced by! Cmm infection 
RLKs: !involved in! pattern-triggered immunity 
WRKYs, NACs, HSFs, CBP60s: !induced by! Cmm infection 
EDS1, EDS5/SID1, PAD4/EDS9: !upregulated by! Cmm infection 
SA: !accumulated by! Cmm infection 
SA: !regulates! Cmm-responsive genes 
SA: !suppresses! bacterial growth