Six Mazaceae plastomes were assembled in this study, including the newly recognized genus, Puchiumazus. Comparative plastid genomic analysis provided new insights into Mazaceae. The phylogenetic categorization of Mazus lanceifolius (Mazaceae) has long been uncertain. In 2021, the scholars Bo Li, D. G. Zhang, and C. L. Xiang republished M. lanceifolius as a new species Puchiumazus lanceifolius, within a new genus Puchiumazus. However, there is little plastome information on Mazaceae. Following the publishing of the new genus Puchiumazus, it is now necessary to study the Mazaceae plastome features to comprehensively understand this young family. The Mazaceae plastomes all have a typical quartile structure. The plastomes have a size ranging from 152,388 to 154,252 bp, and each plastome contains 112 unique genes, including 78 protein-coding genes, 4 rRNA genes, and 30 tRNA genes. A comparative analysis showed that these plastome sequences are highly conserved. Furthermore, we identified four relatively hypervariable regions (trnQ-UUC-psbK, trnS-GCU- trnS-CGA, trnT-UGU-trnL-UAA and ycf1) that can be used as potential DNA barcodes for the identification of this clade. Phylogenetic relationships based on the whole plastome sequences of 25 samples of 14 genera of Lamiales placed M. lanceifolius in the basal clade of the family Mazaceae, with 100% bootstrap support. In summary, the M. lanceifolius results indicate that a new monotype genus (Puchiumazus) should be established at the whole-plastome level. This study provides plastid genomic resources for exploring the phylogeny of Mazaceae.

Six Mazaceae plastomes: !assembled! in this study 
Comparative plastid genomic analysis: !provided new insights into! Mazaceae 
Mazus lanceifolius: !republished as! Puchiumazus lanceifolius 
Plastome size: !ranged from! 152,388 to 154,252 bp 
112 unique genes: !included in! each plastome 
Four relatively hypervariable regions: !identified as! potential DNA barcodes 
25 samples of 14 genera of Lamiales: !used for! phylogenetic relationships 
M. lanceifolius: !placed in! basal clade of family Mazaceae 
New monotype genus: !established at! whole-plastome level