Increased resistance to insect herbivory in grain amaranth plants is associated with increased betalain pigmentation, either naturally acquired or accumulated in response to blue-red light irradiation. Betalains are water-soluble pigments characteristic of plants of the Caryophyllales order. Their abiotic stress-induced accumulation is believed to protect against oxidative damage, while their defensive function against biotic aggressors is scarce. A previous observation of induced betalain-biosynthetic gene expression in stressed grain amaranth plants led to the proposal that these pigments play a defensive role against insect herbivory. This study provided further support for this premise. First, a comparison of "green" and "red" Amaranthus cruentus phenotypes showed that the latter suffered less insect herbivory damage. Coincidentally, growth and vitality of Manduca sexta larvae were more severely affected when fed on red-leafed A. cruentus plants or on an artificial diet supplemented with red-leaf pigment extracts. Second, the exposure of A. cruentus and A. caudatus plants, having contrasting pigmentation phenotypes, to light enriched in the blue and red wavelength spectra led to pigment accumulation throughout the plant and to increased resistance to insect herbivory. These events were accompanied by the induced expression of known betalain-biosynthetic genes, including uncharacterized DODA genes believed to participate in this biosynthetic pathway in a still undefined way. Finally, transient co-expression of different combinations of betalain-biosynthetic genes in Nicotiana benthamiana led to detectable accumulation of betalamic acid and betanidin. This outcome supported the participation of certain AhDODA and other genes in the grain amaranth betalain-biosynthetic pathway.

Amaranthus cruentus: !resists! Insect herbivory
Betalain pigmentation: !protects against! Oxidative damage
Blue-red light irradiation: !induces! Betalain biosynthetic gene expression
AhDODA genes: !participate in! Betalain biosynthetic pathway
Nicotiana benthamiana: !accumulates! Betalamic acid and betanidin