Silicon enhances photosynthetic efficiency, biomass, and lignification of root structures possibly limiting antimony translocation and mitigating phytotoxicity in giant reed plants. Antimony (Sb) is a non-essential metalloid causing toxic effects in plants. Silicon has been reported to impart tolerance against biotic and abiotic stress in plants. Fast-growing plant, giant reed (Arundo donax L.) is a promising energy crop, can be a suitable plant for phytoremediation. However, information regarding the tolerance capacity with respect to Sb toxicity and potential of Si to mitigate the Sb phytotoxicity in giant reed are very scarce. Rhizomes of giant reed were grown for ten weeks in hydroponics exposed to Sb, Si, and their combination wherein treatment without Sb/Si served as control. Effect of these treatments on rate of net photosynthesis and photosynthetic pigments, phytoextraction ability of Sb, Si and Sb uptake, plant biomass, and lignification and suberization of roots along with localization of Sb and Si were analysed. We found that Si considerably improved the growth and biomass of giant reed under Sb toxicity. Antimony reduced the photosynthesis and decreased the content of photosynthetic pigments, which was completely alleviated by Si. Silicon amendment to Sb treated plants enhanced root lignification. Silicon enhanced lignification of root structures probably restricted the Sb translocation. However, co-localization of Sb with Si has not been observed neither at the shoot nor at the root levels. Similarly, Sb was also not detected in leaf phytoliths. These findings suggest that Si treatment promotes overall plant growth by improving photosynthetic parameters and decreasing Sb translocation from root to shoot in giant reed by improving root lignification.

Silicon: !enhances! Photosynthetic efficiency
Silicon: !enhances! Biomass
Silicon: !enhances! Lignification of root structures
Silicon: !mitigates! Phytotoxicity
Antimony: !causes! Toxic effects in plants
Antimony: !reduces! Photosynthesis
Antimony: !decreases! Content of photosynthetic pigments
Silicon: !alleviates! Reduced photosynthesis
Silicon: !promotes! Overall plant growth
Silicon: !improves! Root lignification
Silicon: !restricts! Sb translocation