Nitrogen (N) is an essential macronutrient that significantly affects turf quality. Commercial cultivars of bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon (L.) Pers.) require large amounts of nitrogenous fertilizer. Wild bermudagrass germplasm from natural habitats with poor nutrition and diverse N distributions is an important source for low-N-tolerant cultivated bermudagrass breeding. However, the mechanisms underlying the differences in N utilization among wild germplasm resources of bermudagrass are not clear. To clarify the low N tolerance mechanism in wild bermudagrass germplasm, the growth, physiology, metabolome and transcriptome of two wild accessions, C291 (low-N-tolerant) and C716 (low-N-sensitive), were investigated. The results showed that root growth was less inhibited in low-N-tolerant C291 than in low-N-sensitive C716 under low N conditions; the root dry weight, soluble protein content and free amino acid content of C291 did not differ from those of the control, while those of C716 were significantly decreased. Down-regulation of N acquisition, primary N assimilation and amino acid biosynthesis was less pronounced in C291 than in C716 under low N conditions; glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle pathway were also down-regulated, accompanied by a decrease in the biosynthesis of amino acids; strikingly, processes such as translation, biosynthesis of the structural constituent of ribosome, and the expression of individual aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes, most of genes associated with ribosomes related to protein synthesis were all up-regulated in C291, but down-regulated in C716. Overall, low-N-tolerant wild bermudagrass tolerated low N nutrition by reducing N primary assimilation and amino acid biosynthesis, while promoting the root protein synthesis process and thereby maintaining root N status and normal growth.

C291 (low-N-tolerant): !enhances! root growth
C291: !maintains! root N status
C716 (low-N-sensitive): !inhibits! root growth
C716: !decreases! soluble protein content
C291: !up-regulates! translation
C716: !down-regulates! translation
C291: !promotes! root protein synthesis
C716: !reduces! N primary assimilation