This study leads to advances in the field of heat tolerance among different plant species. We concluded that a coordinated, increased antioxidant defense system enabled white clover to reduce heat-induced oxidative damage. The rise in global ambient temperature has a wide range of effects on plant growth, and, therefore, on the activation of various molecular defenses before the appearance of heat damage. Elevated temperatures result in accelerated generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), causing an imbalance between ROS production and the ability of scavenging systems to detoxify and remove the reactive intermediates. The aim of this study was to determine the role of antioxidant defense systems in the alleviation of heat stress (HS) consequences in white clover (Trifolium repens L.), which is cultivated worldwide. We evaluated how temperature and time parameters contribute to the thermotolerance of white clover at different growth stages. We revealed HS protection in white clover from 37 to 40 °C, with 40 °C providing the greatest protection of 3-day-old seedlings and 28-day-old adult plants. Heat-provoked oxidative stress in white clover was confirmed by substantial changes in electrolyte leakage, malondialdehyde (MDA), and chlorophyll content, as well as superoxide anion (O<sub>2</sub><sup>·-</sup>) and hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) production. Furthermore, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) as well as a high level of GSH non-enzymatic antioxidant were the most responsive, and were associated with acquired thermotolerance through the regulation of ROS generation. We demonstrated, by studying protoplast transient gene expression, direct genetic evidence of endogenous antioxidant-related genes that confer HS tolerance in white clover. Our present study clearly establishes that oxidative stress ensues from HS, which triggers the induction of antioxidant defense systems for ROS scavenging in white clover.

Temperature: !affects! Plant Growth 
ROS: !causes! Oxidative Stress 
SOD: !scavenges! ROS 
APX: !scavenges! ROS 
GSH: !scavenges! ROS 
Gene Expression: !regulates! Antioxidant Defense Systems