Photoautotrophic microorganisms are increasingly explored for the conversion of atmospheric carbon dioxide into biomass and valuable products. The Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle is the primary metabolic pathway for net CO<sub>2</sub> fixation within oxygenic photosynthetic organisms. The cyanobacteria, <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803, is a model organism for the study of photosynthesis and a platform for many metabolic engineering efforts. The CBB cycle is regulated by complex mechanisms including enzymatic abundance, intracellular metabolite concentrations, energetic cofactors and post-translational enzymatic modifications that depend on the external conditions such as the intensity and quality of light. However, the extent to which each of these mechanisms play a role under different light intensities remains unclear. In this work, we conducted non-targeted proteomics in tandem with isotopically non-stationary metabolic flux analysis (INST-MFA) at four different light intensities to determine the extent to which fluxes within the CBB cycle are controlled by enzymatic abundance. The correlation between specific enzyme abundances and their corresponding reaction fluxes is examined, revealing several enzymes with uncorrelated enzyme abundance and their corresponding flux, suggesting flux regulation by mechanisms other than enzyme abundance. Additionally, the kinetics of <sup>13</sup>C labeling of CBB cycle intermediates and estimated inactive pool sizes varied significantly as a function of light intensity suggesting the presence of metabolite channeling, an additional method of flux regulation. These results highlight the importance of the diverse methods of regulation of CBB enzyme activity as a function of light intensity, and highlights the importance of considering these effects in future kinetic models.

Light intensity: !affects! CBB cycle fluxes 
Enzyme abundance: !correlates with! reaction fluxes 
Enzyme abundance: !uncorrelated with! reaction fluxes 
Light intensity: !influences! metabolite channeling 
Metabolite channeling: !regulates! CBB enzyme activity