Dendroclimatic research offers insight into tree growth-climate response as a solution to the forward problem and provides reconstructions of climatic variables as products of the reverse problem. Methodological developments in dendroclimatology have led to the inclusion of a variety of tree growth parameters in this field. Tree-ring traits developed during short time intervals of a growing season can potentially provide a finer temporal scale of both dendroclimatic applications and offer a better understanding of the mechanisms of tree growth reaction to climatic variations. Furthermore, the transition from classical dendroclimatic studies based on a single integral variable (tree-ring width) to the modern multitude of quantitative variables (e.g., wood anatomical structure) adds a lot of complexity, which mainly arises from intrinsic feedbacks between wood traits and muddles seasonality of registered climatic signal. This study utilized life-long wood anatomical measurements of 150- to 280-year-old trees of <i>Pinus sylvestris</i> L. growing in a moisture-sensitive habitat of the forest-steppe of Southern Siberia (Russia) to investigate and eliminate legacy effect from cell production in tracheid traits. Anatomical parameters were calculated to describe the results of the three main subsequent stages of conifer xylem tracheid development, namely, cell number per radial file in the ring, mean and maximum cell radial diameter, and mean and maximum cell-wall thickness. Although tree-ring width was almost directly proportional to cell number, non-linear relationships with cell number were revealed in tracheid measurements. They exhibited a stronger relationship in the areas of narrow rings and stable anatomical structure in wider rings. The exponential models proposed in this study demonstrated these relationships in numerical terms with morphometric meaning. The ratio of anatomical measurements to their modeled values was used to develop long-term anatomical chronologies, which proved to retain information about climatic fluctuations independent of tree-ring width (cell number), despite decreased common signal.

Tree-ring width: !proportional to! cell number
Cell number: !non-linearly related to! tracheid measurements
Tracheid measurements: !stronger relationship in! narrow rings
Anatomical chronologies: !retain information about! climatic fluctuations