Light quality significantly affects plant growth and development, photosynthesis, and carbon and nitrogen metabolism. Apple (Malus domestica Borkh.) is a widely cultivated and economically important fruit crop worldwide. However, there are still few studies on the effects of different light qualities on the growth and development of apple seedlings. In this study, we explored the effects of blue and red light treatments on the growth and development, photosynthetic characteristics, leaf chloroplast ultrastructure, and carbon and nitrogen metabolism of apple seedlings. Blue light significantly inhibited apple plant growth and leaf extension, but it promoted the development of leaf tissue structures and chloroplasts and positively affected leaf stomatal conductance, the transpiration rate, and photosynthetic efficiency. The red light treatment promoted apple plant growth and root development, but it resulted in loosely organized leaf palisade tissues and low chlorophyll contents. The blue and red light treatments enhanced the accumulation of ammonium nitrogen in apple seedlings. Moreover, the blue light treatment significantly promoted nitrogen metabolism. Additionally, an RNA-seq analysis revealed that both blue light and red light can significantly up-regulate the expression of genes related to carbon and nitrogen metabolism. Blue light can also promote amino acid synthesis and flavonoid metabolism, whereas red light can induce plant hormone signal transduction. The expression of a gene encoding a bHLH transcription factor (MYC2-like) was significantly up-regulated in response to blue light, implying it may be important for blue light-mediated plant development. Considered together, blue and red light have important effects on apple growth, carbon and nitrogen metabolism. These findings may be useful for determining the ideal light conditions for apple cultivation to maximize fruit yield and quality.

Blue light: !inhibits! Apple plant growth 
Blue light: !promotes! Leaf tissue structures 
Red light: !promotes! Apple plant growth 
Red light: !induces! Plant hormone signal transduction 
Blue light: !enhances! Accumulation of ammonium nitrogen 
Blue light: !promotes! Nitrogen metabolism 
Blue light: !promotes! Amino acid synthesis 
Red light: !induces! Flavonoid metabolism 
MYC2-like gene: !up-regulated by! Blue light