Under tropical and subtropical environments, citrus leaves are exposed to excess sunlight, inducing photoinhibition. Huanglongbing (HLB, citrus greening), a devastating phloem-limited disease putatively caused by Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus, exacerbates this challenge with additional photosynthetic loss and excessive starch accumulation. A combined metabolomics and physiological approach was used to elucidate whether shade alleviates the deleterious effects of HLB in field-grown citrus trees, and to understand the underlying metabolic mechanisms related to shade-induced morpho-physiological changes in citrus. Using metabolite profiling and multinomial logistic regression, we identified pivotal metabolites altered in response to shade. A core metabolic network associated with shade conditions was identified through pathway enrichment analysis and metabolite mapping. We measured physio-biochemical responses and growth and yield characteristics. With these, the relationships between metabolic network and the variables measured above were investigated. We found that moderate-shade alleviates sink limitation by preventing excessive starch accumulation and increasing foliar sucrose levels. Increased growth and fruit yield in shaded compared with non-shaded trees were associated with increased photosystem II efficiency and leaf carbon fixation pathway metabolites. Our study also shows that, in HLB-affected trees under shade, the signaling of plant hormones (auxins and cytokinins) and nitrogen supply were downregulated with reducing new shoot production likely due to diminished needs of cell damage repair and tissue regeneration under shade. Overall, our findings provide the first glimpse of the complex dynamics between cellular metabolites and leaf physiological functions in citrus HLB pathosystem under shade, and reveal the mechanistic basis of how shade ameliorates HLB disease.

Shade: !alleviates! HLB 
HLB: !exacerbates! photoinhibition 
Metabolite profiling: !identifies! pivotal metabolites 
Pathway enrichment analysis: !identifies! core metabolic network 
Core metabolic network: !associated with! shade conditions 
Shade: !prevents! excessive starch accumulation 
Shade: !increases! foliar sucrose levels 
Shade: !increases! photosystem II efficiency 
Shade: !increases! leaf carbon fixation pathway metabolites 
Shade: !downregulates! plant hormones 
Shade: !downregulates! nitrogen supply