<i>Spodoptera frugiperda</i> is a highly polyphagous and invasive agricultural pest that can harm more than 300 plants and cause huge economic losses to crops. Symbiotic bacteria play an important role in the host biology and ecology of herbivores, and have a wide range of effects on host growth and adaptation. In this study, high-throughput sequencing technology was used to investigate the effects of different hosts (corn, wild oat, oilseed rape, pepper, and artificial diet) on gut microbial community structure and diversity. Corn is one of the most favored plants of <i>S. frugiperda</i>. We compared the gut microbiota on corn with and without a seed coating agent. The results showed that Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes dominated the gut microbial community. The microbial abundance on oilseed rape was the highest, the microbial diversity on wild oat was the lowest, and the microbial diversity on corn without a seed coating agent was significantly higher than that with such an agent. PCoA analysis showed that there were significant differences in the gut microbial community among different hosts. PICRUSt analysis showed that most of the functional prediction categories were related to metabolic and cellular processes. The results showed that the gut microbial community of <i>S. frugiperda</i> was affected not only by the host species, but also by different host treatments, which played an important role in host adaptation. It is important to deepen our understanding of the symbiotic relationships between invasive organisms and microorganisms. The study of the adaptability of host insects contributes to the development of more effective and environmentally friendly pest management strategies.

host: !affects! gut microbial community
Firmicutes: !dominates! gut microbial community
Bacteroidetes: !dominates! gut microbial community
oilseed rape: !highest abundance! of gut microbiota
wild oat: !lowest diversity! of gut microbiota
corn: !higher diversity! without seed coating agent
host species: !affects! gut microbial community
host treatments: !affects! gut microbial community
invasive organisms: !interacts with! microorganisms
host insects: !contributes to! pest management strategies