<b>Background:</b> Farmers harvest two batches fruits of Lemons (<i>Citrus limon</i> L. Burm. f.) i.e., spring flowering fruit and autumn flowering fruit in dry-hot valley in Yunnan, China. Regular lemons harvested in autumn have smooth skin. However, lemons harvested in spring have rough skin, which makes them less attractive to customers. Furthermore, the rough skin causes a reduction in commodity value and economical losses to farmers. This is a preliminary study that investigates the key transcriptomic and metabolomic differences in peels of lemon fruits (variety Yuning no. 1) harvested 30, 60, 90, 120, and 150 days after flowering from the same trees in different seasons. <b>Results:</b> We identified 5,792, 4,001, 3,148, and 5,287 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between smooth peel (C) and rough peel (D) 60, 90, 120, and 150 days after flowering, respectively. A total of 1,193 metabolites differentially accumulated (DAM) between D and C. The DEGs and DAMs were enriched in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and plant hormone signaling, terpenoid biosynthesis, flavonoid, and phenylalanine biosynthesis, and ribosome pathways. Predominantly, in the early stages, phytohormonal regulation and signaling were the main driving force for changes in peel surface. Changes in the expression of genes associated with asymmetric cell division were also an important observation. The biosynthesis of terpenoids was possibly reduced in rough peels, while the exclusive expression of cell wall synthesis-related genes could be a possible reason for the thick peel of the rough-skinned lemons. Additionally, cell division, cell number, hypocotyl growth, accumulation of fatty acids, lignans and coumarins- related gene expression, and metabolite accumulation changes were major observations. <b>Conclusion:</b> The rough peels fruit (autumn flowering fruit) and smooth peels fruit (spring flowering fruit) matured on the same trees are possibly due to the differential regulation of asymmetric cell division, cell number regulation, and randomization of hypocotyl growth related genes and the accumulation of terpenoids, flavonoids, fatty acids, lignans, and coumarins. The preliminary results of this study are important for increasing the understanding of peel roughness in lemon and other citrus species.

MAPK: !regulates! Phytohormonal signaling 
Phytohormonal signaling: !affects! Asymmetric cell division 
Asymmetric cell division: !influences! Peel surface 
Terpenoid biosynthesis: !reduced in! Rough peels 
Cell wall synthesis-related genes: !exclusive expression of! Rough-skinned lemons 
Cell division: !changes! Cell number 
Hypocotyl growth: !randomization of! Gene expression 
Metabolite accumulation: !changes! Fatty acids, lignans, coumarins