Paphiopedilum hirsutissimum is a member of Orchidaceae family that is famous for its ornamental value around the globe, it is vulnerable due to over-exploitation and was listed in Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, which prevents its trade across borders. Variation in flower color that gives rise to different flower patterns is a major trait contributing to its high ornamental value. However, the molecular mechanism underlying color formation in P. hirsutissimum still remains unexplored. In the present study, we exploited natural variation in petal and labellum color of Paphiopedilum plants and used comparative transcriptome analysis as well as pigment measurements to explore the important genes, metabolites and regulatory pathways linked to flower color variation in P. hirsutissimum. We observed that reduced anthocyanin and flavonoid contents along with slightly higher carotenoids are responsible for albino flower phenotype. Comparative transcriptome analysis identified 3287 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) among normal and albino labellum, and 3634 DEGs between normal and albino petals. Two genes encoding for flavanone 3-hydroxylase (F3H) and one gene encoding for chalcone synthase (CHS) were strongly downregulated in albino labellum and petals compared to normal flowers. As both F3H and CHS catalyze essentially important steps in anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway, downregulation of these genes is probably leading to albino flower phenotype via down-accumulation of anthocyanins. However, we observed the downregulation of major carotenoid biosynthesis genes including VDE, NCED and ABA2 which was inconsistent with the increased carotenoid accumulation in albino flowers, suggesting that carotenoid accumulation was probably controlled at post-transcriptional or translational level. In addition, we identified several key transcription factors (MYB73, MYB61, bHLH14, bHLH106, MADS-SOC1, AP2/ERF1, ERF26 and ERF87) that may regulate structural genes involved in flower color formation in P. hirsutissimum. Importantly, over-expression of some of these candidate TFs increased anthocyanin accumulation in tobacco leaves which provided important evidence for the role of these TFs in flower color formation probably via regulating key structural genes of the anthocyanin pathway. The genes identified here could be potential targets for breeding P. hirsutissimum with different flower color patterns by manipulating the anthocyanin and carotenoid biosynthesis pathways.

F3H: !downregulated in! albino labellum/petals
CHS: !downregulated in! albino labellum/petals
VDE, NCED, ABA2: !downregulated in! albino flowers
MYB73, MYB61, bHLH14, bHLH106, MADS-SOC1, AP2/ERF1, ERF26, ERF87: !may regulate! structural genes 
anthocyanin pathway: !downaccumulation of! anthocyanins