Differences in cell wall components between two BNF-contrasting sugarcane genotypes might result from genetic variations particular to the genotype and from the efficiency in diazotrophic bacteria association. Sugarcane is a plant of the grass family (Poaceae) that is highly cultivated in Brazil, as an important energy resource. Commercial sugarcane genotypes may be successfully associated with beneficial endophytic nitrogen-fixing bacteria, which can influence several plant metabolic pathways, such as cell division and growth, synthesis of hormones, and defense compounds. In this study, we investigated how diazotrophic bacteria associated with sugarcane plants could be involved in the regulation of cell wall formation pathways. A molecular and structural characterization of the cell wall was compared between two genotypes of sugarcane with contrasting rates of Biological Nitrogen Fixation (BNF): SP70-1143 (high BNF) and Chunee (low BNF). Differentially expressed transcripts were identified in transcriptomes generated from SP70-1143 and Chunee. Expression profiles of cellulose and lignin genes, which were more expressed in SP70-1134, and callose genes, which were more expressed in Chunee, were validated by RT-qPCR and microscopic analysis of cell wall components in tissue sections. A similar expression profile in both BNF-contrasting genotypes was observed in naturally colonized plants and in plants inoculated with G. diazotrophicus. Cell walls of the high BNF genotype have a greater cellulose content, which might contribute to increase biomass. In parallel, callose was concentrated in the vascular tissues of the low BNF genotype and could possibly represent a barrier for an efficient bacterial colonization and dissemination in sugarcane tissues. Our data show a correlation between the gene profiles identified in the BNF-contrasting genotypes and a successful association with endophytic diazotrophic bacteria.

genotype: !contrasts in! BNF
diazotrophic bacteria: !influences! plant metabolic pathways
cell wall: !differs between! two genotypes
transcriptomes: !identify! differentially expressed transcripts
cellulose/lignin genes: !more expressed in! SP70-1143
callose genes: !more expressed in! Chunee
RT-qPCR/microscopic analysis: !validate! expression profiles
high BNF genotype: !has greater! cellulose content
low BNF genotype: !has greater! callose content
gene profiles: !correlate with! successful association