Aquaporins (AQPs) are channel proteins involved in transporting a variety of substrates. It has been proposed that the constriction regions in the central pores of the AQP channels play a crucial role in determining transport substrates and activities of AQPs. Our previous results suggest that AtNIP1;2, a member of the AQP superfamily in Arabidopsis, facilitates aluminum transport across the plasma membrane. However, the functions of the constriction regions in AtNIP1;2-mediated transport activities are unclear. This study reports that residue substitutions of the constriction regions affect AtNIP1;2-mediated aluminum uptake, demonstrating the critical roles of the constriction regions for transport activities. Furthermore, a constriction region that partially or wholly mimics AtNIP5;1, a demonstrated boric-acid transporter, could not render the boric-acid transport activity to AtNIP1;2. Therefore, besides the constriction regions, other structural features are also involved in determining the nature of AtNIP1;2's transport activities.<b>Abbreviations</b>: AIAR: alanine-isoleucine-alanine-arginine; AIGR: alanine-isoleucine-glycine- arginine; AQP: aquaporin; Al-Mal: aluminum-malate; ar/R: aromatic/arginine; AVAR: alanine-valine-alanine-arginine; CK: control; H: helical domain; ICP-MS: inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry; LA - LE: inter-helical loops A to E; NIP: nodulin 26-like intrinsic protein; NPA: asparagine-proline-alanine; NPG: asparagine-proline- glycine; NPS: asparagine-proline-Serine; NPV: asparagine-proline-valine; ORF: open reading frame; PIP: plasma membrane intrinsic proteins; SIP: small basic intrinsic proteins; TM: transmembrane helices; WIAR: tryptophan-isoleucine-alanine-arginine; WVAR: tryptophan-valine-alanine-arginine; WVGR: tryptophan-valine-glycine- arginine.

AtNIP1;2: !facilitates! Aluminum transport 
constriction regions: !affects! AtNIP1;2-mediated aluminum uptake 
constriction region: !mimics! AtNIP5;1 
AtNIP5;1: !demonstrates! boric-acid transporter 
constriction region: !cannot render! boric-acid transport activity to AtNIP1;2 
structural features: !involved in! determining nature of AtNIP1;2's transport activities