During crop cultivation, water-deficit conditions retard growth, thus reducing crop productivity. Therefore, uncovering the mechanisms behind drought tolerance is a critical task for crop improvement. Here, we show that the rice (Oryza sativa) WRKY transcription factor OsWRKY5 negatively regulates drought tolerance. We determined that OsWRKY5 was mainly expressed in developing leaves at the seedling and heading stages, and that its expression was reduced by drought stress and by treatment with NaCl, mannitol, and abscisic acid (ABA). Notably, the genome-edited loss-of-function alleles oswrky5-2 and oswrky5-3 conferred enhanced drought tolerance, measured as plant growth under water-deficit conditions. Conversely, the overexpression of OsWRKY5 in the activation-tagged line oswrky5-D resulted in higher susceptibility under the same conditions. The loss of OsWRKY5 activity increased sensitivity to ABA, thus promoting ABA-dependent stomatal closure. Transcriptome deep sequencing and reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction analyses demonstrated that the expression of abiotic stress-related genes including rice MYB2 (OsMYB2) was upregulated in oswrky5 knockout mutants and downregulated in oswrky5-D mutants. Moreover, dual-luciferase, yeast one-hybrid, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that OsWRKY5 directly binds to the W-box sequences in the promoter region of OsMYB2 and represses OsMYB2 expression, thus downregulating genes downstream of OsMYB2 in the ABA signaling pathways. Our results demonstrate that OsWRKY5 functions as a negative regulator of ABA-induced drought stress tolerance, strongly suggesting that inactivation of OsWRKY5 or manipulation of key OsWRKY5 targets could be useful to improve drought tolerance in rice cultivars.

OsWRKY5: !negatively regulates! drought tolerance
OsWRKY5: !reduced by! drought stress, NaCl, mannitol, ABA
oswrky5-2/3: !enhance! drought tolerance
oswrky5-D: !increases! susceptibility to drought
OsWRKY5: !increases! sensitivity to ABA
OsWRKY5: !upregulates! OsMYB2 expression
OsWRKY5: !binds to! W-box sequences in OsMYB2 promoter
OsWRKY5: !represses! OsMYB2 expression