Precursor feeding, elicitation and culture medium parameters are traditional in vitro strategies to enhance bioactive compounds of medicinal, aromatic, and ornamental plants (MAOPs). Machine learning can help researchers find the best combination of these strategies to increase the secondary metabolites content of MAOPs. Many requirements for human life, from food, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics to clothes, fuel and building materials depend on plant-derived natural products. Essential oils, methanolic and ethanolic extracts of in vitro undifferentiated callus and organogenic cultures of medicinal, aromatic, and ornamental plants (MAOPs) contain bioactive compounds that have several applications for various industries, including food and pharmaceutical. In vitro culture systems provide opportunities to manipulate the metabolomic profile of MAOPs. Precursors feeding, elicitation and culture media optimization are the traditional strategies to enhance in vitro accumulation of favorable bioactive compounds. The stimulation of plant defense mechanisms through biotic and abiotic elicitors is a simple way to increase the production of secondary metabolites in different in vitro culture systems. Different elicitors have been applied to stimulate defense machinery and change the metabolomic profile of MAOPs in in vitro cultures. Plant growth regulators (PGRs), stress hormones, chitosan, microbial extracts and physical stresses are the most applied elicitors in this regard. Many other chemical tolerance-enhancer additives, such as melatonin and proline, have been applied along with stress response-inducing elicitors. The use of stress-inducing materials such as PEG and NaCl activates stress tolerance elicitors with the potential of increasing secondary metabolites content of MAOPs. The present study reviewed the state-of-the-art traditional in vitro strategies to manipulate bioactive compounds of MAOPs. The objective is to provide insights to researchers involved in in vitro production of plant-derived natural compounds. The present review provided a wide range of traditional strategies to increase the accumulation of valuable bioactive compounds of MAOPs in different in vitro systems. Traditional strategies are faster, simpler, and cost-effective than other biotechnology-based breeding methods such as genetic transformation, genome editing, metabolic pathways engineering, and synthetic biology. The integrate application of precursors and elicitors along with culture media optimization and the interpretation of their interactions through machine learning algorithms could provide an excellent opportunity for large-scale in vitro production of pharmaceutical bioactive compounds.

precursors: !enhance! bioactive compounds
elicitors: !stimulate! defense machinery
PGRs: !activate! stress tolerance elicitors
machine learning: !interpret! interactions
culture media optimization: !increase! secondary metabolites content