In recent years, the utility of earlywood vessels anatomical characteristics in identifying and reconstructing hydrological conditions has been fully recognized. In riparian ring-porous species, flood rings have been used to identify discrete flood events, and chronologies developed from cross-sectional lumen areas of earlywood vessels have been used to successfully reconstruct seasonal discharge. In contrast, the utility of the earlywood vessel chronologies in non-riparian habitats has been less compelling. No studies have contrasted within species their earlywood vessel anatomical characteristics, specifically from trees that are inversely exposed to flooding. In this study, earlywood vessel and ring-width chronologies were compared between flooded and non-flooded control <i>Fraxinus nigra</i> trees. The association between chronologies and hydroclimate variables was also assessed. <i>Fraxinus nigra</i> trees from both settings shared similar mean tree-ring width but floodplain trees did produce, on average, thicker earlywood. Vessel chronologies from the floodplain trees generally recorded higher mean sensitivity (standard deviation) and lower autocorrelation than corresponding control chronologies indicating higher year-to-year variations. Principal components analysis (PCA) revealed that control and floodplain chronologies shared little variance indicating habitat-specific signals. At the habitat level, the PCA indicated that vessel characteristics were strongly associated with tree-ring width descriptors in control trees whereas, in floodplain trees, they were decoupled from the width. The most striking difference found between flood exposures related to the chronologies' associations with hydroclimatic variables. Floodplain vessel chronologies were strongly associated with climate variables modulating spring-flood conditions as well as with spring discharge whereas control ones showed weaker and few consistent correlations. Our results illustrated how spring flood conditions modulate earlywood vessel plasticity. In floodplain <i>F. nigra</i> trees, the use of earlywood vessel characteristics could potentially be extended to assess and/or mitigate anthropogenic modifications of hydrological regimes. In absence of major recurring environmental stressors like spring flooding, our results support the idea that the production of continuous earlywood vessel chronologies may be of limited utility in dendroclimatology.

Fraxinus nigra: !produces thicker! Earlywood in floodplain
Fraxinus nigra: !has higher mean sensitivity! In floodplain
Fraxinus nigra: !shares little variance! Between control and floodplain chronologies
Fraxinus nigra: !is strongly associated with! Climate variables in floodplain
Fraxinus nigra: !has limited utility! In dendroclimatology