Drought stress severely limits maize seedling growth and crop yield. Previous studies have elucidated the mechanisms by which maize acquires drought resistance and contends with water deficiency. However, the link between the physiological and molecular variations among maize cultivars are unknown. Here, physiological and proteomic analyses were conducted to compare the stress responses of two maize cultivars with contrasting drought stress tolerance. The physiological analysis showed that the drought-tolerant SD609 maize variety maintains relatively high photochemical efficiency by enhancing its protective cyclic electron flow (CEF) mechanism and antioxidative enzymes activities. Proteomics analysis revealed that 198 and 102 proteins were differentially expressed in SD609 and the drought-sensitive SD902 cultivar, respectively. GO and KEGG enrichments indicated that SD609 upregulated proteins associated with photosynthesis, antioxidants/detoxifying enzymes, molecular chaperones and metabolic enzymes. Upregulation of the proteins related to PSII repair and photoprotection improved photochemical capacity in SD609 subjected to moderate drought stress. In SD902, however, only the molecular chaperones and sucrose synthesis pathways were induced and they failed to protect the impaired photosystem. Further analysis demonstrated that proteins related to the electron transport chain (ETC) and redox homeostasis as well as heat shock proteins (HSPs) may be important in protecting plants from drought stress. Our experiments explored the mechanism of drought tolerance and clarified the interconnections between the physiological and proteomic factors contributing to it. In summary, our findings aid in further understanding of the drought tolerance mechanisms in maize.

SD609: !enhances! CEF mechanism
SD609: !upregulates! photosynthesis proteins
SD609: !upregulates! antioxidants/detoxifying enzymes
SD609: !upregulates! molecular chaperones
SD609: !upregulates! metabolic enzymes
SD902: !induces! molecular chaperones
SD902: !induces! sucrose synthesis pathways
ETC/redox homeostasis: !protects! plants from drought stress
HSPs: !protects! plants from drought stress