Soybean mosaic virus (SMV) is a severe soybean (Glycine max) pathogen. Here we characterize a soybean SMV resistance cluster (SRC) that comprises five resistance (R) genes. SRC1 encodes a Toll/interleukin-1 receptor and nucleotide-binding site (TIR-NBS [TN]) protein, SRC4 and SRC6 encode TIR proteins with a short EF-hand domain, while SRC7 and SRC8 encode TNX proteins with a noncanonical basic secretory protein (BSP) domain at their C-termini. We mainly studied SRC7, which contains a noncanonical BSP domain and gave full resistance to SMV. SRC7 possessed broad-spectrum antiviral activity toward several plant viruses including SMV, plum pox virus, potato virus Y, and tobacco mosaic virus. The TIR domain alone was both necessary and sufficient for SRC7 immune signaling, while the NBS domain enhanced its activity. Nuclear oligomerization via the interactions of both TIR and NBS domains was essential for SRC7 function. SRC7 expression was transcriptionally inducible by SMV infection and salicylic acid (SA) treatment, and SA was required for SRC7 triggered virus resistance. SRC7 expression was posttranscriptionally regulated by miR1510a and miR2109, and the SRC7-miR1510a/miR2109 regulatory network appeared to contribute to SMV-soybean interactions in both resistant and susceptible soybean cultivars. In summary, we report a soybean R gene cluster centered by SRC7 that is regulated at both transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels, possesses a yet uncharacterized BSP domain, and has broad-spectrum antiviral activities. The SRC cluster is special as it harbors several functional R genes encoding atypical TIR-NBS-LRR (TNL) type R proteins, highlighting its importance in SMV-soybean interaction and plant immunity.

SRC7: !encodes! TNX protein 
SRC7: !possesses! broad-spectrum antiviral activity 
TIR domain: !necessary and sufficient for! SRC7 immune signaling 
NBS domain: !enhances! SRC7 activity 
Nuclear oligomerization: !essential for! SRC7 function 
SMV infection/SA treatment: !induces! SRC7 expression 
miR1510a/miR2109: !regulate! SRC7 posttranscriptionally 
SRC7-miR1510a/miR2109 regulatory network: !contributes to! SMV-soybean interactions