GRAS transcription factors perform indispensable functions in various biological processes, such as plant growth, fruit development, and biotic and abiotic stress responses. The development of whole-genome sequencing has allowed the GRAS gene family to be identified and characterized in many species. However, thorough in-depth identification or systematic analysis of GRAS family genes in foxtail millet has not been conducted. In this study, 57 GRAS genes of foxtail millet (SiGRASs) were identified and renamed according to the chromosomal distribution of the SiGRAS genes. Based on the number of conserved domains and gene structure, the SiGRAS genes were divided into 13 subfamilies via phylogenetic tree analysis. The GRAS genes were unevenly distributed on nine chromosomes, and members of the same subfamily had similar gene structures and motif compositions. Genetic structure analysis showed that most SiGRAS genes lacked introns. Some SiGRAS genes were derived from gene duplication events, and segmental duplications may have contributed more to GRAS gene family expansion than tandem duplications. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction showed significant differences in the expression of SiGRAS genes in different tissues and stages of fruits development, which indicated the complexity of the physiological functions of SiGRAS. In addition, exogenous paclobutrazol treatment significantly altered the transcription levels of DELLA subfamily members, downregulated the gibberellin content, and decreased the plant height of foxtail millet, while it increased the fruit weight. In addition, SiGRAS13 and SiGRAS25 may have the potential for genetic improvement and functional gene research in foxtail millet. Collectively, this study will be helpful for further analysing the biological function of SiGRAS. Our results may contribute to improving the genetic breeding of foxtail millet.

GRAS transcription factors: !perform! indispensable functions 
whole-genome sequencing: !allows! GRAS gene family to be identified 
57 GRAS genes: !identified! in foxtail millet 
13 subfamilies: !divided! via phylogenetic tree analysis 
SiGRAS genes: !unevenly distributed! on nine chromosomes 
gene duplication events: !contributed! to GRAS gene family expansion 
SiGRAS genes: !expressed differently! in different tissues and stages of fruits development 
paclobutrazol treatment: !altered! transcription levels of DELLA subfamily members 
SiGRAS13 and SiGRAS25: !have potential! for genetic improvement and functional gene research