Light plays a pivotal role in plant growth, development, and stress responses. Green light has been reported to enhance plant drought tolerance via stomatal regulation. However, the mechanisms of green light-induced drought tolerance in plants remain elusive. To uncover those mechanisms, we investigated the molecular responses of tomato plants under monochromatic red, blue, and green light spectrum with drought and well-water conditions using a comparative transcriptomic approach. The results showed that compared with monochromatic red and blue light treated plants, green light alleviated the drought-induced inhibition of plant growth and photosynthetic capacity, and induced lower stomatal aperture and higher ABA accumulation in tomato leaves after 9 days of drought stress. A total of 3,850 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was identified in tomato leaves through pairwise comparisons. Functional annotations revealed that those DEGs responses to green light under drought stress were enriched in plant hormone signal transduction, phototransduction, and calcium signaling pathway. The DEGs involved in ABA synthesis and ABA signal transduction both participated in the green light-induced drought tolerance of tomato plants. Compared with ABA signal transduction, more DEGs related to ABA synthesis were detected under different light spectral treatments. The bZIP transcription factor- HY5 was found to play a vital role in green light-induced drought responses. Furthermore, other transcription factors, including WRKY46 and WRKY81 might participate in the regulation of stomatal aperture and ABA accumulation under green light. Taken together, the results of this study might expand our understanding of green light-modulated tomato drought tolerance via regulating ABA accumulation and stomatal aperture.

Light: !enhances! Drought tolerance 
Green light: !induces! Lower stomatal aperture 
Green light: !induces! Higher ABA accumulation 
DEGs: !enriched in! Plant hormone signal transduction 
DEGs: !enriched in! Phototransduction 
DEGs: !enriched in! Calcium signaling pathway 
ABA synthesis: !participates in! Green light-induced drought tolerance 
ABA signal transduction: !participates in! Green light-induced drought tolerance 
HY5: !plays a vital role in! Green light-induced drought responses 
WRKY46: !participates in! Regulation of stomatal aperture 
WRKY81: !participates in! Regulation of ABA accumulation