Chloroplasts are the sites for photosynthesis, and two Golden2-like factors act as transcriptional activators of chloroplast development in rice (Oryza sativa L.) and maize (Zea mays L.). Rice OsGLK1 and OsGLK2 are orthologous to maize ZmGLK1 (ZmG1) and ZmGLK2 (ZmG2), respectively. However, while rice OsGLK1 and OsGLK2 act redundantly to regulate chloroplast development in mesophyll cells, maize ZmG1 and ZmG2 are functionally specialized and expressed in different cell-specific manners. To boost rice chloroplast development and photosynthesis, we generated transgenic rice plants overexpressing ZmG1 and ZmG2, individually or simultaneously, with constitutive promoters (pZmUbi::ZmG1 and p35S::ZmG2) or maize promoters (pZmG1::ZmG1, pZmG2::ZmG2, and pZmG1::ZmG1/pZmG2::ZmG2). Both ZmG1 and ZmG2 genes were highly expressed in transgenic rice leaves. Moreover, ZmG1 and ZmG2 showed coordinated expression in pZmG1::ZmG1/pZmG2::ZmG2 plants. All Golden2-like (GLK) transgenic plants had higher chlorophyll and protein contents, Rubisco activities and photosynthetic rates per unit leaf area in flag leaves. However, the highest grain yields occurred when maize promoters were used; pZmG1::ZmG1, pZmG2::ZmG2, and pZmG1::ZmG1/pZmG2::ZmG2 transgenic plants showed increases in grain yield by 51%, 47%, and 70%, respectively. In contrast, the pZmUbi::ZmG1 plant produced smaller seeds without yield increases. Transcriptome analysis indicated that maize GLKs act as master regulators promoting the expression of both photosynthesis-related and stress-responsive regulatory genes in both rice shoot and root. Thus, by promoting these important functions under the control of their own promoters, maize GLK1 and GLK2 genes together dramatically improved rice photosynthetic performance and productivity. A similar approach can potentially improve the productivity of many other crops.

OsGLK1/OsGLK2: !act redundantly to regulate! chloroplast development 
ZmG1/ZmG2: !functionally specialized and expressed in different cell-specific manners! 
ZmG1/ZmG2: !overexpressed with constitutive or maize promoters! 
ZmG1/ZmG2: !coordinated expression in pZmG1::ZmG1/pZmG2::ZmG2 plants! 
ZmG1/ZmG2: !increased grain yield by 51%, 47%, and 70%! 
ZmG1/ZmG2: !promote expression of photosynthesis-related and stress-responsive regulatory genes!