The Physcomitrium patens DICER-LIKE1a (PpDCL1a) mRNA encoding the essential Dicer protein for microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis harbors an intronic miRNA (miR1047). An autoregulatory mechanism to control PpDCL1a abundance that is based on competitive processing of the intronic miRNA and proper PpDCL1a mRNA splicing has previously been proposed. If intron splicing occurs first the mRNA can be translated into the functional PpDCL1a protein, whereas the processing of the intronic miRNA catalyzed by PpDCL1a itself, prior to pre-mRNA splicing, generates a truncated transcript unable to produce a functional protein. This proposed autoregulation of DCL1 has not been functionally analyzed in any plant species, and the existence of this autoregulatory control is expected to have a general impact on the overall miRNA biogenesis pathway and the transcriptome that is under miRNA control. We abolished PpDCL1a autoregulatory feedback control by the precise deletion of the MIR1047-containing intron. The generated line displayed hypersensitivity to salt stress and hyposensitivity to the plant hormone ABA, accompanied by the disturbed expression of miRNAs and mRNAs, revealed by transcriptome analyses. The feedback control together with the phenotypic abnormalities and molecular changes in the intron-less line can be rescued by the re-insertion of a modified intron harboring a sequence-unrelated artificial miRNA. Our findings indicate the physiological importance of miR1047-based feedback control of PpDCL1a transcript abundance, which controls the expression of miRNAs, and their cognate target RNAs during salt stress adaptation, and suggests a key role for this autoregulation in the molecular adaptation of land plants to terrestrial habitats.

PpDCL1a: !harbors! intronic miRNA 
intronic miRNA: !competes with! PpDCL1a mRNA splicing 
PpDCL1a autoregulation: !controls! miRNA biogenesis pathway 
intron-less line: !displays! hypersensitivity to salt stress 
intron-less line: !displays! hyposensitivity to ABA 
intron-less line: !reveals! disturbed expression of miRNAs and mRNAs 
modified intron: !rescues! feedback control and phenotypic abnormalities 
miR1047-based feedback control: !controls! expression of miRNAs and target RNAs