Flowers of Chrysanthemum × morifolium Ramat. are used as tea in traditional Chinese cuisine. However, with increasing population and urbanization, water and land availability have become limiting for chrysanthemum tea production. Hydroponic culture enables effective, rapid nutrient exchange, while requiring no soil and less water than soil cultivation. Hydroponic culture can reduce pesticide residues in food and improve the quantity or size of fruits, flowers, and leaves, and the levels of active compounds important for nutrition and health. To date, studies to improve the yield and active compounds of chrysanthemum have focused on soil culture. Moreover, the molecular effects of hydroponic and soil culture on chrysanthemum tea development remain understudied. Here, we studied the effects of soil and hydroponic culture on yield and total flavonoid and chlorogenic acid contents in chrysanthemum flowers (C. morifolium 'wuyuanhuang'). Yield and the total flavonoids and chlorogenic acid contents of chrysanthemum flowers were higher in the hydroponic culture system than in the soil system. Transcriptome profiling using RNA-seq revealed 3858 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between chrysanthemum flowers grown in soil and hydroponic conditions. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment annotation revealed that these differentially transcribed genes are mainly involved in "cytoplasmic part", "biosynthetic process", "organic substance biosynthetic process", "cell wall organization or biogenesis" and other processes. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis revealed enrichment in "metabolic pathways", "biosynthesis of secondary metabolites", "ribosome", "carbon metabolism", "plant hormone signal transduction" and other metabolic processes. In functional annotations, pathways related to yield and formation of the main active compounds included phytohormone signaling, secondary metabolism, and cell wall metabolism. Enrichment analysis of transcription factors also showed that under the hydroponic system, bHLH, MYB, NAC, and ERF protein families were involved in metabolic pathways, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, and plant hormone signal transduction. Hydroponic culture is a simple and effective way to cultivate chrysanthemum for tea production. A transcriptome analysis of chrysanthemum flowers grown in soil and hydroponic conditions. The large number of DEGs identified confirmed the difference of the regulatory machinery under two culture system.

Hydroponic culture: !enhances! Yield 
Hydroponic culture: !enhances! Total flavonoid and chlorogenic acid contents 
DEGs: !involved in! Cytoplasmic part 
DEGs: !involved in! Biosynthetic process 
DEGs: !involved in! Organic substance biosynthetic process 
DEGs: !involved in! Cell wall organization or biogenesis 
Metabolic pathways: !enriched in! Hydroponic system 
Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites: !enriched in! Hydroponic system 
Ribosome: !enriched in! Hydroponic system 
Carbon metabolism: !enriched in! Hydroponic system 
Plant hormone signal transduction: !enriched in! Hydroponic system 
bHLH: !involved in! Metabolic pathways 
MYB: !involved in! Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites 
NAC: !involved in! Plant hormone signal transduction 
ERF: !involved in! Plant hormone signal transduction