Down-regulation of starch branching enzymes alters fine structure and starch properties, especially the B-type crystalline pattern and extremely high amylose content identified in the BEIIb-deficiency mutant in the indica rice. The relative importance of the starch branching enzymes in determining the molecular fine structure and starch functional properties were uncovered in this study. An indica rice, Guangluai 4 with high amylose content (AC) and high gelatinization temperature (GT) was used to generate the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/associated protein-9 (Cas9) knockout lines. Five mutant lines were identified including be1-1, be1-2, be2a-1, be2a-2 and be2b-1, and analysis of western blot showed the CRISPR/Cas9 system was successful in inducing mutations in the targeted genes. AC of be2b-1 (34.1%) was greater than that of wild type (WT) (27.4%) and other mutants. Mutations of either BEI or BEIIa did not alter the starch crystallite pattern (A-type). The BEIIb deficiency caused an opaque endosperm phenotype, changed the crystallite pattern from A- to B-type, and dramatically increased the degree of ordered structure, the relative proportion of amylose chains and intermediate to long amylopectin chains, average chain length of amylopectin molecules as well as GT. The BEIIa deficiency had no effect on the proportion of amylose chains, the length of amylopectin intermediate-long chains, conclusion temperature and enthalpy of gelatinization. Down-regulation of BEI increased the proportion of shortest amylopectin chains (fa) but decreased the proportion of long amylopectin chains (fb2 and fb3), leading to a lower GT. It is concluded that the relative importance in determining starch fine structures and functionality was in the order of BEIIb > BEI > BEIIa. Our results provide new information for utilizations of BE-deficient mutants in rice quality breeding.

Down-regulation of BEI: !increases! shortest amylopectin chains
Down-regulation of BEIIa: !has no effect on! proportion of amylose chains
Down-regulation of BEIIb: !changes! crystallite pattern from A- to B-type
BEI: !decreases! long amylopectin chains
BEIIa: !has no effect on! conclusion temperature and enthalpy of gelatinization
BEIIb: !dramatically increases! degree of ordered structure