The novel structural variations were identified in cotton chloroplast tRNAs and gene loss events were more obvious than duplications in chloroplast tRNAs. Transfer RNAs (tRNA) have long been believed an evolutionary-conserved molecular family, which play the key roles in the process of protein biosynthesis in plant life activities. In this study, we detected the evolutionary characteristics and phylogeny of chloroplast tRNAs in cotton plants, an economic and fibered important taxon in the world. We firstly annotated the chloroplast tRNAs of 27 Gossypium species to analyze their genetic composition, structural characteristics and evolution. Compared with the traditional view of evolutionary conservation of tRNA, some novel tRNA structural variations were identified in cotton plants. I.g., tRNA<sup>Val</sup>-UAC and tRNA<sup>Ile</sup>-GAU only contained one intron in the anti-condon loop region of tRNA secondary structure, respectively. In the variable region, some tRNAs contained a circle structure with a few nucleotides. Interestingly, the calculation result of free energy indicated that the variation of novel tRNAs contributed to the stability of tRNA structure. Phylogenetic analysis suggested that chloroplast tRNAs have evolved from multiple common ancestors, and the tRNA<sup>Met</sup> seemed to be an ancestral tRNA, which can be duplicated and diversified to produce other tRNAs. The chloroplast tRNAs contained a group I intron in cotton plants, and the evolutionary analysis of introns indicated that group I intron of chloroplast tRNA originated from cyanobacteria. Analysis of gene duplication and loss events showed that gene loss events were more obvious than duplications in Gossypium chloroplast tRNAs. Additionally, we found that the rate of transition was higher than the ones of transversion in cotton chloroplast tRNAs. This study provided new insights into the structural characteristics and evolution of chloroplast tRNAs in cotton plants.

tRNA: !contains! intron 
tRNA: !evolved from! common ancestor 
tRNA: !variation contributes to! stability 
tRNA: !gene loss more obvious than! duplication 
tRNA: !rate of transition higher than! transversion