Interactions between climate change and UV penetration in the biosphere are resulting in the exposure of plants to new combinations of UV radiation and drought. In theory, the impacts of combinations of UV and drought may be additive, synergistic or antagonistic. Lack of understanding of the impacts of combined treatments creates substantial uncertainties that hamper predictions of future ecological change. Here, we compiled information from 52 publications and analysed the relative impacts of UV and/or drought. Both UV and drought have substantial negative effects on biomass accumulation, plant height, photosynthesis, leaf area and stomatal conductance and transpiration, while increasing stress-associated symptoms such as MDA accumulation and reactive-oxygen-species content. Contents of proline, flavonoids, antioxidants and anthocyanins, associated with plant acclimation, are upregulated both under enhanced UV and drought. In plants exposed to both UV and drought, increases in plant defense responses are less-than-additive, and so are the damage and growth retardation. Less-than-additive effects were observed across field, glasshouse and growth-chamber studies, indicating similar physiological response mechanisms. Induction of a degree of cross-resistance seems the most likely interpretation of the observed less-than-additive responses. The data show that in future climates, the impacts of increases in drought exposure may be lessened by naturally high UV regimes.

UV: !affects! Biomass accumulation
UV: !affects! Plant height
UV: !affects! Photosynthesis
UV: !affects! Leaf area
UV: !affects! Stomatal conductance
UV: !affects! Transpiration
UV: !affects! MDA accumulation
UV: !affects! Reactive-oxygen-species content
UV: !enhances! Proline content
UV: !enhances! Flavonoid content
UV: !enhances! Antioxidant content
UV: !enhances! Anthocyanin content
Drought: !affects! Biomass accumulation
Drought: !affects! Plant height
Drought: !affects! Photosynthesis
Drought: !affects! Leaf area
Drought: !affects! Stomatal conductance
Drought: !affects! Transpiration
Drought: !affects! MDA accumulation
Drought: !affects! Reactive-oxygen-species content
Drought: !enhances! Proline content
Drought: !enhances! Flavon