Populus and Salix belong to Salicaceae and are used as models to investigate woody plant physiology. The variation of karyotype and nuclear DNA content can partly reflect the evolutionary history of the whole genome, and can provide critical information for understanding, predicting, and potentially ameliorating the woody plant traits. Therefore, it is essential to study the chromosome number (CN) and genome size in detail to provide information for revealing the evolutionary process of Salicaceae. In this study, we report the somatic CNs of seventeen species from eight genera in Salicaceae. Of these, CNs for twelve species and for five genera are reported for the first time. Among the three subfamilies of Salicaceae, the available data indicate CN in Samydoideae is n = 21, 22, 42. The only two genera, Dianyuea and Scyphostegia, in Scyphostegioideae respectively have n = 9 and 18. In Salicoideae, Populus, Salix and five genera closely related to them (Bennettiodendron, Idesia, Carrierea, Poliothyrsis, Itoa) are based on relatively high CNs from n = 19, 20, 21, 22 to n = 95 in Salix. However, the other genera of Salicoideae are mainly based on relatively low CNs of n = 9, 10, 11. The genome sizes of 35 taxa belonging to 14 genera of Salicaceae were estimated. Of these, the genome sizes of 12 genera and all taxa except Populus euphratica are first reported. Except for Dianyuea, Idesia and Bennettiodendron, all examined species have relatively small genome sizes of less than 1 pg, although polyploidization exists. The variation of CN and genome size across Salicaceae indicates frequent ploidy changes and a widespread sharing of the salicoid whole genome duplication (WGD) by the relatives of Populus and Salix. The shrinkage of genome size after WGD indicates massive loss of genomic components. The phylogenetic asymmetry in clade of Populus, Salix, and their close relatives suggests that there is a lag-time for the subsequent radiations after the salicoid WGD event. Our results provide useful data for studying the evolutionary events of Salicaceae.

CN: !varies in! Salicaceae 
Genome size: !estimated for! 35 taxa 
CN: !reported for! 12 species 
CN: !reported for! 5 genera 
Samydoideae: !has CN of! 21, 22, 42 
Scyphostegioideae: !has CN of! 9, 18 
Salicoideae: !has CN of! 19-95 
Genome size: !less than 1 pg for! all except Populus euphratica 
Variation of CN/genome size: !indicates! ploidy changes 
Salicoid WGD: !shared by! relatives of Populus and Salix 
Genome size: !shrank after! WGD 
Phylogenetic asymmetry: !suggests lag-time for! subsequent radiations