The phenomenon of albinism in wheat androgenesis is linked to the transcriptional repression of specific genes involved in chloroplast biogenesis during the first weeks of in vitro culture. Isolated microspore culture is widely used to accelerate breeding programs and produce new cultivars. However, in cereals and particularly in wheat, the use of this technique is limited due to the high proportion of regenerated albino plantlets. The causes and mechanisms leading to the formation of albino plantlets in wheat remain largely unknown and, to date, no concrete solution has been found to make it possible to overcome this barrier. We performed a molecular study of proplastid-to-chloroplast differentiation within wheat microspore cultures by analyzing the expression of 20 genes specifically involved in chloroplast biogenesis. Their expression levels were compared between two wheat genotypes that exhibit differential capacities to regenerate green plantlets, i.e., Pavon and Paledor, which produce high and low rates of green plants, respectively. We observed that chloroplast biogenesis within wheat microspores was affected as of the very early stages of the androgenesis process. A successful transition from a NEP- to a PEP-dependent transcription during early plastid development was found to be strongly correlated with the formation of green plantlets, while failure of this transition was strongly correlated with the regeneration of albino plantlets. The very low expression of plastid-encoded 16S and 23S rRNAs within plastids of the recalcitrant genotype Paledor suggests a low translation activity in albino plastids. Furthermore, a delay in the activation of the transcription of nuclear encoded key genes like GLK1 related to chloroplast biogenesis was observed in multicellular structures and pro-embryos of the genotype Paledor. These data help to understand the phenomenon of albinism in wheat androgenesis, which appears to be linked to the transcriptional activation of specific genes involved in the initial steps of chloroplast biogenesis that occurs between days 7 and 21 of in vitro culture.

Pavon: !produces! high rate of green plants
Paledor: !produces! low rate of green plants
NEP-dependent transcription: !correlated with! formation of green plantlets
PEP-dependent transcription: !correlated with! formation of green plantlets
GLK1: !delayed activation of! transcription in Paledor
16S and 23S rRNAs: !low expression of! plastid-encoded in Paledor
Chloroplast biogenesis: !affected as of! early stages of androgenesis