Tree-ring anatomy, microdensity and isotope records provide valuable intra-annual information. However, extracting signals at that scale is challenged by the complexity of xylogenesis, where two major processes - cell enlargement and wall thickening - occur at different times and rates. We characterized the space-for-time association in the tree rings of three conifer species by examining the duration, overlapping, inter-tree synchronicity and interannual stability during cell enlargement and wall thickening across regular tree-ring sectors (portions of equal tangential width). The number of cells and cell differentiation rates determined the duration of sector formation, which augmented more rapidly throughout the ring for wall thickening than for enlargement. Increasing the number of sectors above c. 15 had a limited effect on improving time resolution because consecutive sector formation overlapped greatly in time, especially in narrow rings and during wall thickening. Increasing the number of sectors also resulted in lower synchronicity and stability of intermediate-sector enlargement, whereas all sectors showed high synchronicity and stability during wall thickening. Increasing the number of sectors had a stronger effect on enhancing time-series resolution for enlargement- than for wall-thickening-related traits, which would nevertheless produce more reliable intra-annual chronologies as a result of the more similar calendars across trees and years in wall thickening.

Cell enlargement: !determines duration of! sector formation
Wall thickening: !augments more rapidly than! cell enlargement
Number of sectors: !limited effect on improving! time resolution
Number of sectors: !lower synchronicity and stability of! intermediate-sector enlargement
Number of sectors: !stronger effect on enhancing! time-series resolution for enlargement-related traits
Wall thickening: !produces more reliable intra-annual chronologies as a result of! similar calendars across trees and years