The calmodulin binding transcription activator (CAMTA) is a transcription factor that is widely present in eukaryotes with conserved structure. It contributes to the response to biotic and abiotic stresses and promotes the growth and development of plants. Although previous studies have investigated the number and function of CAMTAs in some species, there is still a lack of comprehensive understanding of the evolutionary process, phylogenetic relationship, expression patterns, and functions of CAMTAs in plants. Here we identified 465 CMATA genes from 112 plants and systematically studied the origin of CAMTA family, gene expansion, functional differentiation, gene structure, and conservative motif distribution. Based on these analyses, we presented the evidence that CAMTA family was originated from chlorophyta, and we speculated that CAMTA might experience obvious structure variation during its early evolution, and that the number of CAMTA genes might gradually increase in higher plants. To reveal potential functions of CAMTA genes, we analyzed the expression patterns of 12 representative species and found significant species specificity, tissue specificity, and developmental stage specificity of CAMTAs. The results also indicated that the CAMTA genes might promote the maturation and senescence. The expression levels and regulatory networks of CAMTAs revealed that CAMTAs could enhance cold tolerance of rice by regulating carbohydrate metabolism-related genes to accumulate carbohydrates or by modulating target genes together with other transcription factors. Our study provides an insight into the molecular evolution of CAMTA family and lays a foundation for further study of related biological functions.

CAMTA: !originated from! chlorophyta
CAMTA: !experienced! structure variation
CAMTA: !increased in! higher plants
CAMTA: !showed species specificity! expression patterns
CAMTA: !promoted! maturation and senescence
CAMTA: !enhanced! cold tolerance of rice
CAMTA: !regulated! carbohydrate metabolism-related genes