The extrafloral nectaries of S. occidentalis were studied structurally and anatomically (at secretory and post-secretory developmental stages). Role of extrafloral nectaries as a common plant-adoptive characteristic in context to diversity and phylogenetic pattern was also speculated while exploring other collaborative evolutionary implications of this plant. Extrafloral nectaries (EFNs) are widespread and evolutionarily labile traits that have repeatedly and remarkably evolved in vascular plants. Morphological descriptions of the EFNs of certain plant species are common in the literature, but they rarely relate morphology with histology, gland distribution and secretory characteristics. Studies relating EFNs features, i.e., morphology and distribution with their differential visitation by insects, viz. ants and the cost of maintenance to the plants are important to understand the evolution of these glands. Therefore, in this study a morphological, anatomical (structure and ultrastructure) and secretory characterization of EFNs occurring on Senna occidentalis L. is made with the implications of gland attributes discussed from a functional perspective. S. occidentalis L. (Caesalpiniaceae) is an economically important species from industrial, medicinal and agricultural perspective. Observations from the result showed that shape of the EFNs (size 1-2 mm) ranged to globular, ovoid-conical, dome-shaped, fusiform or cylindrical with conical tip. The EFNs were sessile, positioned interpetiolar or seated at the base of petiole. Light and transmission electron microscopic studies showed the specific internal structures of the extrafloral nectary. Two developmental stages of the EFNs (secretory and post-secretory) were recognized. Our current understanding of the phylogenetic patterns of EFNs makes them powerful candidates for future work exploring the drivers of their evolutionary origins, shifts, and losses.

EFNs: !occur on! S. occidentalis 
EFNs: !range in shape! globular, ovoid-conical, dome-shaped, fusiform or cylindrical 
EFNs: !are sessile! interpetiolar or at base of petiole 
EFNs: !have two developmental stages! secretory and post-secretory 
EFNs: !are visited by! ants 
EFNs: !have implications for! evolutionary origins, shifts, and losses