In plants, histone modification (HM) genes participate in various developmental and defense processes. Gramineae plants (e.g., Triticum aestivum, Hordeum vulgare, Sorghum bicolor, Setaria italica, Setaria viridis, and Zea mays) are important crop species worldwide. However, little information on HM genes is in Gramineae species. Here, we identified 245 TaHMs, 72 HvHMs, 84 SbHMs, 93 SvHMs, 90 SiHMs, and 90 ZmHMs in the above six Gramineae species, respectively. Detailed information on their chromosome locations, conserved domains, phylogenetic trees, synteny, promoter elements, and gene structures were determined. Among the HMs, most motifs were conserved, but several unique motifs were also identified. Our results also suggested that gene and genome duplications potentially impacted the evolution and expansion of HMs in wheat. The number of orthologous gene pairs between rice (Oryza sativa) and each Gramineae species was much greater than that between Arabidopsis and each Gramineae species, indicating that the dicotyledons shared common ancestors. Moreover, all identified HM gene pairs likely underwent purifying selection based on to their non-synonymous (Ka)/synonymous (Ks) nucleotide substitutions. Using published transcriptome data, changes in TaHM gene expression in developing wheat grains treated with brassinosteroid, brassinazole, or activated charcoal were investigated. In addition, the transcription models of ZmHMs in developing maize seeds and after gibberellin treatment were also identified. We also examined plant stress responses and found that heat, drought, salt, insect feeding, nitrogen, and cadmium stress influenced many TaHMs, and drought altered the expression of several ZmHMs. Thus, these findings indicate their important functions in plant growth and stress adaptations. Based on a comprehensive analysis of Gramineae HMs, we found that TaHMs play potential roles in grain development, brassinosteroid- and brassinazole-mediated root growth, activated charcoal-mediated root and leaf growth, and biotic and abiotic adaptations. Furthermore, ZmHMs likely participate in seed development, gibberellin-mediated leaf growth, and drought adaptation.

TaHMs: !play potential roles in! grain development
TaHMs: !mediate root growth in response to! brassinosteroid and brassinazole
TaHMs: !mediate root and leaf growth in response to! activated charcoal
TaHMs: !influence! biotic and abiotic adaptations
ZmHMs: !participate in! seed development
ZmHMs: !mediate leaf growth in response to! gibberellin
ZmHMs: !alter expression in response to! drought