Physical dormancy in seeds can challenge restoration efforts where scarification conditions for optimal germination and seedling vigor are unknown. For species that occur along wide environmental gradients, optimal scarification conditions may also differ by seed source. We examined intraspecific variation in optimal scarification conditions for germination and seedling performance in koa (<i>Acacia koa</i>), which occurs across a wide range of environmental conditions. To evaluate scarification responses, we recorded imbibition percentage, germination percentage, germination time, seedling abnormalities, early mortality, seedling growth, and seedling survivorship. From these, we developed a scarification index (<i>SI</i>) that integrates these measures simultaneously. We hypothesized that seeds from lower elevation sources exposed to higher temperatures would have harder seed coats and would require more intense scarification treatments. To test this hypothesis, we repeatedly exposed seeds to hot water differing in temperature and time until seeds imbibed. Supporting the hypothesis, seeds from lower elevation sources generally required more intense scarification, although we found substantial variation among sources. Koa seeds germinated in about a week following imbibition. Boiling seeds (i.e., maintaining at 100°C) was effective for imbibing seeds but it also substantially reduced germination percentages. Repeated exposure to 90 to 100°C water did not reduce germination percentage but decreased seedling performance and increased early mortality. No seeds remained unimbibed after six attempts of boiling germinated whereas seeds remaining unimbibed after 15 attempts of exposure to 90 to 100°C water showed high germination percentages. Abnormalities in seedling development were rare but increased with treatment intensity. Exposure to 100°C water for 1 min overall generated the best <i>SI</i> values but the best treatment differed by elevation, and the treatment with the best <i>SI</i> was rarely predicted from the highest germination percentages. Seeds that imbibed without any treatment germinated at the same level as manually filed seeds but produced poor seedling quality. Variation in mother tree environments along an elevational gradient can lead to differences in seed coat characteristics, which may explain differing responses to treatments. Scarification treatments affected processes beyond imbibition and germination and using an index like <i>SI</i> may improve efficiency by identifying optimal scarification treatments while reducing seed waste.

seed: !requires! scarification
seed: !imbibes with! boiling
seed: !responds to! temperature
seed: !germinates with! manual filing
seed: !produces! seedling quality
seed: !varies by! elevation