Understanding the ecological strategies of urban trees to the urban environment is crucial to the selection and management of urban trees. However, it is still unclear whether urban tree pit cover will affect plant functional traits. Here, we study the response of urban trees to different tree pit covers, analyzed the effects of different cover types on soil properties and their trade-off strategies based on leaf functional traits. We found that there were obvious differences in the physical properties of the soil in different tree pit covers. Under the different tree pit cover types, soil bulk density and soil porosity reached the maximum under cement cover and turf cover, respectively. We found that tree pit cover significantly affected the leaf properties of urban trees. Leaf thickness, chlorophyll content index and stomatal density were mainly affected by soil bulk density and non-capillary porosity in a positive direction, and were affected by soil total porosity and capillary porosity in a negative direction. Leaf dry matter content and stomata area were mainly negatively affected by soil bulk density and non-capillary porosity, and positively affected by soil total porosity and capillary porosity. Covering materials of tree pits promoted the functional adjustment of plants and form the best combination of functions. Under the influence of tree pit cover, plant have low specific leaf area, stomata density, high leaf thickness, chlorophyll content index, leaf dry matter content, leaf tissue density and stomata area, which belong to "quick investment-return" type in the leaf economics spectrum.

tree pit cover: !affects! soil properties 
soil properties: !affects! leaf functional traits 
leaf functional traits: !affected by! soil bulk density 
soil bulk density: !affects! chlorophyll content index 
chlorophyll content index: !affected by! non-capillary porosity 
non-capillary porosity: !affects! stomatal density 
stomatal density: !affected by! soil total porosity 
soil total porosity: !affects! leaf dry matter content 
leaf dry matter content: !affected by! capillary porosity 
capillary porosity: !affects! stomata area