Barley yellow mosaic disease (BYMD) caused by Barley yellow mosaic virus (BaYMV) and Barley mild mosaic virus (BaMMV) seriously threatens the production of winter barley. Cultivating and promoting varieties that carry disease-resistant genes is one of the most powerful ways to minimize the disease's effect on yield. However, as the BYMD virus mutates rapidly, resistance conferred by the two cloned R genes to the virus had been overcome by new virus strains. There is an urgent need for novel resistance genes in barley that convey sustainable resistance to newly emerging virus strains causing BYMD. A doubled haploid (DH) population derived from a cross of SRY01 (BYMD resistant wild barley) and Gairdner (BYMD susceptible barley cultivar) was used to explore for QTL of resistance to BYMD in barley. A total of six quantitative trait loci (qRYM-1H, qRYM-2Ha, qRYM-2Hb, qRYM-3H, qRYM-5H, and qRYM-7H) related to BYMD resistance were detected, which were located on chromosomes 1H, 2H, 3H, 5H, and 7H. Both qRYM-1H and qRYM-2Ha were detected in all environments. qRYM-1H was found to be overlapped with rym7, a known R gene to the disease, whereas qRYM-2Ha is a novel QTL on chromosome 2H originated from SRY01, explaining phenotypic variation from 9.8 to 17.8%. The closely linked InDel markers for qRYM-2Ha were developed which could be used for marker-assisted selection in barley breeding. qRYM-2Hb and qRYM-3H were stable QTL for specific resistance to Yancheng and Yangzhou virus strains, respectively. qRYM-5H and qRYM-7H identified in Yangzhou were originated from Gairdner. Our work is focusing on a virus disease (barley yellow mosaic) of barley. It is the first report on BYMD-resistant QTL from wild barley accessions. One novel major QTL (qRYM-2Ha) for the resistance was detected. The consistently detected new genes will potentially serve as novel sources for achieving pre-breeding barley materials with resistance to BYMD.

qRYM-1H: !overlaps with! rym7 
qRYM-2Ha: !originates from! SRY01 
qRYM-2Hb: !stable for! Yancheng virus strain 
qRYM-3H: !stable for! Yangzhou virus strain 
qRYM-5H: !originates from! Gairdner 
qRYM-7H: !originates from! Gairdner