We show that in rice, the amino acid-conjugates of JA precursor, OPDA, may function as a non-canonical signal for the production of phytoalexins in coordination with the innate chitin signaling. The core oxylipins, jasmonic acid (JA) and JA-Ile, are well-known as potent regulators of plant defense against necrotrophic pathogens and/or herbivores. However, recent studies also suggest that other oxylipins, including 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid (OPDA), may contribute to plant defense. Here, we used a previously characterized metabolic defense marker, p-coumaroylputrescine (CoP), and fungal elicitor, chitooligosaccharide, to specifically test defense role of various oxylipins in rice (Oryza sativa). While fungal elicitor triggered a rapid production of JA, JA-Ile, and their precursor OPDA, rice cells exogenously treated with the compounds revealed that OPDA, rather than JA-Ile, can stimulate the CoP production. Next, reverse genetic approach and oxylipin-deficient rice mutant (hebiba) were used to uncouple oxylipins from other elicitor-triggered signals. It appeared that, without oxylipins, residual elicitor signaling had only a minimal effect but, in synergy with OPDA, exerted a strong stimulatory activity towards CoP production. Furthermore, as CoP levels were compromised in the OPDA-treated Osjar1 mutant cells impaired in the oxylipin-amino acid conjugation, putative OPDA-amino acid conjugates emerged as hypothetical regulators of CoP biosynthesis. Accordingly, we found several OPDA-amino acid conjugates in rice cells treated with exogenous OPDA, and OPDA-Asp was detected, although in small amounts, in the chitooligosaccharide-treated rice. However, as synthetic OPDA-Asp and OPDA-Ile, so far, failed to induce CoP in cells, it suggests that yet another presumed OPDA-amino acid form(s) could be acting as novel regulator(s) of phytoalexins in rice.

JA: !triggers! CoP production
OPDA: !triggers! CoP production
chitooligosaccharide: !triggers! JA & OPDA
Osjar1: !impairs! oxylipin-amino acid conjugation
OPDA-amino acid conjugates: !hypothesized to regulate! CoP biosynthesis
OPDA-Asp: !detected in! chitooligosaccharide-treated rice
OPDA-Asp/Ile: !failed to induce! CoP in cells