Al responsive proteins are associated with starch, sucrose, and other carbohydrate metabolic pathways. Sucrose synthase is a candidate to Al tolerance. Al responses are regulated at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. Aluminum toxicity is one of the important abiotic stresses that affects worldwide crop production. The soluble form of aluminum (Al<sup>3+</sup>) inhibits root growth by altering water and nutrient uptake, a process that also reduces plant growth and development. Under long-term Al<sup>3+</sup> exposure, plants can activate several tolerance mechanisms. To date, no reports of large-scale proteomic data concerning maize responses to this ion have been published. To investigate the post-transcriptional regulation in response to Al toxicity, we performed label-free quantitative proteomics for comparative analysis of two Al-contrasting popcorn inbred lines and an Al-tolerant commercial hybrid during 72 h under Al-stress conditions. A total of 489 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were identified in the Al-sensitive inbred line, 491 in the Al-tolerant inbred line, and 277 in the commercial hybrid. Among them, 120 DAPs were co-expressed in both Al tolerant genotypes. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that starch, sucrose, and other components of carbohydrate metabolism and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis are the biochemical processes regulated in response to Al toxicity. Sucrose synthase accumulation and an increase in sucrose content and starch degradation suggest that these components may enhance popcorn tolerance to Al stress. The accumulation of citrate synthase suggests a key role for this enzyme in the detoxification process in the Al-tolerant inbred line. The integration of transcriptomic and proteomic data indicates that the Al tolerance response presents a complex regulatory network into the transcription and translation dynamics of popcorn root development.

Al: !inhibits! root growth 
starch: !regulated by! Al toxicity
sucrose synthase: !candidate for! Al tolerance
sucrose: !increases! Al tolerance
starch degradation: !enhances! Al tolerance
citrate synthase: !key role in! detoxification