Some plant lineages, such as Araceae and Orchidaceae, have independently evolved deceptive flowers. These exploit the insect's perception and deceive the insects into believing to have located a suitable opportunity for reproduction. The scent compounds emitted by the flowers are the key signals that dupe the insects, guiding them to the right spots that in turn ensure flower pollination. Most species of the genus <i>Amorphophallus</i> of the Araceae emit scent compounds that are characteristic of a deceit, suggesting a specific plant pollinator interaction and according odors. However, only a few clear evolutionary trends in regard to inflorescence odors in <i>Amorphophallus</i> could be traced in previous studies - an intriguing result, considered the multitude of characteristic scent compounds expressed in <i>Amorphophallus</i> as well as the key function of scent compounds in deceptive floral systems in general. At least two factors could account for this result. (1) The deceptive pollinator-attraction floral system, including the emitted scent compounds, is less specific than assumed. (2) An evolutionary trend cannot be discerned if the intraspecific scent variation (odor polymorphism) exceeds the interspecific odor variation. Therefore, we discuss the potential deceptive function of the emitted scent compounds, in particular those that are related to cadaveric decomposition. Moreover, we review the data about emitted scent compounds in <i>Amorphophallus</i> with a focus on putative odor polymorphism. Upon examination, it appears that the emitted scent compounds in <i>Amorphophallus</i> are highly mimetic of decomposing organic materials. We show that several species display odor polymorphism, which in turn might constitute an obstacle in the analysis of evolutionary trends. An important odor polymorphism is also indicated by subjective odor perceptions. Odor polymorphism may serve several purposes: it might represent an adaptation to local pollinators or it might assumingly prevent insects from learning to distinguish between a real decomposing substrate and an oviposition-site mimic.

Scent compounds: !deceive! Insects 
Inflorescence odors: !suggest! Specific plant pollinator interaction 
Deceptive pollinator-attraction floral system: !less specific than assumed! 
Intraspecific scent variation: !exceeds! Interspecific odor variation 
Emitted scent compounds: !mimetic of! Decomposing organic materials 
Odor polymorphism: !adaptation to! Local pollinators 
Odor polymorphism: !prevents! Insects from learning