Two squalene synthase genes AlSQS1 and AlSQS2 were isolated from Atractylodes lancea and functionally characterized using in vitro enzymatic reactions. Atractylodes lancea is a traditional herb used for the treatment of rheumatic diseases, gastric disorders, and influenza. Its major active ingredients include sesquiterpenoids and triterpenes. Squalene synthase (SQS; EC 2.5.1.21) catalyzes the first enzymatic step in the central isoprenoid pathway towards sterol and triterpenoid biosynthesis. In this study, we aimed to investigate two SQSs from A. lancea using cloning and in vitro enzymatic characterization. Bioinformatics and phylogenetic analyses revealed that the AlSQSs exhibited high homology with other plant SQSs. Furthermore, AlSQS1 was observed to be localized in both the nucleus and cytoplasm, whereas AlSQS2 was localized in the cytoplasm and endoplasmic reticulum. To obtain soluble recombinant enzymes, AlSQS1 and AlSQS2 were successfully expressed as glutathione S-transferase (GST)-tagged fusion proteins in Escherichia coli Transetta (DE3). Approximately 68 kDa recombinant proteins were obtained using GST-tag affinity chromatography and Western blot analysis. Results of the in vitro enzymatic reactions established that both AlSQS1 and AlSQS2 were functional, which verifies their catalytic ability in converting two farnesyl pyrophosphates to squalene. The expression patterns of AlSQS and selected terpenoid genes were also investigated in two A. lancea chemotypes using available RNA sequencing data. AlSQS1 and AlSQS2, which showed relatively similar expression in the three tissues, were more highly expressed in the stems than in the leaves and rhizomes. Methyl jasmonate (MeJA) was used as an elicitor to analyze the expression profiles of AlSQSs. The results of qRT-PCR analysis revealed that the gene expression of AlSQS1 and AlSQS2 plummeted at lowest value at 12 h and reached its peak at 24 h. This study is the first report on the cloning, characterization, and expression of SQSs in A. lancea. Therefore, our findings contribute novel insights that may be useful for future studies regarding terpenoid biosynthesis in A. lancea.

AlSQS1: !localizes to! nucleus and cytoplasm 
AlSQS2: !localizes to! cytoplasm and endoplasmic reticulum 
AlSQS1: !synthesizes! squalene 
AlSQS2: !synthesizes! squalene 
AlSQS1: !enhances! terpenoid biosynthesis 
AlSQS2: !enhances! terpenoid biosynthesis 
AlSQS1: !represses! expression in response to MeJA 
AlSQS2: !represses! expression in response to MeJA