Plant transformation with rol oncogenes derived from wild strains of Rhizobium rhizogenes is a popular biotechnology tool. Transformation effects depend on the type of rol gene, expression level, and the number of gene copies incorporated into the plant's genomic DNA. Although rol oncogenes are known as inducers of plant secondary metabolism, little is known about the physiological response of plants subjected to transformation. In this study, the physiological consequences of rolB oncogene incorporation into the DNA of Dionaea muscipula J. Ellis was evaluated at the level of primary and secondary metabolism. Examination of the teratoma (transformed shoots) cultures of two different clones (K and L) showed two different strategies for dealing with the presence of the rolB gene. Clone K showed an increased ratio of free fatty acids to lipids, superoxide dismutase activity, synthesis of the oxidised form of glutathione, and total pool of glutathione and carotenoids, in comparison to non-transformed plants (control). Clone L was characterised by increased accumulation of malondialdehyde, proline, activity of superoxide dismutase and catalase, total pool of glutathione, ratio of reduced form of glutathione to oxidised form, and accumulation of selected phenolic acids. Moreover, clone L had an enhanced ratio of total triglycerides to lipids and accumulated saccharose, fructose, glucose, and tyrosine. This study showed that plant transformation with the rolB oncogene derived from R. rhizogenes induces a pleiotropic effect in plant tissue after transformation. Examination of D. muscipula plant in the context of transformation with wild strains of R. rhizogenes can be a new source of knowledge about primary and secondary metabolites in transgenic organisms.

rolB oncogene: !induces! pleiotropic effect
rolB oncogene: !increases! ratio of free fatty acids to lipids
rolB oncogene: !enhances! superoxide dismutase activity
rolB oncogene: !synthesizes! oxidised form of glutathione
rolB oncogene: !accumulates! malondialdehyde
rolB oncogene: !increases! proline activity
rolB oncogene: !enhances! catalase activity
rolB oncogene: !accumulates! total pool of glutathione
rolB oncogene: !increases! ratio of reduced form of glutathione to oxidised form
rolB oncogene: !accumulates! selected phenolic acids
rolB oncogene: !enhances! ratio of total triglycerides to lipids
rolB oncogene: !accumulates! saccharose, fructose, glucose, and tyrosine