This study identified the historical geoclimatic factors which caused low genetic diversity and strong phylogeographic structure in a cryptoviviparous mangrove. The phylogeographic pattern was used to suggest conservation actions. Phylogeographic studies are used to understand the spatial distribution and evolution of genetic diversity, and have major conservation implications, especially for threatened taxa like the mangroves. This study aimed to assess the phylogeographic pattern of Aegiceras corniculatum, a cryptoviviparous mangrove, across its distribution range in the Indo-West Pacific (IWP) region. We genotyped 398 samples, collected from 37 populations, at four chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) loci, and identified the influence of historical processes on the contemporary population structure of the species. Low genetic diversity at the population level was observed. The evolutionary relationship between 12 cpDNA haplotypes suggested a strong phylogeographic structure, which was further validated by the clustering algorithms and proportioning of maximum variation among hierarchical population groups. The magnitude and direction of historical gene flow indicated that the species attained its wide distribution from its likely ancestral area of the Malay Archipelago. The divergence time estimates of the haplotypes indicated that the geoclimatic changes during the Pleistocene, especially the glacial sea-level changes and emergence of landmasses, hindered genetic exchange and created genetic differentiation between the phylogenetic groups. The species overwintered the last glacial maxima in multiple refugia in the IWP, as identified by the environmental niche modelling. Overall, our findings indicated that ancient glacial vicariance had influenced the present genetic composition of A. corniculatum, which was maintained by the current demographic features of this region. We discussed how these findings can be used to prioritize areas for conservation actions, restore disturbed habitats and prevent further genetic erosion.

Aegiceras corniculatum: !attained wide distribution from! Malay Archipelago
Aegiceras corniculatum: !influenced by! glacial vicariance
Aegiceras corniculatum: !overwintered in! multiple refugia
Aegiceras corniculatum: !maintained by! current demographic features
Aegiceras corniculatum: !used to prioritize! conservation actions