The kinetochore is a supramolecular protein complex assembled on the chromosomes, essential for faithful segregation of the genome during cell divisions. More than 100 proteins are known to constitute the eukaryotic kinetochore architecture, primarily identified using non-plant organisms. A majority of them are fast evolving and are under positive selection. Thus, functional characterization of the plant kinetochore proteins is limited as only a few conserved orthologs sharing sequence similarity with their animal counterparts have been examined. Here, we report the functional characterization of the Arabidopsis thaliana homolog of the yeast NNF1/human PMF1 outer kinetochore protein and show that it has both kinetochore and non-kinetochore functions in plant growth and development. Knockout of NNF1 causes embryo lethality implying its essential role in cell division. AtNNF1 interacts with MIS12 in Y2H and co-immunoprecipitation assays, confirming it is one of the constituents of the plant MIS12 complex. GFP-NNF1 localizes to the kinetochore, rescuing the embryo lethal nnf1-1-/- phenotype, but the rescued plants (GFP-NNF1<sup>nnf1-/-</sup> ) are dwarf, displaying hypomorphic phenotypes with no evidence of mitotic or meiotic segregation defects. GFP-NNF1<sup>nnf1-/-</sup> dwarf plants have reduced levels of endogenous polyamines, which are partially rescued to wild-type levels upon exogenous application of polyamines. Mutations in the putative leucine zipper-like binding motif of NNF1 gave rise to a dominant-negative tall plant phenotype reminiscent of constitutive gibberellic acid (GA) action. These contrasting hypomorphic dwarf and antimorphic tall phenotypes facilitated us to attribute a moonlighting role to Arabidopsis NNF1 affecting polyamine and GA metabolism apart from its primary role in kinetochores.

AtNNF1: !interacts with! MIS12 
AtNNF1: !localizes to! kinetochore 
AtNNF1: !enhances! cell division 
AtNNF1: !affects! polyamine metabolism 
AtNNF1: !affects! GA metabolism