Maize is sensitive to cold injury, especially during germination. Since cold causes oxidative stress, compounds that promote the accumulation of free radical forms, such as the reactive aldehyde (RA) methylglyoxal (MG), may be suitable to trigger a systemic defense response. In this study, maize seeds were soaked in MG solution for one night at room temperature, before germination test at 13°C. The exogenous MG enhanced the germination and photosynthetic performance of maize at low temperature. Transcriptome analysis, hormonal, and flavonoid profiling indicated MG-induced changes in photosystem antenna proteins, pigments, late embryogenesis abundant proteins, abscisic acid (ABA) derivatives, chaperons, and certain dihydroflavonols, members of the phenylpropanoid pathway. MG-response of the two maize cultivars (A654 and Cm174) were somewhat different, but we recorded higher endogenous hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> ) and lower nitric oxide (NO) level in at least one of the treated genotypes. These secondary signal molecules may provoke some of the changes in the hormonal, metabolic and gene expression profile. Decreased auxin transport, but increased ABA degradation and cytokinin and jasmonic acid (JA) synthesis, as well as an altered carbohydrate metabolism and transport (amylases, invertases, and SWEET transporters) could have promoted germination of MG-pretreated seeds. While LEA accumulation could have protected against osmotic stress and catalase expression and production of many antioxidants, like para-hydroxybenzoic acid (p-HBA) and anthocyanins may have balanced the oxidative environment for maize germination. Our results showed that MG-pretreatment could be an effective way to promote cold germination and its effect was more pronounced in the originally cold-sensitive maize genotype.

MG: !enhances! Germination 
MG: !induces! Photosynthetic Performance 
MG: !alters! Photosystem Antenna Proteins 
MG: !alters! Pigments 
MG: !alters! Late Embryogenesis Abundant Proteins 
MG: !alters! ABA Derivatives 
MG: !alters! Chaperons 
MG: !alters! Dihydroflavonols 
MG: !increases! H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> 
MG: !decreases! NO 
MG: !decreases! Auxin Transport 
MG: !increases! ABA Degradation 
MG: !increases! Cytokinin 
MG: !increases! Jasmonic Acid 
MG: !alters! Carbohydrate Metabolism 
MG: !alters! Carbohydrate Transport 
MG: !promotes! LEA Accumulation 
MG: !induces! Catalase Expression 
MG: !induces! Production of Antioxidants 
MG: !promotes! Cold Ger