The intricate architecture of cell walls and the complex cross-linking of their components hinders some industrial and agricultural applications of plant biomass. Xylan is a key structural element of grass cell walls, closely interacting with other cell wall components such as cellulose and lignin. The main branching points of grass xylan, 3-linked l-arabinosyl substitutions, can be modified by ferulic acid (a hydroxycinnamic acid), which cross-links xylan to other xylan chains and lignin. XAX1 (Xylosyl arabinosyl substitution of xylan 1), a rice (Oryza sativa) member of the glycosyltransferase family GT61, has been described to add xylosyl residues to arabinosyl substitutions modified by ferulic acid. In this study, we characterize hydroxycinnamic acid-decorated arabinosyl substitutions present on rice xylan and their cross-linking, in order to decipher the role of XAX1 in xylan synthesis. Our results show a general reduction of hydroxycinnamic acid-modified 3-linked arabinosyl substitutions in xax1 mutant rice regardless of their modification with a xylosyl residue. Moreover, structures resembling the direct cross-link between xylan and lignin (ferulated arabinosyl substitutions bound to lignin monomers and dimers), together with diferulates known to cross-link xylan, are strongly reduced in xax1. Interestingly, apart from feruloyl and p-coumaroyl modifications on arabinose, putative caffeoyl and oxalyl modifications were characterized, which were also reduced in xax1. Our results suggest an alternative function of XAX1 in the transfer of hydroxycinnamic acid-modified arabinosyl substitutions to xylan, rather than xylosyl transfer to arabinosyl substitutions. Ultimately, XAX1 plays a fundamental role in cross-linking, providing a potential target for the improvement of use of grass biomass.

XAX1: !adds! xylosyl residues 
XAX1: !transfers! hydroxycinnamic acid-modified arabinosyl substitutions 
xylan: !interacts with! lignin 
xylan: !cross-links to! other xylan chains 
ferulic acid: !modifies! 3-linked l-arabinosyl substitutions 
hydroxycinnamic acid-modified arabinosyl substitutions: !binds to! lignin monomers and dimers 
putative caffeoyl and oxalyl modifications: !reduced in! xax1