Genome wide analysis, expression pattern analysis, and functional characterization of RAV genes highlight their roles in roots, stem development and hormonal response. RAV (Related to ABI3 and VP1) gene family members have been involved in tissues/organs growth and hormone signaling in various plant species. Here, we identified 247 RAVs from 12 different species with 33 RAV genes from G. hirsutum. Phylogenetic analysis classified RAV genes into four distinct groups. Analysis of gene structure showed that most GhRAVs lack introns. Motif distribution pattern and protein sequence logos indicated that GhRAV genes were highly conserved during the process of evolution. Promotor cis-acting elements revealed that promotor regions of GhRAV genes encode numerous elements related to plant growth, abiotic stresses and phytohormones. Chromosomal location information showed uneven distribution of 33 GhRAV genes on different chromosomes. Collinearity analysis identified 628 and 52 orthologous/ paralogous gene pairs in G. hirsutum and G. barbadense, respectively. Ka/Ks values indicated that GhRAV and GbRAV genes underwent strong purifying selection pressure. Selecton model and codon model selection revealed that GhRAV amino acids were under purifying selection and adaptive evolution exists among GhRAV proteins. Three dimensional structure of GhRAVs indicated the presence of numerous alpha helix and beta-barrels. Expression level revealed that some GhRAV genes exhibited high expression in roots (GhRAV3, GhRAV4, GhRAV11, GhRAV18, GhRAV20 and GhRAV30) and stem (GhRAV3 and GhRAV18), indicating their potential role in roots and stem development. GhRAV genes can be regulated by phytohormonal stresses (BL, JA and IAA). Our study provides a reference for future studies related to the functional analysis of GhRAVs in cotton.

RAV gene family: !involved in! tissues/organs growth 
RAV gene family: !regulated by! phytohormonal stresses 
GhRAV genes: !localizes to! different chromosomes 
GhRAV genes: !undergo! purifying selection pressure 
GhRAV genes: !exhibit high expression in! roots and stem 
GhRAV proteins: !undergo! adaptive evolution