High plant density is considered a proficient approach to increase maize production in countries with limited agricultural land; however, this creates a high risk of stem lodging and kernel abortion by reducing the ratio of biomass to the development of the stem and ear. Stem lodging and kernel abortion are major constraints in maize yield production for high plant density cropping; therefore, it is very important to overcome stem lodging and kernel abortion in maize. In this review, we discuss various morphophysiological and genetic characteristics of maize that may reduce the risk of stem lodging and kernel abortion, with a focus on carbohydrate metabolism and partitioning in maize. These characteristics illustrate a strong relationship between stem lodging resistance and kernel abortion. Previous studies have focused on targeting lignin and cellulose accumulation to improve lodging resistance. Nonetheless, a critical analysis of the literature showed that considering sugar metabolism and examining its effects on lodging resistance and kernel abortion in maize may provide considerable results to improve maize productivity. A constructive summary of management approaches that could be used to efficiently control the effects of stem lodging and kernel abortion is also included. The preferred management choice is based on the genotype of maize; nevertheless, various genetic and physiological approaches can control stem lodging and kernel abortion. However, plant growth regulators and nutrient application can also help reduce the risk for stem lodging and kernel abortion in maize.

High plant density: !increases risk of! stem lodging and kernel abortion
Carbohydrate metabolism: !strongly relates to! stem lodging resistance and kernel abortion
Lignin and cellulose accumulation: !targeted to improve! lodging resistance
Sugar metabolism: !examined for effects on! lodging resistance and kernel abortion
Genotype: !preferred management choice for! controlling stem lodging and kernel abortion
Plant growth regulators: !can help reduce risk of! stem lodging and kernel abortion