Plants supply both food and medicinal compounds, which are ascribed to diverse metabolites produced by plants. However, studies on domestication-driven changes in the metabolome and genetic basis of bioactive molecules in perennial fruit trees are generally lacking. Here, we conducted multidimensional analyses revealing a singular domestication event involving the genomic and metabolomic selection of jujube trees (Ziziphus jujuba Mill.). The genomic selection for domesticated genes was highly enriched in metabolic pathways, including carbohydrates and specialized metabolism. Domesticated metabolome profiling indicated that 187 metabolites exhibited significant divergence as a result of directional selection. Malic acid was directly selected during domestication, and the simultaneous selection of specialized metabolites, including triterpenes, consequently lead to edible properties. Cyclopeptide alkaloids (CPAs) were specifically targeted for the divergence between dry and fresh cultivars. We identified 1080 significantly associated loci for 986 metabolites. Among them, 15 triterpenes were directly selected at six major loci, allowing the identification of a homologous cluster containing seven 2,3-oxidosqualene cyclases (OSCs). An OSC gene was found to contribute to the reduction in the content of triterpenes during domestication. The complete pathway for synthesizing ursolic acid was dissected by integration of the metabolome and transcriptome. Additionally, an N-methyltransferase involved in the biosynthesis of CPA and responsible for inter-cultivar content variation was identified. The present study promotes our understanding of the selection process of the global metabolome subsequent to fruit tree domestication and facilitates the genetic manipulation of specialized metabolites to enhance their edible traits.

genomic selection: !enriched in! metabolic pathways
domesticated metabolome profiling: !indicated divergence of! 187 metabolites
malic acid: !directly selected during! domestication
triterpenes: !simultaneously selected for! edible properties
CPAs: !specifically targeted for! divergence between dry and fresh cultivars
1080 loci: !significantly associated with! 986 metabolites
OSC gene: !contributed to reduction of! triterpenes
N-methyltransferase: !involved in biosynthesis of! CPA