The detection of spatial variability in field trials has great potential for accelerating plant breeding progress due to the possibility of better controlling non-genetic variation. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate a digital soil mapping approach and a high-density soil sampling procedure for identifying and adjusting spatial dependence in the early sugarcane breeding stage. Two experiments were conducted in regions with different soil classifications. High-density sampling of soil physical and chemical properties was performed in a regular grid to investigate the structure of spatial variability. Soil apparent electrical conductivity (ECa) was measured in both experimental areas with an EM38-MK2<sup>®</sup> sensor. In addition, principal component analysis (PCA) was employed to reduce the dimensionality of the physical and chemical soil data sets. After conducting the PCA and obtaining different thematic maps, we determined each experimental plot's exact position within the field. Tons of cane per hectare (TCH) data for each experiment were obtained and analyzed using mixed linear models. When environmental covariates were considered, a previous forward model selection step was applied to incorporate the variables. The PCA based on high-density soil sampling data captured part of the total variability in the data for Experimental Area 1 and was suggested to be an efficient index to be incorporated as a covariate in the statistical model, reducing the experimental error (residual variation coefficient, CVe). When incorporated into the different statistical models, the ECa information increased the selection accuracy of the experimental genotypes. Therefore, we demonstrate that the genetic parameter increased when both approaches (spatial analysis and environmental covariates) were employed.

soil: !captures! variability 
PCA: !reduces! dimensionality 
EM38-MK2<sup>®</sup>: !measures! ECa 
PCA: !incorporated as! covariate 
ECa: !increases! selection accuracy 
spatial analysis: !employed with! environmental covariates 
genetic parameter: !increased by! both approaches