R2R3-MYB is a class of transcription factor crucial in regulating secondary cell wall development during wood formation. The regulation of wood formation in gymnosperm has been understudied due to its large genome size. Using Single-Molecule Real-Time sequencing, we obtained full-length transcriptomic libraries from the developmental stem of Cunninghamia lanceolata, a perennial conifer known as Chinese fir. The R2R3-MYB of C. lanceolata (hereafter named as ClMYB) associated with secondary wall development were identified based on phylogenetic analysis, expression studies and functional study on transgenic line. The evolutionary relationship of 52 ClMYBs with those from Arabidopsis thaliana, Eucalyptus grandis, Populus trichocarpa, Oryza sativa, two gymnosperm species, Pinus taeda, and Picea glauca were established by neighbour-joining phylogenetic analysis. A large number of ClMYBs resided in the woody-expanded subgroups that predominated with the members from woody dicots. In contrast, the woody-preferential subgroup strictly carrying the members of woody dicots contained only one candidate. The results suggest that the woody-expanded subgroup emerges before the gymnosperm/angiosperm split, while most of the woody-preferential subgroups are likely lineage-specific to woody dicots. Nine candidates shared the same subgroups with the A. thaliana orthologs, with known function in regulating secondary wall development. Gene expression analysis inferred that ClMYB1/2/3/4/5/26/27/49/51 might participate in secondary wall development, among which ClMYB1/2/5/26/27/49 were significantly upregulated in the highly lignified compression wood region, reinforcing their regulatory role associated with secondary wall development. ClMYB1 was experimentally proven a transcriptional activator that localised in the nucleus. The overexpression of ClMYB1 in Nicotiana benthamiana resulted in an increased lignin deposition in the stems. The members of subgroup S4, ClMYB3/4/5 shared the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression motif with AtMYB4, which is known to repress the metabolism of phenylpropanoid derived compounds. They also carried a core motif specific to gymnosperm lineage, suggesting divergence of the regulatory process compared to the angiosperms. This work will enrich the collection of full-length gymnosperm-specific R2R3-MYBs related to stem development and contribute to understanding their evolutionary relationship with angiosperm species.

R2R3-MYB: !regulates! Secondary Cell Wall Development 
ClMYB: !evolved from! Woody Dicots 
ClMYB1/2/3/4/5/26/27/49/51: !participate in! Secondary Wall Development 
ClMYB1: !localizes to! Nucleus 
ClMYB1: !enhances! Lignin Deposition 
ClMYB3/4/5: !represses! Phenylpropanoid Metabolism 
ClMYB: !diverges from! Angiosperm Regulatory Process