Salt stress hinders plant growth and production around the world. Autophagy induced by salt stress helps plants improve their adaptability to salt stress. However, the underlying mechanism behind this adaptability remains unclear. To obtain deeper insight into this phenomenon, combined metabolomics and transcriptomics analyses were used to explore the coexpression of differentially expressed-metabolite (DEM) and gene (DEG) between control and salt-stressed wheat roots and leaves in the presence or absence of the added autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine (3-MA). The results indicated that 3-MA addition inhibited autophagy, increased ROS accumulation, damaged photosynthesis apparatus and impaired the tolerance of wheat seedlings to NaCl stress. A total of 14,759 DEGs and 554 DEMs in roots and leaves of wheat seedlings were induced by salt stress. DEGs were predominantly enriched in cellular amino acid catabolic process, response to external biotic stimulus, regulation of the response to salt stress, reactive oxygen species (ROS) biosynthetic process, regulation of response to osmotic stress, ect. The DEMs were mostly associated with amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, phenylalanine metabolism, carbapenem biosynthesis, and pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis. Further analysis identified some critical genes (gene involved in the oxidative stress response, gene encoding transcription factor (TF) and gene involved in the synthesis of metabolite such as alanine, asparagine, aspartate, glutamate, glutamine, 4-aminobutyric acid, abscisic acid, jasmonic acid, ect.) that potentially participated in a complex regulatory network in the wheat response to NaCl stress. The expression of the upregulated DEGs and DEMs were higher, and the expression of the down-regulated DEGs and DEMs was lower in 3-MA-treated plants under NaCl treatment. 3-MA enhanced the salt stress sensitivity of wheat seedlings by inhibiting the activity of the roots and leaves, inhibiting autophagy in the roots and leaves, increasing the content of both H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and O<sub>2</sub>•-, damaged photosynthesis apparatus and changing the transcriptome and metabolome of salt-stressed wheat seedlings.

Gene: !affects! Cellular amino acid catabolic process 
Gene: !affects! Response to external biotic stimulus 
Gene: !affects! Regulation of the response to salt stress 
Gene: !affects! ROS biosynthetic process 
Gene: !affects! Regulation of response to osmotic stress 
Gene: !affects! Oxidative stress response 
Gene: !encodes! Transcription factor 
Gene: !synthesizes! Alanine 
Gene: !synthesizes! Asparagine 
Gene: !synthesizes! Aspartate 
Gene: !synthesizes! Glutamate 
Gene: !synthesizes! Glutamine 
Gene: !synthesizes! 4-aminobutyric acid 
Gene: !synthesizes! Abscisic acid 
Gene: !synthesizes! Jasmonic acid 
Gene: !inhibits! Autophagy 
Gene: !increases! H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> content 
Gene: !increases! O