Doubled haploid technology has been widely applied to multiple plant species and is recognized as one of the most important technologies for improving crop breeding efficiency. Although mutations in MATRILINEAL/Zea mays PHOSPHOLIPASE A1/NOT LIKE DAD (MTL/ZmPLA1/NLD) and Zea mays DOMAIN OF UNKNOWN FUNCTION 679 MEMBRANE PROTEIN (ZmDMP) have been shown to generate haploids in maize, knowledge of the genetic basis of haploid induction (HI) remains incomplete. Therefore, cloning of new genes underlying HI is important for further elucidating its genetic architecture. Here, we found that loss-of-function mutations of Zea mays PHOSPHOLIPASE D3 (ZmPLD3), one of the members from the phospholipase D subfamily, could trigger maternal HI in maize. ZmPLD3 was identified through a reverse genetic strategy based on analysis of pollen-specifically expressed phospholipases, followed by validation through the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (CRISPR-Cas9) system. Mutations of ZmPLD3 resulted in a haploid induction rate (HIR) similar to that of mtl/zmpla1/nld and showed synergistic effects rather than functional redundancy on tripling the HIR (from 1.19% to 4.13%) in the presence of mtl/zmpla1/nld. RNA-seq profiling of mature pollen indicated that a large number of pollen-specific differentially expressed genes were enriched in processes related to gametogenesis development, such as pollen tube development and cell communication, during the double-fertilization process. In addition, ZmPLD3 is highly conserved among cereals, highlighting the potential application of these in vivo haploid-inducer lines for other important crop plant species. Collectively, our discovery identifies a novel gene underlying in vivo maternal HI and provides possibility of breeding haploid inducers with further improved HIR.

MTL/ZmPLA1/NLD: !triggers! maternal HI 
ZmPLD3: !triggers! maternal HI 
MTL/ZmPLA1/NLD: !synergizes with! ZmPLD3 
ZmPLD3: !enhances! HIR 
ZmPLD3: !enriches! gametogenesis development 
ZmPLD3: !highly conserved among! cereals