A mannitol stress treatment and a subsequent application of n-butanol, known as a microtubule-disrupting agent, enhance microspore embryogenesis (ME) induction and plant regeneration in bread wheat. To characterize changes in cortical (CMT) and endoplasmic (EMT) microtubules organization and dynamics, associated with ME induction treatments, immunocytochemistry studies complemented by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) were accomplished. This technique has allowed us to perform advanced 3- and 4D studies of MT architecture. The degree of MT fragmentation was examined by the relative fluorescence intensity quantification. In uni-nucleated mannitol-treated microspores, severe CMT and EMT fragmentation occurs, although a complex network of short EMT bundles protected the nucleus. Additional treatment with n-butanol resulted in further depolymerization of both CMT and EMT, simultaneously with the formation of MT aggregates in the perinuclear region. Some aggregates resembled a preprophase band. In addition, a portion of the microspores progressed to the first mitotic division during the treatments. Bi-nucleate pollen-like structures showed a high MT depolymerization after mannitol treatment and numerous EMT bundles around the vegetative and generative nuclei after n-butanol. Interestingly, bi-nucleate symmetric structures showed prominent stabilization of EMT. Fragmentation and stabilization of microtubules induced by mannitol- and n-butanol lead to new configurations essential for the induction of microspore embryogenesis in bread wheat. These results provide robust insight into MT dynamics during EM induction and open avenues to address newly targeted treatments to induce ME in recalcitrant species.

mannitol treatment: !enhances! microspore embryogenesis
n-butanol: !enhances! microspore embryogenesis
immunocytochemistry: !examines! microtubules organization and dynamics
confocal laser scanning microscopy: !examines! microtubules architecture
relative fluorescence intensity quantification: !examines! degree of MT fragmentation
mannitol treatment: !causes! CMT and EMT fragmentation
n-butanol: !causes! further depolymerization of CMT and EMT
n-butanol: !forms! MT aggregates in perinuclear region
mannitol treatment: !induces! first mitotic division
bi-nucleate pollen-like structures: !show! high MT depolymerization
bi-nucleate symmetric structures: !show! prominent stabilization of EMT
mannitol treatment: !fragments! microtubules
n-butanol: !stabilizes! microtubules