The essential role of auxin in plant growth and development is well known. Pathways related to auxin synthesis, transport and signaling have been extensively studied in recent years, and the PIN-FORMED (PIN) protein family has been identified as being pivotal for polar auxin transport and distribution. However, research focused on the functional characterization of PIN proteins in rice is still lacking. In this study, we investigated the expression and function of OsPIN1c and OsPIN1d in the japonica rice variety (Nipponbare) using gene knockout and high-throughput RNA sequencing analysis. The results showed that OsPIN1c and OsPIN1d were mainly expressed in young panicles and exhibited a redundant function. Furthermore, OsPIN1c or OsPIN1d loss-of-function mutants presented a mild phenotype compared with the wild type. However, in addition to significantly decreased plant height and tiller number, panicle development was severely disrupted in double-mutant lines of OsPIN1c and OsPIN1d. Severe defects included smaller inflorescence meristem and panicle sizes, fewer primary branches, elongated bract leaves, non-degraded hair and no spikelet growth. Interestingly, ospin1cd-3, a double-mutant line with functional retention of OsPIN1d, showed milder defects than those observed in other mutants. Additionally, several critical regulators of reproductive development, such as OsPID, LAX1, OsMADS1 and OsSPL14/IPA1, were differentially expressed in ospin1c-1 ospin1d-1, supporting the hypothesis that OsPIN1c and OsPIN1d are involved in regulating panicle development. Therefore, this study provides novel insights into the auxin pathways that regulate plant reproductive development in monocots.

OsPIN1c: !affects! panicle development
OsPIN1d: !affects! panicle development
OsPIN1c: !interacts with! OsPIN1d
OsPIN1c: !represses! plant height
OsPIN1d: !represses! tiller number
OsPID: !enhances! reproductive development
LAX1: !enhances! reproductive development
OsMADS1: !enhances! reproductive development
OsSPL14/IPA1: !enhances! reproductive development