Drought affects plant growth and development, causing severe yield losses, especially in cereal crops. The identification of genes involved in drought tolerance is crucial for the development of drought-tolerant crops. The aim of this study was to identify genes that are conserved key players for conferring drought tolerance in cereals. By comparing the transcriptomic changes between tolerant and susceptible genotypes in four Gramineae species, we identified 69 conserved drought tolerant-related (CDT) genes that are potentially involved in the drought tolerance of all of the analysed species. The CDT genes are principally involved in stress response, photosynthesis, chlorophyll biogenesis, secondary metabolism, jasmonic acid signalling, and cellular transport. Twenty CDT genes are not yet characterized and can be novel candidates for drought tolerance. The k-means clustering analysis of expression data highlighted the prominent roles of photosynthesis and leaf senescence-related mechanisms in differentiating the drought response between tolerant and sensitive genotypes. In addition, we identified specific transcription factors that could regulate the expression of photosynthesis and leaf senescence-related genes. Our analysis suggests that the balance between the induction of leaf senescence and maintenance of photosynthesis during drought plays a major role in tolerance. Fine-tuning of CDT gene expression modulation by specific transcription factors can be the key to improving drought tolerance in cereals.

Drought: !affects! Plant growth 
CDT genes: !involved in! Stress response 
CDT genes: !involved in! Photosynthesis 
CDT genes: !involved in! Chlorophyll biogenesis 
CDT genes: !involved in! Secondary metabolism 
CDT genes: !involved in! Jasmonic acid signalling 
CDT genes: !involved in! Cellular transport 
Photosynthesis: !differentiates! Drought response 
Transcription factors: !regulate! Photosynthesis 
Transcription factors: !regulate! Leaf senescence-related genes