In conjunction with big data analysis methods, plant omics technologies have provided scientists with cost-effective and promising tools for discovering genetic architectures of complex agronomic traits using large breeding populations. In recent years, there has been significant progress in plant phenomics and genomics approaches for generating reliable large datasets. However, selecting an appropriate data integration and analysis method to improve the efficiency of phenome-phenome and phenome-genome association studies is still a bottleneck. This study proposes a hyperspectral wide association study (HypWAS) approach as a phenome-phenome association analysis through a hierarchical data integration strategy to estimate the prediction power of hyperspectral reflectance bands in predicting soybean seed yield. Using HypWAS, five important hyperspectral reflectance bands in visible, red-edge, and near-infrared regions were identified significantly associated with seed yield. The phenome-genome association analysis of each tested hyperspectral reflectance band was performed using two conventional genome-wide association studies (GWAS) methods and a machine learning mediated GWAS based on the support vector regression (SVR) method. Using SVR-mediated GWAS, more relevant QTL with the physiological background of the tested hyperspectral reflectance bands were detected, supported by the functional annotation of candidate gene analyses. The results of this study have indicated the advantages of using hierarchical data integration strategy and advanced mathematical methods coupled with phenome-phenome and phenome-genome association analyses for a better understanding of the biology and genetic backgrounds of hyperspectral reflectance bands affecting soybean yield formation. The identified yield-related hyperspectral reflectance bands using HypWAS can be used as indirect selection criteria for selecting superior genotypes with improved yield genetic gains in large breeding populations.

HypWAS: !identifies! hyperspectral reflectance bands 
GWAS: !associates! hyperspectral reflectance bands 
SVR-mediated GWAS: !detects! QTL 
QTL: !annotates! candidate genes 
candidate genes: !affects! soybean yield formation