['34890456', 'Under anaerobic stress, Arabidopsis thaliana induces the expression of a  collection of core hypoxia genes that encode proteins for an adaptive response.  Among these genes is NIP2;1, which encodes a member of the "Nodulin 26-like  Intrinsic Protein" (NIP) subgroup of the aquaporin superfamily of membrane  channel proteins. NIP2;1 expression is limited to the "anoxia core" region of the  root stele under normal growth conditions, but shows substantial induction (up to  1,000-fold by 2-4 h of hypoxia) by low oxygen stress, and accumulation in all  root tissues. During hypoxia, NIP2;1-GFP accumulates predominantly on the plasma  membrane by 2 h, is distributed between the plasma and internal membranes during  sustained hypoxia, and remains elevated in root tissues through 4 h of  reoxygenation recovery. In response to hypoxia challenge, T-DNA insertion mutant  nip2;1 plants exhibit elevated lactic acid within root tissues, reduced efflux of  lactic acid, and reduced acidification of the external medium compared to  wild-type plants. Previous biochemical evidence demonstrates that NIP2;1 has  lactic acid channel activity, and our work supports the hypothesis that NIP2;1  prevents lactic acid toxicity by facilitating release of cellular lactic acid  from the cytosol to the apoplast, supporting eventual efflux to the rhizosphere.  In evidence, nip2;1 plants demonstrate poorer survival during argon-induced  hypoxia stress. Expressions of the ethanolic fermentation transcript Alcohol  Dehydrogenase1 and the core hypoxia-induced transcript Alanine Aminotransferase1  are elevated in nip2;1, and expression of the Glycolate Oxidase3 transcript is  reduced, suggesting NIP2;1 lactic acid efflux regulates other pyruvate and  lactate metabolism pathways.', '2021 Dec 4', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1093/plphys/kiab196', 'ORCID:']

NIP2;1: !encodes! protein 
NIP2;1: !accumulates on! plasma membrane 
NIP2;1: !facilitates release of! lactic acid 
NIP2;1: !regulates! pyruvate and lactate metabolism pathways 
nip2;1 plants: !exhibit! elevated lactic acid 
nip2;1 plants: !show poorer survival! during hypoxia stress