Plants cope with low phosphorus availability by adjusting growth and metabolism through transcriptomic and proteomic adaptations. We hypothesize that selected genotypes with distinct phosphorous (P) use efficiency covering the breeding history of European Flint heterotic pool provide a tool to reveal general and genotype-specific molecular responses to P limitation. We reconstructed protein and gene co-expression networks by weighted correlation network analysis and related these to phosphate deficiency-induced traits. In roots, low phosphate supply resulted in a decreasing abundance of proteins in the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway and a negative correlation with root and shoot phosphate content. We observed an increase in abundance and positive correlation with root and shoot phosphate content for proteins in sucrose biosynthesis, lipid metabolism, respiration and RNA processing. Purple acid phosphatases, superoxide dismutase and phenylalanine ammonia lyase were identified as being upregulated under low phosphate in all genotypes. Overall, correlations between protein and mRNA abundance changes were limited, with ribosomal proteins and the ubiquitin protein degradation pathway exclusively responding with protein abundance changes. Carbohydrate, phospho- and sulfo-lipid metabolism showed abundance changes at the protein and mRNA levels. These partially non-overlapping proteomic and transcriptomic adjustments to low phosphate suggest sugar and lipid metabolism as metabolic processes associated with improved P use efficiency specifically in Founder Flint lines. We identified a mitogen-activated protein kinase-kinase as a potential genotype-specific regulator of sucrose metabolism at low phosphate in Founder Flint line EP1. We conclude that, during breedingt of Elite Flint lines, regulation of primary metabolism has changed to result in a distinct low phosphate response in Founder lines.

Gene: !affects! Metabolism 
Gene: !localizes to! Root/Shoot Phosphate Content 
Gene: !interacts with! Purple Acid Phosphatases 
Gene: !enhances! Sucrose Biosynthesis 
Gene: !represses! Oxidative Pentose Phosphate Pathway 
Gene: !synthesizes! Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase-Kinase