Plant embryogenic cell culture allows mass propagation and genetic manipulation, but the mechanisms that determine the fate of these totipotent cells in somatic embryos have not yet been elucidated. Here, we performed label-free quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses to determine signaling events related to sugarcane somatic embryo differentiation, especially those related to protein phosphorylation. Embryogenic calli were compared at multiplication (EC0, dedifferentiated cells) and after 14 days of maturation (EC14, onset of embryo differentiation). Metabolic pathway analysis showed enriched lysine degradation and starch/sucrose metabolism proteins during multiplication, whereas the differentiation of somatic embryos was found to involve the enrichment of energy metabolism, including the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Multiplication-related phosphoproteins were associated with transcriptional regulation, including SNF1 kinase homolog 10 (KIN10), SEUSS (SEU), and LEUNIG_HOMOLOG (LUH). The regulation of multiple light harvesting complex photosystem II proteins and phytochrome interacting factor 3-LIKE 5 were predicted to promote bioenergetic metabolism and carbon fixation during the maturation stage. A motif analysis revealed 15 phosphorylation motifs. The [D-pS/T-x-D] motif was overrepresented during somatic embryo differentiation. A protein-protein network analysis predicted interactions among SNF1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2), abscisic acid-responsive element-binding factor 2 (ABF2), and KIN10, which indicated the role of these proteins in embryogenic competence. The predicted interactions between TOPLESS (TPL) and histone deacetylase 19 (HD19) may be involved in posttranslational protein regulation during somatic embryo differentiation. These results reveal the protein regulation dynamics of somatic embryogenesis and new players in somatic embryo differentiation, including their predicted phosphorylation motifs and phosphosites.

KIN10: !regulates! Transcriptional regulation
SEU: !regulates! Transcriptional regulation
LUH: !regulates! Transcriptional regulation
Light harvesting complex photosystem II proteins: !promote! Carbon fixation
phytochrome interacting factor 3-LIKE 5: !promote! Carbon fixation
SnRK2: !interacts with! ABF2
ABF2: !interacts with! KIN10
TPL: !interacts with! HD19