The plastid and nuclear genomes of parasitic plants exhibit deeply altered architectures,<sup>1-13</sup> whereas the few examined mitogenomes range from deeply altered to conventional.<sup>14-20</sup> To provide further insight on mitogenome evolution in parasitic plants, we report the highly modified mitogenome of Rhopalocnemis phalloides, a holoparasite in Balanophoraceae. Its mitogenome is uniquely arranged in 21 minicircular chromosomes that vary in size from 4,949 to 7,861 bp, with a total length of only 130,713 bp. All chromosomes share an identical 896 bp conserved region, with a large stem-loop that acts as the origin of replication, flanked on each side by hypervariable and semi-conserved regions. Similar minicircular structures with shared and unique regions have been observed in parasitic animals and free-living protists,<sup>21-24</sup> suggesting convergent structural evolution. Southern blots confirm both the minicircular structure and the replication origin of the mitochondrial chromosomes. PacBio reads provide evidence for chromosome recombination and rolling-circle replication for the R. phalloides mitogenome. Despite its small size, the mitogenome harbors a typical set of genes and introns within the unique regions of each chromosome, yet introns are the smallest among seed plants and ferns. The mitogenome also exhibits extreme heteroplasmy, predominantly involving short indels and more complex variants, many of which cause potential loss-of-function mutations for some gene copies. All heteroplasmic variants are transcribed, and functional and nonfunctional protein-coding variants are spliced and RNA edited. Our findings offer a unique perspective into how mitogenomes of parasitic plants can be deeply altered and shed light on plant mitogenome replication.

plastid/nuclear genome: !exhibit! altered architectures
mitogenome: !range from! deeply altered to conventional
minicircular chromosomes: !share! conserved region
Southern blots: !confirm! minicircular structure
PacBio reads: !provide evidence for! chromosome recombination
R. phalloides mitogenome: !harbors! typical set of genes
introns: !are! smallest among seed plants and ferns
heteroplasmy: !involves! short indels and complex variants
variants: !are! transcribed, spliced, and RNA edited