Proteins are the workforce of the cell and their phosphorylation status tailors specific responses efficiently. One of the main challenges of phosphoproteomic approaches is to deconvolute biological processes that specifically respond to an experimental query from a list of phosphoproteins. Comparison of the frequency distribution of GO (Gene Ontology) terms in a given phosphoproteome set with that observed in the genome reference set (GenRS) is the most widely used tool to infer biological significance. Yet, this comparison assumes that GO term distribution between the phosphoproteome and the genome are identical. However, this hypothesis has not been tested due to the lack of a comprehensive phosphoproteome database. In this study, we test this hypothesis by constructing three phosphoproteome databases in Arabidopsis thaliana: one based in experimental data (ExpRS), another based in in silico phosphorylation protein prediction (PredRS) and a third that is the union of both (UnRS). Our results show that the three phosphoproteome reference sets show default enrichment of several GO terms compared to GenRS, indicating that GO term distribution in the phosphoproteomes does not match that of the genome. Moreover, these differences overshadow the identification of GO terms that are specifically enriched in a particular condition. To overcome this limitation, we present an additional comparison of the sample of interest with UnRS to uncover GO terms specifically enriched in a particular phosphoproteome experiment. Using this strategy, we found that mRNA splicing and cytoplasmic microtubule compounds are important processes specifically enriched in the phosphoproteome of dark-grown Arabidopsis seedlings. This study provides a novel strategy to uncover GO specific terms in phosphoproteome data of Arabidopsis that could be applied to any other organism. We also highlight the importance of specific phosphorylation pathways that take place during dark-grown Arabidopsis development.

Proteins: !phosphorylate! Responses 
GO terms: !enrich! Phosphoproteomes 
Phosphoproteome: !differ from! GenRS 
ExpRS: !compared to! PredRS 
UnRS: !compared to! Sample of Interest 
Splicing/Microtubules: !specifically enriched in! Dark-Grown Arabidopsis