The first step toward marker-assisted selection is linking the phenotypes to molecular markers through quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis. While the process is straightforward in self-pollinating diploid (2x) species, QTL analysis in polyploids requires unconventional methods. In this study, we have identified markers associated with weevil <i>Cosmopolites sordidus</i> (Germar) resistance in bananas using 138 triploid (2n = 3x) hybrids derived from a cross between a tetraploid "Monyet" (2n = 4x) and a 2x "Kokopo" (2n = 2x) banana genotypes. The population was genotyped by Diversity Arrays Technology Sequencing (DArTSeq), resulting in 18,009 polymorphic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between the two parents. Marker-trait association was carried out by continuous mapping where the adjusted trait means for the corm peripheral damage (PD) and total cross-section damage (TXD), both on the logit scale, were regressed on the marker allele frequencies. Forty-four SNPs that were associated with corm PD were identified on the chromosomes 5, 6, and 8, with 41 of them located on chromosome 6 and segregated in "Kokopo." Eleven SNPs associated with corm total TXD were identified on chromosome 6 and segregated in "Monyet." The additive effect of replacing one reference allele with the alternative allele was determined at each marker position. The PD QTL was confirmed using conventional QTL linkage analysis in the simplex markers segregating in "Kokopo" (AAAA × RA). We also identified 43 putative genes in the vicinity of the markers significantly associated with the two traits. The identified loci associated with resistance to weevil damage will be used in the efforts of developing molecular tools for marker-assisted breeding in bananas.

QTL: !links! phenotypes 
DArTSeq: !identifies! SNPs 
SNPs: !associated with! corm PD 
SNPs: !associated with! corm TXD 
reference allele: !replaced by! alternative allele 
simplex markers: !used in! QTL linkage analysis 
markers: !locate! putative genes