The communication between chloroplasts and mitochondria, which depends on the inter-organellar exchange of carbon skeletons, energy, and reducing equivalents, is essential for maintaining efficient respiratory metabolism and photosynthesis. We devised a multi-transgene approach to manipulate the leaf energy and redox balance in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) while monitoring the in vivo cytosolic redox status of NAD(H) using the biosensor c-Peredox-mCherry. Our strategy involved altering the shuttling capacity of the chloroplast by (1) increasing the chloroplast malate valve capacity by overexpression of the chloroplast malate valve transporter pOMT from Arabidopsis (AtpOMT1) while (2) reducing the activity of the chloroplast triose-phosphate/3-phosphoglycerate shuttle by knocking down the cytosolic NAD-dependent glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (NtGAPC). This was accompanied by (3) alterations to the export of reducing equivalents in the mitochondria by knocking down the mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase (NtmMDH) and (4) an increased expression of the mitochondrial fission regulator FIS1A from Arabidopsis (AtFIS1A). The multi-transgene tobacco plants were analysed in glasshouse conditions and showed significant increases in the cytosolic NADH:NAD<sup>+</sup> in the dark when transcript levels for NtGAPC or NtmMDH were knocked down. In addition, principal component analysis and Spearman correlation analyses showed negative correlations between average transcript levels for the gene targets and parameters related to chlorophyll fluorescence and plant growth. Our results highlight the importance of the shuttling of energy and reducing equivalents from chloroplasts and mitochondria to support photosynthesis and growth and suggest an important role for the dual 2-oxoglutarate/malate and oxaloacetate/malate transporter (pOMT).

pOMT: !increases! chloroplast malate valve capacity
NtGAPC: !knocked down! to reduce chloroplast triose-phosphate/3-phosphoglycerate shuttle
NtmMDH: !knocked down! to alter export of reducing equivalents in mitochondria
AtFIS1A: !overexpressed! to increase mitochondrial fission regulator
NAD(H): !monitored! using biosensor c-Peredox-mCherry
NADH:NAD<sup>+</sup>: !increased! in dark when NtGAPC or NtmMDH transcript levels knocked down
Chlorophyll fluorescence: !negatively correlated! with average transcript levels for gene targets
Plant growth: !negatively correlated! with average transcript levels for gene targets