Parastagonospora nodorum is one of the important necrotrophic pathogens of wheat which causes severe economical loss to crop yield. So far, a number of effectors of Parastagonospora nodorum origin and their target interacting genes on the host plant have been characterized. Since targeting effector-sensitive gene carefully can be helpful in breeding for resistance. Therefore, constant efforts are required to further characterize the effectors, their interacting genes, and underlying biochemical pathways. Furthermore, to develop effective counter-strategies against emerging diseases, continuous efforts are required to determine the qualitative resistance that demands to screen of diverse genotypes for host resistance. Stagonospora nodorum blotch also refers to as Stagonospora glume blotch and leaf is caused by Parastagonospora nodorum. The pathogen deploys necrotrophic effectors for the establishment and development on wheat plants. The necrotrophic effectors and their interaction with host receptors lead to the establishment of infection on leaves and extensive lesions formation which either results in host cell death or suppression/activation of host defence mechanisms. The wheat Stagonospora nodorum interaction involves a set of nine host gene-necrotrophic effector interactions. Out of these, Snn1-SnTox1, Tsn1-SnToxA and Snn-SnTox3 are one of the most studied interaction, due to its role in the suppression of reactive oxygen species production, regulating the cytokinin content through ethylene-dependent wayduring initial infection stage. Further, although the molecular basis is not fully unveiled, these effectors regulate the redox state and influence the ethylene biosynthesis in infected wheat plants. Here, we have discussed the biology of the wheat pathogen Parastagonospora nodorum, role of its necrotrophic effectors and their interacting sensitivity genes on the redox state, how they hijack the resistance mechanisms, hormonal regulated immunity and other signalling pathways in susceptible wheat plants. The information generated from effectors and their corresponding sensitivity genes and other biological processes could be utilized effectively for disease management strategies.

Parastagonospora nodorum: !causes! Stagonospora nodorum blotch 
necrotrophic effectors: !deployed by! Parastagonospora nodorum 
Snn1-SnTox1: !interacts with! Tsn1-SnToxA 
Snn-SnTox3: !interacts with! Tsn1-SnToxA 
necrotrophic effectors: !regulate! redox state 
necrotrophic effectors: !influence! ethylene biosynthesis 
effectors: !hijack! resistance mechanisms 
effectors: !regulate! hormonal regulated immunity