Phytophthora root rot, caused by Phytophthora capsici, is a major disease affecting Capsicum production worldwide. A recombinant inbred line (RIL) population derived from the hybridization between 'Criollo de Morellos-334' (CM-334), a resistant landrace from Mexico, and 'Early Jalapeno', a susceptible cultivar was genotyped using genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS)-derived single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers. A GBS-SNP based genetic linkage map for the RIL population was constructed. Quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping dissected the genetic architecture of P. capsici resistance and candidate genes linked to resistance for this important disease were identified. Development of a genetic linkage map using 1,973 GBS-derived polymorphic SNP markers identified 12 linkage groups corresponding to the 12 chromosomes of chile pepper, with a total length of 1,277.7 cM and a marker density of 1.5 SNP/cM. The maximum gaps between consecutive SNP markers ranged between 1.9 (LG7) and 13.5 cM (LG5). Collinearity between genetic and physical positions of markers reached a maximum of 0.92 for LG8. QTL mapping identified genomic regions associated with P. capsici resistance in chromosomes P5, P8, and P9 that explained between 19.7 and 30.4% of phenotypic variation for resistance. Additive interactions between QTL in chromosomes P5 and P8 were observed. The role of chromosome P5 as major genomic region containing P. capsici resistance QTL was established. Through candidate gene analysis, biological functions associated with response to pathogen infections, regulation of cyclin-dependent protein serine/threonine kinase activity, and epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation were identified. Results support the genetic complexity of the P. capsici-Capsicum pathosystem and the possible role of epigenetics in conferring resistance to Phytophthora root rot. Significant genomic regions and candidate genes associated with disease response and gene regulatory activity were identified which allows for a deeper understanding of the genomic landscape of Phytophthora root rot resistance in chile pepper.

GBS-SNP: !constructs! Genetic Linkage Map
QTL: !maps! Genomic Regions
Chromosome P5: !contains! Resistance QTL
Candidate Gene Analysis: !identifies! Biological Functions 
Pathogen Infections: !regulates! Cyclin-dependent Protein Serine/Threonine Kinase Activity
DNA Methylation: !enhances! Resistance to Phytophthora Root Rot