The biogeographic characteristics of soil microbial biomass stoichiometry homeostasis and also its mechanisms are commonly thought to be key factors for the survival strategies and resource utilization of soil microbes under extreme habitat. In this work, we conducted a 5,000-km transect filed survey in alpine grassland across Qinghai-Tibet Plateau in 2015 to measure soil microbial biomass carbon (MBC) and nitrogen (MBN) across alpine steppe and meadow. Based on the differences of climate and soil conditions between alpine steppe and meadow, the variation coefficient was calculated to investigate the homeostatic degree of MBC to MBN. Furthermore, the "trade-off" model was utilized to deeply distinguish the homeostasis degree of MBC/MBN between alpine steppe and meadow, and the regression analysis was used to explore the variability of trade-off in response to environmental factors in the alpine grassland. The results showed that the coefficient of variation (CV) of MBC/MBN in alpine meadow (CV = 0.4) was lower than alpine steppe (CV = 0.7). According to the trade-off model, microbial turnover activity of soil N relative to soil C increased rapidly and then decreased slightly with soil organic carbon (SOC), soil total nitrogen (STN), and soil water content across alpine meadow. Nevertheless, in alpine steppe, SOC/STN had a positive effect on microbial turnover of soil N. These results suggested that water, heat, and soil nutrients availability were the key factors affecting the C:N stoichiometry homeostasis of soil microbial biomass in Qinghai-Tibet Plateau (QTP)'s alpine grassland. Since the difference of survival strategy of the trade-off demands between soil C and N resulting in different patterns and mechanism, the stoichiometry homeostasis of soil microbial biomass was more stable in alpine meadow than in alpine steppe.

soil: !affects! microbial biomass stoichiometry homeostasis 
climate: !influences! microbial turnover activity 
SOC/STN: !affects! microbial turnover of soil N 
water: !influences! C:N stoichiometry homeostasis 
heat: !influences! C:N stoichiometry homeostasis 
soil nutrients: !influences! C:N stoichiometry homeostasis 
alpine meadow: !more stable than! alpine steppe