Already a short-term Cd treatment induces changes in gene expression in barley root tips via IAA and ROS signaling during mild and severe Cd stress, respectively. Even a short, 30 min, Cd treatment of roots induced a considerable alteration in gene expression in the barley root tips within an hour after the treatments. The very early activation of MYB1 transcription factor expression is partially regulated by auxin signaling in mildly stressed seedlings. An increase in allene oxide cyclase and NADPH oxidase expression was a distinguishing feature of root tips response to mild Cd stress and their expression is activated via IAA signaling. Meanwhile, early changes in the level of dehydrin transcripts were detected in moderately and severely stressed root tips, and their induction is related to altered ROS homeostasis in cells. The early activation of glutathione peroxidase expression by mild Cd stress indicates the involvement of IAA in the signaling process. In contrast, early ascorbate peroxidase expression was induced only with Cd treatment causing severe stress and ROS play central roles in its induction. The expression of cysteine protease was activated similarly in both mildly and severely Cd-stressed roots; consequently, both increased IAA and ROS levels take part in the regulation of cysteine protease expression. The Cd-evoked accumulation of BAX Inhibitor-1 mRNA was characteristic for moderately and severely stressed roots. Whereas decreased IAA level did not affect its expression, rotenone-mediated ROS depletion markedly reduced the Cd-induced expression of BAX Inhibitor-1. An early increase of alternative oxidase levels in the root tip cells indicated that the reduction of mitochondrial superoxide generation is an important component of barley root response to severe Cd stress.

MYB1: !regulated by! auxin signaling 
allene oxide cyclase/NADPH oxidase: !activated via! IAA signaling 
dehydrin transcripts: !induced by! altered ROS homeostasis 
glutathione peroxidase: !involvement of! IAA 
ascorbate peroxidase: !induced by! ROS 
cysteine protease: !regulated by! increased IAA/ROS 
BAX Inhibitor-1: !reduced by! rotenone-mediated ROS depletion 
alternative oxidase: !increased by! severe Cd stress