Low temperature (LT) is an important factor limiting plant growth and distribution. Plants have evolved sophisticated adaptive mechanisms to cope with hypothermia. RNA silencing is the orchestrator of these cellular responses. RNA silencing, which modifies gene expression through noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), is a strategy used by plants to combat environmental stress. ncRNAs, which have very little protein-coding capacity, work by binding reverse complementary endogenous transcripts. In plants, ncRNAs include small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs), medium-sized non-coding RNAs (mncRNAs), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). Apart from describing the biogenesis of different ncRNAs (miRNAs, siRNAs, and lncRNAs), we thoroughly discuss the functions of these ncRNAs during cold acclimation. Two major classes of sncRNAs, microRNAs and siRNAs, play essential regulatory roles in cold response processes through the posttranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS) pathway or transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) pathway. Microarray or transcriptome sequencing analysis can reveal a large number of cold-responsive miRNAs in plants. In this review, the cold-response patterns of miRNAs verified by Northern blotting or quantitative PCR in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, rice, and many other important crops are discussed. The detailed molecular mechanisms of several miRNAs in <i>Arabidopsis</i> (miR397, miR408, miR402, and miR394) and rice (Osa-miR156, Osa-miR319, and Osa-miR528) that regulate plant cold resistance are elucidated. In addition, the regulatory mechanism of the lncRNA SVALKA in the cold signaling pathway is explained in detail. Finally, we present the challenges for understanding the roles of small ncRNAs in cold signal transduction.

ncRNA: !modifies! gene expression
sncRNA: !plays role in! PTGS/TGS pathway
miRNA: !regulates! cold response
miR397/408/402/394: !regulate! plant cold resistance
Osa-miR156/319/528: !regulate! plant cold resistance
lncRNA SVALKA: !regulates! cold signaling pathway