Novel crop improvement approaches, including those that facilitate for the exploitation of crop wild relatives and underutilized species harboring the much-needed natural allelic variation are indispensable if we are to develop climate-smart crops with enhanced abiotic and biotic stress tolerance, higher nutritive value, and superior traits of agronomic importance. Top among these approaches are the "omics" technologies, including genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, phenomics, and their integration, whose deployment has been vital in revealing several key genes, proteins and metabolic pathways underlying numerous traits of agronomic importance, and aiding marker-assisted breeding in major crop species. Here, citing several relevant examples, we appraise our understanding on the recent developments in omics technologies and how they are driving our quest to breed climate resilient crops. Large-scale genome resequencing, pan-genomes and genome-wide association studies are aiding the identification and analysis of species-level genome variations, whilst RNA-sequencing driven transcriptomics has provided unprecedented opportunities for conducting crop abiotic and biotic stress response studies. Meanwhile, single cell transcriptomics is slowly becoming an indispensable tool for decoding cell-specific stress responses, although several technical and experimental design challenges still need to be resolved. Additionally, the refinement of the conventional techniques and advent of modern, high-resolution proteomics technologies necessitated a gradual shift from the general descriptive studies of plant protein abundances to large scale analysis of protein-metabolite interactions. Especially, metabolomics is currently receiving special attention, owing to the role metabolites play as metabolic intermediates and close links to the phenotypic expression. Further, high throughput phenomics applications are driving the targeting of new research domains such as root system architecture analysis, and exploration of plant root-associated microbes for improved crop health and climate resilience. Overall, coupling these multi-omics technologies to modern plant breeding and genetic engineering methods ensures an all-encompassing approach to developing nutritionally-rich and climate-smart crops whose productivity can sustainably and sufficiently meet the current and future food, nutrition and energy demands.

genome-wide association studies: !identify and analyze! species-level genome variations
RNA-sequencing: !drives! transcriptomics
single cell transcriptomics: !decodes! cell-specific stress responses
conventional techniques: !refined by! modern, high-resolution proteomics technologies
proteomics: !analyzes! protein-metabolite interactions
metabolomics: !plays role in! metabolic intermediates
phenomics: !explores! plant root-associated microbes
multi-omics technologies: !coupled to! modern plant breeding and genetic engineering methods