GL2-interacting-repressor (GIR) family members may contribute to fiber/fuzz formation via a newly discovered unique pathway in Gossypium arboreum. There are similarities between cotton fiber development and the formation of trichomes and root hairs. The GL2-interacting-repressors (GIRs) are crucial regulators of root hair and trichome formation. The GaFzl gene, annotated as GaGIR1, is negatively associated with trichome development and fuzz initiation. However, there is relatively little available information regarding the other GIR genes in cotton, especially regarding their effects on cotton fiber development. In this study, 21 GIR family genes were identified in the diploid cotton species Gossypium arboreum; these genes were divided into three groups. The GIR genes were characterized in terms of their phylogenetic relationships, structures, chromosomal distribution and evolutionary dynamics. These GIR genes were revealed to be unequally distributed on 12 chromosomes in the diploid cotton genome, with no GIR gene detected on Ga06. The cis-acting elements in the promoter regions were predicted to be responsive to light, phytohormones, defense activities and stress. The transcriptomic data and qRT-PCR results revealed that most GIR genes were not differentially expressed between the wild-type control and the fuzzless mutant line. Moreover, 14 of 21 family genes were expressed at high levels, indicating these genes may play important roles during fiber development and fuzz formation. Furthermore, Ga01G0231 was predominantly expressed in root samples, suggestive of a role in root hair formation rather than in fuzz initiation and development. The results of this study have enhanced our understanding of the GIR genes and their potential utility for improving cotton fiber through breeding.

GL2-interacting-repressor (GIR): !contributes to! fiber/fuzz formation
GaFzl gene: !negatively associated with! trichome development
GIR family genes: !unequally distributed on! 12 chromosomes
GIR genes: !responsive to! light, phytohormones, defense activities and stress
GIR genes: !expressed at high levels! during fiber development
Ga01G0231: !predominantly expressed in! root samples