Phytoplasmas are bacterial pathogens that live mainly in the phloem of their plant hosts. They dramatically manipulate plant development by secreting effector proteins that target developmental proteins of their hosts. Traditionally, the effects of individual effector proteins have been studied by ectopic overexpression using strong, ubiquitously active promoters in transgenic model plants. However, the impact of phytoplasma infection on the host plants depends on the intensity and timing of infection with respect to the developmental stage of the host. To facilitate investigations addressing the timing of effector protein activity, we have established chemical-inducible expression systems for the three most well-characterized phytoplasma effector proteins, SECRETED ASTER YELLOWS WITCHES' BROOM PROTEIN 11 (SAP11), SAP54 and TENGU in transgenic <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. We induced gene expression either continuously, or at germination stage, seedling stage, or flowering stage. mRNA expression was determined by quantitative reverse transcription PCR, protein accumulation by confocal laser scanning microscopy of GFP fusion proteins. Our data reveal tight regulation of effector gene expression and strong upregulation after induction. Phenotypic analyses showed differences in disease phenotypes depending on the timing of induction. Comparative phenotype analysis revealed so far unreported similarities in disease phenotypes, with all three effector proteins interfering with flower development and shoot branching, indicating a surprising functional redundancy of SAP54, SAP11 and TENGU. However, subtle but mechanistically important differences were also observed, especially affecting the branching pattern of the plants.

SAP11: !affects! Flower development 
SAP54: !affects! Shoot branching 
TENGU: !affects! Branching pattern 
Phytoplasmas: !secrete! Effector proteins 
Effector proteins: !target! Developmental proteins 
Transgenic plants: !overexpress! Effector proteins 
Chemical-inducible expression systems: !regulate! Effector gene expression 
Induction: !upregulates! Effector gene expression 
Phenotypic analyses: !reveal! Disease phenotypes