Leaf senescence is an active developmental process that is tightly regulated through extensive transcriptional and metabolic reprogramming events, which underlie controlled degradation and relocation of nutrients from aged or metabolically inactive leaves to young organs. The onset of leaf senescence is coordinately modulated by intrinsic aging programs and environmental conditions, such as prolonged darkness and temperature extremes. Seedlings growing under light deprivation, as often experienced in severe shading or night darkening, exhibit an accelerated senescing process, which is mediated by a complex signaling network that includes sugar starvation responses and light signaling events via the phytochrome B (phyB)-PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR (PIF) signaling routes. Notably, recent studies indicate that nonstressful ambient temperatures profoundly influence the onset and progression of leaf senescence in darkness, presumably mediated by the phyB-PIF4 signaling pathways. However, it is not fully understood how temperature signals regulate leaf senescence at the molecular level. Here, we demonstrated that low ambient temperatures repress the nuclear export of phyB and the nuclear phyB suppresses the transcriptional activation activity of ethylene signaling mediator ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3), thus delaying leaf senescence. Accordingly, leaf senescence was insensitive to low ambient temperatures in transgenic plants overexpressing a constitutively nuclear phyB form, as observed in ein3 eil1 mutants. In contrast, leaf senescence was significantly promoted in phyB-deficient mutants under identical temperature conditions. Our data indicate that phyB coordinately integrates light and temperature cues into the EIN3-mediated ethylene signaling pathway that regulates leaf senescence under light deprivation, which would enhance plant fitness under fluctuating natural environments.

phyB: !integrates! light and temperature cues 
EIN3: !mediates! ethylene signaling pathway 
phyB: !represses! EIN3 transcriptional activation activity 
phyB: !suppresses! nuclear export 
low ambient temperatures: !delay! leaf senescence 
ein3 eil1 mutants: !insensitive to! low ambient temperatures 
phyB-deficient mutants: !promote! leaf senescence