Nitrogen (N) is one of the most crucial elements for plant growth and development. However, little is known about the metabolic regulation of trees under conditions of N deficiency. In this investigation, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) was used to determine global changes in metabolites and regulatory pathways in <i>Populus tomentosa</i>. Thirty metabolites were found to be changed significantly under conditions of low-N stress. N deficiency resulted in increased levels of carbohydrates and decreases in amino acids and some alcohols, as well as some secondary metabolites. Furthermore, an RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) analysis was performed to characterize the transcriptomic profiles, and 1,662 differentially expressed genes were identified in <i>P. tomentosa</i>. Intriguingly, four pathways related to carbohydrate metabolism were enriched. Genes involved in the gibberellic acid and indole-3-acetic acid pathways were found to be responsive to low-N stress, and the contents of hormones were then validated by high-performance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS). Coordinated metabolomics and transcriptomics analysis revealed a pattern of co-expression of five pairs of metabolites and unigenes. Overall, our investigation showed that metabolism directly related to N deficiency was depressed, while some components of energy metabolism were increased. These observations provided insights into the metabolic and molecular mechanisms underlying the interactions of N and carbon in poplar.

N: !affects! Metabolism 
Metabolites: !changed significantly under! N deficiency 
RNA-Seq: !identifies! 1,662 differentially expressed genes 
Carbohydrate metabolism: !enriched by! N deficiency 
Gibberellic acid pathway: !responsive to! Low-N stress 
Indole-3-acetic acid pathway: !responsive to! Low-N stress 
HPLC-ESI-MS/MS: !validates! Hormone contents 
Metabolomics: !reveals! Co-expression of metabolites and unigenes 
Energy metabolism: !increased by! N deficiency