Phosphorus content and root zone temperature are two major environmental factors affecting maize growth. Both low phosphorus and root zone high temperature stress significantly affect the growth of maize, but the comprehensive effects of phosphorus deficiency and root zone warming are less studied. This study aimed to explore the effects of phosphorus deficiency and root zone warming on the root absorption capacity, total phosphorus content, and photosynthetic fluorescence parameters of maize seedlings. The results showed that maize shoots and roots had different responses to root zone warming and phosphorus deficiency. Properly increasing the root zone temperature was beneficial to the growth of maize seedlings, but when the root zone temperature was too high, it significantly affected the root and shoot development of maize seedlings. The root zone warming had a more significant impact on the root system, while phosphorus deficiency had a greater impact on the shoots. Phosphorus content and root zone warming had a strong interaction. Under the comprehensive influence of normal phosphorus supply and medium temperature in the root zone, the growth of maize seedlings was the best. Under the combined effects of low phosphorus and high temperature in the root zone, the growth was the worst. Compared with the combination of normal phosphorus and root zone medium temperature treatment, the dry mass of the low-phosphorus root zone high temperature treatment was decreased by 55.80%. Under the condition of low-phosphorus too high root zone temperature reduced root vitality, plant phosphorus content, which in turn affected plant growth and light energy utilization efficiency. In the case of sufficient phosphate fertilizer supply, appropriately increasing the soil temperature in the root zone is beneficial to increase the absorption and utilization of phosphorus by plants and promote the growth and development of maize seedlings.

Phosphorus: !affects! Maize growth
Root zone temperature: !affects! Maize growth
Root zone temperature: !enhances! Maize seedling growth
Root zone temperature: !represses! Root and shoot development of maize seedlings
Phosphorus deficiency: !affects! Shoots
Root zone temperature: !affects! Root system
Phosphorus content: !interacts with! Root zone warming
Normal phosphorus supply: !promotes! Growth of maize seedlings
Low phosphorus: !combined with! High temperature in root zone: !reduces! Dry mass by 55.80%
Low-phosphorus: !reduces! Root vitality, plant phosphorus content
Sufficient phosphate fertilizer supply: !enhances! Absorption and utilization of phosphorus by plants