To identify the regulatory network of known and novel microRNAs (miRNAs) and their targets responding to salt stress, a combined analysis of mRNA libraries, small RNA libraries, and degradome libraries were performed. In this study, we used unique molecular identifiers (UMIs), which are more sensitive, accurate, and reproducible than traditional methods of sequencing, to quantify the number of molecules and correct for amplification bias. We identified a total of 312 cotton miRNAs using seedlings at 0, 1, 3, and 6 h after NaCl treatment, including 80 known ghr-miRNAs and 232 novel miRNAs and found 155 miRNAs that displayed significant differential expression under salt stress. Among them, fifty-nine differentially expressed miRNAs were simultaneously induced in two or three tissues, while 66, 11, and 19 were specifically expressed in the roots, leaves, and stems, respectively. It is indicated there were different populations of miRNAs against salt stress in roots, leaves and stems. 399 candidate targets of salt-induced miRNAs showed significant differential expression before and after salt treatment, and 72 targets of 25 miRNAs were verified by degradome sequencing data. Furthermore, the regulatory relationship of miRNA-target gene was validated experimentally via 5'RLM-RACE, proving our data reliability. Gene ontology and KEGG pathway analysis found that salt-responsive miRNA targets among the differentially expressed genes were significantly enriched, and mainly involved in response to the stimulus process and the plant hormone signal transduction pathway. Furthermore, the expression levels of newly identified miRNA mir1 and known miRNAs miR390 and miR393 gradually decreased when subjected to continuous salt stress, while overexpression of these miRNAs both increased sensitivity to salt stress. Those newly identified miRNAs and mRNA pairs were conducive to genetic engineering and better understanding the mechanisms responding to salt stress in cotton.

miRNA: !responds to! salt stress
miRNA: !induces! target gene
miRNA: !regulates! response to stimulus process
miRNA: !regulates! plant hormone signal transduction pathway
miRNA: !increases! sensitivity to salt stress