Post-transcriptional gene silencing of the chalcone synthase gene CHS specifically suppresses anthocyanin biosynthesis in corolla lobes and is responsible for the formation of a stripe type bicolor in Japanese gentian. The flower of Japanese gentian is a bell-shaped corolla composed of lobes and plicae, which is painted uniformly blue. However, the gentian cultivar 'Hakuju' shows bicolor phenotype (blue-white stripe corolla), in which anthocyanin accumulation is suppressed only in corolla lobes. Expression analysis indicated that steady-state levels of chalcone synthase (CHS) transcripts were remarkably reduced in corolla lobes compared with plicae during petal pigmentation initiation. However, no significant difference in expression levels of other flavonoid biosynthetic structural and regulatory genes was detected in its lobes and plicae. On feeding naringenin in white lobes, anthocyanin accumulation was recovered. Northern blotting probed with CHS confirmed the abundant accumulation of small RNAs in corolla lobes. Likewise, small RNA-seq analysis indicated that short reads from its lobes were predominantly mapped onto the 2nd exon region of the CHS gene, whereas those from the plicae were scarcely mapped. Subsequent infection with the gentian ovary ringspot virus (GORV), which had an RNA-silencing activity, showed the recovery of partial pigmentation in lobes. Hence, these results strongly suggested that suppressing anthocyanin accumulation in the lobes of bicolored 'Hakuju' was attributed to the specific degradation of CHS mRNA in corolla lobes, which was through post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS). Herein, we revealed the molecular mechanism of strip bicolor formation in Japanese gentian, and showed that PTGS of CHS was also responsible for flower color pattern in a floricultural plant other than petunia and dahlia.

CHS: !suppresses! anthocyanin biosynthesis 
CHS: !degraded by! PTGS 
PTGS: !responsible for! strip bicolor formation 
naringenin: !recovers! anthocyanin accumulation 
GORV: !induces! partial pigmentation