An overview is presented of recent advances in our knowledge of candidate proteins that regulate various physiological and biochemical processes underpinning plant adaptation to saline conditions. Salt stress is one of the environmental constraints that restrict plant distribution, growth and yield in many parts of the world. Increased world population surely elevates food demands all over the globe, which anticipates to add a great challenge to humanity. These concerns have necessitated the scientists to understand and unmask the puzzle of plant salt tolerance mechanisms in order to utilize various strategies to develop salt tolerant crop plants. Salt tolerance is a complex trait involving alterations in physiological, biochemical, and molecular processes. These alterations are a result of genomic and proteomic complement readjustments that lead to tolerance mechanisms. Proteomics is a crucial molecular tool that indicates proteins expressed by the genome, and also identifies the functions of proteins accumulated in response to salt stress. Recently, proteomic studies have shed more light on a range of promising candidate proteins that regulate various processes rendering salt tolerance to plants. These proteins have been shown to be involved in photosynthesis and energy metabolism, ion homeostasis, gene transcription and protein biosynthesis, compatible solute production, hormone modulation, cell wall structure modification, cellular detoxification, membrane stabilization, and signal transduction. These candidate salt responsive proteins can be therefore used in biotechnological approaches to improve tolerance of crop plants to salt conditions. In this review, we provided comprehensive updated information on the proteomic data of plants/genotypes contrasting in salt tolerance in response to salt stress. The roles of salt responsive proteins that are potential determinants for plant salt adaptation are discussed. The relationship between changes in proteome composition and abundance, and alterations observed in physiological and biochemical features associated with salt tolerance are also addressed.

Photosynthesis: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Energy Metabolism: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Ion Homeostasis: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Gene Transcription: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Protein Biosynthesis: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Compatible Solute Production: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Hormone Modulation: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Cell Wall Structure Modification: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Cellular Detoxification: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Membrane Stabilization: !enhances! Salt Tolerance 
Signal Transduction: !enhances! Salt Tolerance