Evaluating the volatile compounds and characteristic fingerprints of the core cultivars of vegetable soybean would provide useful data for improving their aroma in the breeding programs. The present study used headspace-gas chromatography-ion mobility spectrometry (HS-GC-IMS) to evaluate the volatile compounds of vegetable soybean seeds at a specific growth stage. In total, 93 signal peaks were identified, 63 compounds qualitatively, with 14 volatile flavor compounds providing multiple signals. The 63 volatile compounds consisted of 15 esters, 15 aldehydes, 13 alcohols, 15 ketones, one acid, and four other compounds. The peak intensity of most of the volatile compounds varied greatly between the core cultivars. The alcohols and aldehydes determined the basic volatile flavor of the vegetable soybean seeds. Volatile flavors were determined by their respective esters, ketones, or other components. Characteristic fingerprints were found in some core vegetable soybean cultivars. Four cultivars (Xiangdou, ZHE1754, Zhexian 65018-33, and Qvxian No. 1) had pleasant aromas, because of their higher content of 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline (2-AP). A principal component analysis (PCA) was used to distinguish the samples based on the signal intensity of their volatile components. The results showed that the composition and concentration of volatile compounds differed greatly between the core cultivars, with the volatile flavor compounds of soybeans being determined by the ecotype of the cultivar, the direction of breeding selection, and their geographical origin. Characteristic fingerprints of the cultivars were established by HS-GC-IMS, enabling them to be used to describe and distinguish cultivars and their offspring in future breeding studies.

Ester: !determines! Volatile flavor
Aldehyde: !determines! Basic volatile flavor
Alcohol: !determines! Basic volatile flavor
Ketone: !determines! Volatile flavor
2-AP: !enhances! Pleasant aroma
PCA: !distinguishes! Samples
Cultivar: !affects! Composition/concentration of volatile compounds
Breeding selection: !affects! Volatile flavor compounds
Geographical origin: !affects! Volatile flavor compounds