Comparative transcriptomic analysis provides broad and detailed understandings of transcriptional responses to a wide range of temperatures in different plant tissues, and unique regulatory functions of temperature-mediating transcription factors. Climate change poses a great threat to plant diversity and food security. It is thus of necessity to understand the molecular mechanisms for perceiving and responding to adverse temperature changes, to develop the cultivars that are resilient to these environmental stresses. Making use of publicly available datasets, we gathered and re-analyzed 259 individual transcriptomic profiles from 139 unique experiments of Arabidopsis thaliana's shoot, root, and seedling tissues, subjected to a wide variety of temperature conditions, ranging from freezing, cold, low and high ambient temperatures, to heat shock. Despite the underlying differences in the overall transcriptomic profiles between the plant tissues, we were able to identify distinct sets of genes whose transcription patterns were highly responsive to different types of temperature conditions, some were common among the tissues and some were tissue-specific. Interestingly, we observed that the known temperature-responsive genes such as the heat-shock factor (HSF) family, were up-regulated not only in response to high temperatures, but some of its members were also likely involved in the cold response. By integrating the DNA-binding specificity information of the key temperature transcription factor (TF) HSFA1a, PIF4, and CBFs, we elucidated their distinct DNA-binding patterns to the target genes that showed different transcriptional responses. Taken together, we have comprehensively characterized the transcription patterns of temperature-responsive genes and provided directly testable hypotheses on the regulatory roles of key temperature TFs on the expression dynamics of their target genes.

Gene: !affects! Transcriptional response
TF: !binds to! Target genes
HSF: !up-regulates! High temperatures
HSFA1a: !regulates! Cold response
PIF4: !controls! DNA-binding patterns
CBFs: !influences! Expression dynamics