Cassava breeders have made significant progress in developing new genotypes with improved agronomic characteristics such as improved root yield and resistance against biotic and abiotic stresses. However, these new and improved cassava (<i>Manihot esculenta</i> Crantz) varieties in cultivation in Nigeria have undergone little or no improvement in their culinary qualities; hence, there is a paucity of genetic information regarding the texture of boiled cassava, particularly with respect to its mealiness, the principal sensory quality attribute of boiled cassava roots. The current study aimed at identifying genomic regions and polymorphisms associated with natural variation for root mealiness and other texture-related attributes of boiled cassava roots, which includes fibre, adhesiveness (ADH), taste, aroma, colour, and firmness. We performed a genome-wide association (GWAS) analysis using phenotypic data from a panel of 142 accessions obtained from the National Root Crops Research Institute (NRCRI), Umudike, Nigeria, and a set of 59,792 high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed across the cassava genome. Through genome-wide association mapping, we identified 80 SNPs that were significantly associated with root mealiness, fibre, adhesiveness, taste, aroma, colour and firmness on chromosomes 1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 13, 17 and 18. We also identified relevant candidate genes that are co-located with peak SNPs linked to these traits in <i>M. esculenta</i>. A survey of the cassava reference genome v6.1 positioned the SNPs on chromosome 13 in the vicinity of <i>Manes</i>.<i>13G026900</i>, a gene recognized as being responsible for cell adhesion and for the mealiness or crispness of vegetables and fruits, and also known to play an important role in cooked potato texture. This study provides the first insights into understanding the underlying genetic basis of boiled cassava root texture. After validation, the markers and candidate genes identified in this novel work could provide important genomic resources for use in marker-assisted selection (MAS) and genomic selection (GS) to accelerate genetic improvement of root mealiness and other culinary qualities in cassava breeding programmes in West Africa, especially in Nigeria, where the consumption of boiled and pounded cassava is low.

Gene: !affects! Root mealiness 
Gene: !affects! Fibre 
Gene: !affects! Adhesiveness 
Gene: !affects! Taste 
Gene: !affects! Aroma 
Gene: !affects! Colour 
Gene: !affects! Firmness 
Gene: !localizes to! Chromosomes 1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 13, 17 and 18 
Gene: !interacts with! Manes.13G026900 
Gene: !enhances! Cell adhesion 
Gene: !represses! Mealiness or crispness of vegetables and fruits 
Gene: !synthesizes! Cooked potato texture