Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) root hairs develop as long tubular extensions from the rootward pole of trichoblasts and exert polarized tip growth. The establishment and maintenance of root hair polarity is a complex process involving the local apical production of reactive oxygen species generated by A. thaliana nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase respiratory burst oxidase homolog protein C/ROOT HAIR-DEFECTIVE 2 (AtRBOHC/RHD2). Loss-of-function root hair defective 2 (rhd2) mutants have short root hairs that are unable to elongate by tip growth, and this phenotype is fully complemented by GREEN FLUORESCENT PROTEIN (GFP)-RHD2 expressed under the RHD2 promoter. However, the spatiotemporal mechanism of AtRBOHC/RHD2 subcellular redistribution and delivery to the plasma membrane (PM) during root hair initiation and tip growth are still unclear. Here, we used advanced microscopy for detailed qualitative and quantitative analysis of vesicular compartments containing GFP-RHD2 and characterization of their movements in developing bulges and growing root hairs. These compartments, identified by an independent molecular marker mCherry-VTI12 as the trans-Golgi network (TGN), deliver GFP-RHD2 to the apical PM domain, the extent of which corresponds with the stage of root hair formation. Movements of TGN/early endosomes, but not late endosomes, were affected in the bulging domains of the rhd2-1 mutant. Finally, we revealed that structural sterols might be involved in the accumulation, docking, and incorporation of TGN compartments containing GFP-RHD2 to the apical PM of root hairs. These results help in clarifying the mechanism of polarized AtRBOHC/RHD2 targeting, maintenance, and recycling at the apical PM domain, coordinated with different developmental stages of root hair initiation and growth.

AtRBOHC/RHD2: !generates! Reactive Oxygen Species 
GFP-RHD2: !delivered to! PM domain 
mCherry-VTI12: !identifies! TGN 
TGN: !delivers! GFP-RHD2 
rhd2-1 mutant: !affects! TGN/early endosome movements 
Structural sterols: !involved in! Accumulation, docking, and incorporation of TGN compartments