Somatic embryogenesis is being piloted for the commercial production of genetically improved Norway spruce (<i>Picea abies</i> L. Karst) forest regeneration material in Finland. The main challenge to making the process commercially relevant is the dependence on time-consuming and highly skilled manual labor. Automation and scaling up are needed to improve cost-effectiveness. Moving from the proliferation of embryogenic tissue on semisolid media to suspension cultures could improve process scalability. In a series of four experiments (overall, with 20 cell lines, 4-9 per experiment), the suitability of proliferation in suspension culture for Norway spruce somatic embryogenesis was evaluated based on the growth rate, indicators of stress conditions, good-quality cotyledonary embryo yield, and embling survival in a greenhouse. The proliferation rate in suspension was found equal to on semisolid media, but with a remarkable genotypic variation. Embryogenic tissue matured directly without pre-treatments from suspension onto semisolid media produced lower numbers of good-quality embryos than tissue matured from semisolid media. Rinsing the suspension-grown tissue with hormone-free liquid media before maturation improved embryo yield, bringing it closer to that of semisolid-grown tissue. Decreasing 6-benzylaminopurine and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid concentrations in suspension proliferation media to 0.5 or 0.1 times those in semisolid media did not affect tissue growth and did not improve embryo production. The hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) content and guaiacol peroxidase activity were elevated in suspension cultures compared with semisolid medium, which had the same plant growth regulator content. In one experiment out of four, the greenhouse survival of germinants was lower when proliferation was carried out in full strength suspension than on semisolid media; in other experiments the survival rates were equal.

Somatic embryogenesis: !piloted for! Norway spruce 
Automation: !needed to improve! cost-effectiveness 
Suspension culture: !equal to! semisolid media 
Hormone-free liquid media: !improved embryo yield! suspension-grown tissue 
6-benzylaminopurine/2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid: !did not affect! tissue growth 
Hydrogen peroxide/guaiacol peroxidase activity: !elevated in! suspension cultures 
Greenhouse survival: !lower when proliferation was carried out in! full strength suspension