Light affects many physiological and developmental processes of plants by regulating the expression and activity of light-responsive proteins. Among them, phytochrome interacting factors (PIFs) play pivotal roles in the regulation of anthocyanin accumulation and hypocotyl growth. However, the molecular mechanism is not well understood, especially in woody plants, such as apple (Malus × domestica). In this study, we identified a light-responsive PIF protein, MdPIF7, in apple and investigated the molecular mechanism of its regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis and hypocotyl growth. We found that overexpression of MdPIF7 decreased anthocyanin accumulation in transgenic apple materials and promoted hypocotyl elongation in ectopically expressed Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Further investigation showed that MdPIF7 functioned by interacting with B-box 23 (MdBBX23), a positive regulator of anthocyanin biosynthesis in apple and hypocotyl growth inhibition in ectopically expressed Arabidopsis, and attenuating the transcriptional activation of MdBBX23 on LONG HYPOCOTYL 5 (MdHY5). In addition, MdPIF7 interacted with basic region leucine zipper 44 (MdbZIP44) and ethylene response factor 38 (MdERF38), two positive regulators of anthocyanin biosynthesis, and it negatively regulated MdbZIP44- and MdERF38-promoted anthocyanin accumulation by interfering with the interaction between MdbZIP44/MdERF38 and MdMYB1. Taken together, our results reveal that MdPIF7 regulates anthocyanin biosynthesis in apple and hypocotyl growth in ectopically expressed Arabidopsis through MdPIF7-MdBBX23-MdHY5 and MdPIF7-MdbZIP44/MdERF38-MdMYB1 modules. Our findings enrich the functional studies of PIF proteins and provide insights into the molecular mechanism of PIF-mediated anthocyanin biosynthesis and hypocotyl growth.

Light: !affects! Process
MdPIF7: !decreases! Anthocyanin accumulation
MdPIF7: !promotes! Hypocotyl elongation
MdPIF7: !interacts with! MdBBX23
MdPIF7: !attenuates! MdHY5 transcriptional activation
MdPIF7: !interacts with! MdbZIP44/MdERF38
MdPIF7: !negatively regulates! MdMYB1