The 2022 Nucleic Acids Research Database Issue contains 185 papers, including 87 papers reporting on new databases and 85 updates from resources previously published in the Issue. Thirteen additional manuscripts provide updates on databases most recently published elsewhere. Seven new databases focus specifically on COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2, including SCoV2-MD, the first of the Issue's Breakthrough Articles. Major nucleic acid databases reporting updates include MODOMICS, JASPAR and miRTarBase. The AlphaFold Protein Structure Database, described in the second Breakthrough Article, is the stand-out in the protein section, where the Human Proteoform Atlas and GproteinDb are other notable new arrivals. Updates from DisProt, FuzDB and ELM comprehensively cover disordered proteins. Under the metabolism and signalling section Reactome, ConsensusPathDB, HMDB and CAZy are major returning resources. In microbial and viral genomes taxonomy and systematics are well covered by LPSN, TYGS and GTDB. Genomics resources include Ensembl, Ensembl Genomes and UCSC Genome Browser. Major returning pharmacology resource names include the IUPHAR/BPS guide and the Therapeutic Target Database. New plant databases include PlantGSAD for gene lists and qPTMplants for post-translational modifications. The entire Database Issue is freely available online on the Nucleic Acids Research website (https://academic.oup.com/nar). Our latest update to the NAR online Molecular Biology Database Collection brings the total number of entries to 1645. Following last year's major cleanup, we have updated 317 entries, listing 89 new resources and trimming 80 discontinued URLs. The current release is available at http://www.oxfordjournals.org/nar/database/c/.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Gene: !synthesizes! I 
Database: !updates! MODOMICS 
Database: !updates! JASPAR 
Database: !updates! miRTarBase 
Database: !updates! DisProt 
Database: !updates! FuzDB 
Database: !updates! ELM 
Database: !updates! Reactome 
Database: !updates! ConsensusPathDB 
Database: !updates! HMDB 
Database: !updates! CAZy 
Database: !updates! LPSN 
Database: !updates! TYGS 
Database: !updates! GTDB 
Database: !updates! Ensembl 
Database: !updates! Ensembl Genomes 
Database: !updates! UCSC Genome Browser 
Database: !updates! IUPHAR/BPS guide 
Database: !updates! Therapeutic Target Database 
Database: !updates! PlantGSAD 
Database: !updates! qPTMplants