<i>Hevea brasiliensis</i> (rubber tree) is a large tree species of the Euphorbiaceae family with inestimable economic importance. Rubber tree breeding programs currently aim to improve growth and production, and the use of early genotype selection technologies can accelerate such processes, mainly with the incorporation of genomic tools, such as marker-assisted selection (MAS). However, few quantitative trait loci (QTLs) have been used successfully in MAS for complex characteristics. Recent research shows the efficiency of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for locating QTL regions in different populations. In this way, the integration of GWAS, RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) methodologies, coexpression networks and enzyme networks can provide a better understanding of the molecular relationships involved in the definition of the phenotypes of interest, supplying research support for the development of appropriate genomic based strategies for breeding. In this context, this work presents the potential of using combined multiomics to decipher the mechanisms of genotype and phenotype associations involved in the growth of rubber trees. Using GWAS from a genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) <i>Hevea</i> population, we were able to identify molecular markers in QTL regions with a main effect on rubber tree plant growth under constant water stress. The underlying genes were evaluated and incorporated into a gene coexpression network modelled with an assembled RNA-Seq-based transcriptome of the species, where novel gene relationships were estimated and evaluated through <i>in silico</i> methodologies, including an estimated enzymatic network. From all these analyses, we were able to estimate not only the main genes involved in defining the phenotype but also the interactions between a core of genes related to rubber tree growth at the transcriptional and translational levels. This work was the first to integrate multiomics analysis into the in-depth investigation of rubber tree plant growth, producing useful data for future genetic studies in the species and enhancing the efficiency of the species improvement programs.

GWAS: !identifies! QTL regions
GBS: !generates! molecular markers
RNA-Seq: !assembles! transcriptome
GWAS/GBS/RNA-Seq: !estimates! gene relationships
Gene Coexpression Network: !models! gene relationships
Enzymatic Network: !estimates! gene interactions
QTL regions: !contain! main effect genes