An increasing interest in the cultivation of (European) hazelnut (<i>Corylus avellana</i>) is driving a demand to breed cultivars adapted to non-conventional environments, particularly in the context of incipient climate change. Given that plant phenology is so strongly determined by genotype, a rational approach to support these breeding efforts will be to identify quantitative trait loci (QTLs) and the genes underlying the basis for adaptation. The present study was designed to map QTLs for phenology-related traits, such as the timing of both male and female flowering, dichogamy, and the period required for nuts to reach maturity. The analysis took advantage of an existing linkage map developed from a population of F<sub>1</sub> progeny bred from the cross "Tonda Gentile delle Langhe" × "Merveille de Bollwiller," consisting in 11 LG. A total of 42 QTL-harboring regions were identified. Overall, 71 QTLs were detected, 49 on the TGdL map and 22 on the MB map; among these, 21 were classified as major; 13 were detected in at least two of the seasons (stable-major QTL). In detail, 20 QTLs were identified as contributing to the time of male flowering, 15 to time of female flowering, 25 to dichogamy, and 11 to time of nut maturity. LG02 was found to harbor 16 QTLs, while 15 QTLs mapped to LG10 and 14 to LG03. Many of the QTLs were clustered with one another. The major cluster was located on TGdL_02 and consisted of mainly major QTLs governing all the analyzed traits. A search of the key genomic regions revealed 22 candidate genes underlying the set of traits being investigated. Many of them have been described in the literature as involved in processes related to flowering, control of dormancy, budburst, the switch from vegetative to reproductive growth, or the morphogenesis of flowers and seeds.

QTL: !governs! phenology-related traits 
LG02: !harbors! 16 QTLs 
LG10: !harbors! 15 QTLs 
LG03: !harbors! 14 QTLs 
cluster: !located on! TGdL_02 
candidate genes: !underlying! set of traits 
candidate genes: !involved in! processes related to flowering 
candidate genes: !control! dormancy 
candidate genes: !switch! vegetative to reproductive growth 
candidate genes: !morphogenesis! flowers and seeds