Chilling temperature reduces the rate of photosynthesis in plants, which is more pronounced in association with phosphate (Pi) starvation. Previous studies showed that Pi resupply improves recovery of the rate of photosynthesis in plants much better under combination of dual stresses than in non-chilled samples. However, the underlying mechanism remains poorly understood. In this study, RNA-seq analysis showed the expression level of 41 photosynthetic genes in plant roots increased under phosphate starvation associated with 4 °C (-P 4 °C) compared to -P 23 °C. Moreover, iron uptake increased significantly in the stem cell niche (SCN) of wild type (WT) roots in -P 4 °C. In contrast, lower iron concentrations were found in SCN of aluminum activated malate transporter 1 (almt1) and its transcription factor, sensitive to protein rhizotoxicity 1 (stop1) mutants under -P 4 °C. The Fe content examined by ICP-MS analysis in -P 4 °C treated almt1 was 98.5 ng/µg, which was only 17% of that of seedlings grown under -P 23 °C. Average plastid number in almt1 root cells under -P 4 °C was less than -P 23 °C. Furthermore, stop1 and almt1 single mutants both exhibited increased primary root elongation than WT under combined stresses. In addition, dark treatment blocked the root elongation phenotype of stop1 and almt1. Induction of photosynthetic gene expression and increased iron accumulation in roots is required for plant adjustment to chilling in association with phosphate starvation.

Chilling temperature: !reduces! Photosynthesis
Phosphate starvation: !improves! Recovery of photosynthesis rate
RNA-seq analysis: !shows! Expression level of 41 photosynthetic genes
Iron uptake: !increases! In stem cell niche of wild type roots
Iron concentrations: !lower in! SCN of almt1 and stop1 mutants
Fe content: !decreases! In almt1 root cells
Plastid number: !less than! -P 23 °C in almt1 root cells
Primary root elongation: !increased in! Stop1 and almt1 single mutants
Dark treatment: !blocks! Root elongation phenotype of stop1 and almt1
Photosynthetic gene expression: !required for! Plant adjustment to chilling