Decreased PG constrains PSI activity due to inhibition of transcript and polypeptide abundance of light-harvesting and reaction center polypeptides generating a reversible, yellow phenotype during cold acclimation of pgp1. Cold acclimation of the Arabidopsis pgp1 mutant at 5 °C resulted in a pale-yellow phenotype with abnormal chloroplast ultrastructure compared to its green phenotype upon growth at 20 °C despite a normal cold-acclimation response at the transcript level. In contrast, wild type maintained its normal green phenotype and chloroplast ultrastructure irrespective of growth temperature. In contrast to cold acclimation of WT, growth of pgp1 at 5 °C limited the accumulation of Lhcbs and Lhcas assessed by immunoblotting. However, a novel 43 kD polypeptide of Lhcb1 as well as a 29 kD polypeptide of Lhcb3 accumulated in the soluble fraction which was absent in the thylakoid membrane fraction of cold-acclimated pgp1 which was not observed in WT. Cold acclimation of pgp1 destabilized the Chl-protein complexes associated with PSI and predisposed energy distribution in favor of PSII rather than PSI compared to the WT. Functionally, in vivo PSI versus PSII photochemistry was inhibited in cold-acclimated pgp1 to a greater extent than in WT relative to controls. Greening of the pale-yellow pgp1 was induced when cold-acclimated pgp1 was shifted from 5 to 20 °C which resulted in a marked decrease in excitation pressure to a level comparable to WT. Concomitantly, Lhcbs and Lhcas accumulated with a simultaneous decrease in the novel 43 and 29kD polypeptides. We conclude that the reduced levels of phosphatidyldiacylglycerol in the pgp1 limit the capacity of the mutant to maintain the structure and function of its photosynthetic apparatus during cold acclimation. Thus, maintenance of normal thylakoid phosphatidyldiacylglycerol levels is essential to stabilize the photosynthetic apparatus during cold acclimation.

PGP1: !inhibits! Transcript and polypeptide abundance of light-harvesting and reaction center polypeptides
PGP1: !destabilizes! Chl-protein complexes associated with PSI
PGP1: !limits! Capacity to maintain structure and function of photosynthetic apparatus
Phosphatidyldiacylglycerol: !maintains! Thylakoid phosphatidyldiacylglycerol levels