Nicotianamine (NA), 2'-deoxymugineic acid (DMA), and mugineic acid (MA) are chelators required for iron uptake and transport in plants. Nicotianamine aminotransferase (NAAT), 2'-deoxymugineic acid synthase (DMAS), transporter of MAs (TOM), and efflux transporter of NA (ENA) are involved in iron uptake and transport in rice (Oryza sativa), wheat (Triticum aestivum), and barley (Hordeum vulgare); however, these families have not been fully identified and comprehensively analyzed in maize (Zea mays L.). Here, we identified 5 ZmNAAT, 9 ZmDMAS, 11 ZmTOM, and 2 ZmENA genes by genome mining. RNA-sequencing and quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed that these genes are expressed in various tissues and respond differently to high and low iron conditions. In particular, iron deficiency stimulated the expression of ZmDMAS1, ZmTOM1, ZmTOM3, and ZmENA1. Furthermore, we determined protein subcellular localization by transient expression of green fluorescent protein fusions in maize mesophyll protoplasts. ZmNAAT1, ZmNAAT-L4, ZmDMAS1, and ZmDMAS-L1 localized in the cytoplasm, whereas ZmTOMs and ZmENAs targeted to plasma and tonoplast membranes, endomembranes, and vesicles. Our results suggest that the different gene expression profiles and subcellular localizations of ZmNAAT, ZmDMAS, ZmTOM, and ZmENA family members may enable specific regulation of phytosiderophore metabolism in different tissues and under different external conditions, shedding light on iron homeostasis in maize and providing candidate genes for breeding iron-rich maize varieties.

Nicotianamine: !synthesized by! NAAT 
2'-deoxymugineic acid: !synthesized by! DMAS 
Mugineic acid: !transported by! TOM 
Nicotianamine: !transported by! ENA 
NAAT: !expressed in! various tissues 
DMAS: !expressed in! various tissues 
TOM: !expressed in! various tissues 
ENA: !expressed in! various tissues 
NAAT: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
DMAS: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
TOM: !localizes to! plasma and tonoplast membranes, endomembranes, and vesicles 
ENA: !localizes to! plasma and tonoplast membranes, endomembranes, and vesicles