Crop diseases threaten food security and sustainable agriculture. Consumption of crops containing nonessential toxic metals leads to health risks for humans. Therefore, cultivation of disease-resistant and toxic metal-safe crops is a double-gain strategy that can contribute to food security. Here, we show that rice heavy-metal transporter OsNRAMP1 plays an important role in plant immunity by modulating metal ion and reactive oxygen species (ROS) homoeostasis. OsNRAMP1 expression was induced after pathogenic bacteria and fungi infections. The osnramp1 mutants had an increased content of H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> and activity of superoxide dismutase, but decreased activity of catalase, showing enhanced broad-spectrum resistance against bacterial and fungal pathogens. RNA-seq analysis identified a number of differentially expressed genes that were involved in metal ion and ROS homoeostasis. Altered expression of metal ion-dependent ROS-scavenging enzymes genes and lower accumulation of cations such as Mn together induced compromised metal ion-dependent enzyme-catalysing activity and modulated ROS homoeostasis, which together contributed towards disease resistance in osnramp1 mutants. Furthermore, the osnramp1 mutants contained lower levels of toxic heavy metals Cd and Pb and micronutrients Ni and Mn in leaves and grains. Taken together, a proof of concept was achieved that broad-spectrum disease-resistant and toxic heavy-metal-safe rice was engineered by removal of the OsNRAMP1 gene.

OsNRAMP1: !modulates! metal ion and ROS homoeostasis
OsNRAMP1: !induces! expression after pathogenic bacteria and fungi infections
osnramp1 mutants: !have increased! H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> and superoxide dismutase activity
osnramp1 mutants: !have decreased! catalase activity
RNA-seq analysis: !identified! differentially expressed genes
metal ion-dependent ROS-scavenging enzymes genes: !altered expression of! modulated ROS homoeostasis
osnramp1 mutants: !contained lower levels of! toxic heavy metals Cd and Pb and micronutrients Ni and Mn