Carbon(C) and nitrogen(N) metabolisms are important for plant growth and defense, and enzymes play a major role in these two metabolisms. Current studies show that the enzymes of N Metabolism, C Metabolism, and defense are correlated with biomass. Then, we conducted this research under the assumption that enzymes could characterize the relationship based on growth-defense tradeoff, and some of the enzymes could be used to represent the plant growth. From the mechanism model, we picked out 18 physiological/biochemical indicators and obtained the data from 24 tissue culture seedlings of <i>Salvia miltiorrhiza</i> (<i>S.miltiorrhiza</i>) which were grafted with 11 endophytic fungi. Then, the relationship between the biomass and the physiological/biochemical indicators was investigated by using statistical analysis, such as correlation analysis, variable screening, and regression analysis. The results showed that many physiological/biochemical indicators, especially enzyme activities, were related to biomass accumulation. Through a rigorous logical reasoning process, we established a mathematical model of the biomass and 6 key physiological/biochemical indicators, including glutamine synthetase (GS), glutamate synthase (GLS), glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), peroxidase (POD), catalase (CAT), and soluble protein from Cobb-Douglas production function. This model had high prediction accuracy, and it could simplify the measurement of biomass. During the artificial cultivation of <i>S.miltiorrhiza</i>, we can monitor the biomass accumulation by scaling the key physiological/biochemical indicators in the leaves. Interestingly, the coefficients of Lasso regression during our analysis were consistent with the mechanism of growth-defense tradeoff. Perhaps, the key physiological/biochemical indicators obtained in the statistical analysis are related to the indicators affecting biomass accumulation in practice.

Enzymes: !correlate with! biomass
Glutamine synthetase: !related to! biomass accumulation
Glutamate synthase: !related to! biomass accumulation
Glutamate dehydrogenase: !related to! biomass accumulation
Peroxidase: !related to! biomass accumulation
Catalase: !related to! biomass accumulation
Soluble protein: !related to! biomass accumulation
Lasso regression: !consistent with! growth-defense tradeoff