Crop production is a serious challenge to provide food for the 10 billion individuals forecasted to live across the globe in 2050. The scientists' emphasize establishing an equilibrium among diversity and quality of crops by enhancing yield to fulfill the increasing demand for food supply sustainably. The exploitation of genetic resources using genomics and metabolomics strategies can help generate resilient plants against stressors in the future. The innovation of the next-generation sequencing (NGS) strategies laid the foundation to unveil various plants' genetic potential and help us to understand the domestication process to unmask the genetic potential among wild-type plants to utilize for crop improvement. Nowadays, NGS is generating massive genomic resources using wild-type and domesticated plants grown under normal and harsh environments to explore the stress regulatory factors and determine the key metabolites. Improved food nutritional value is also the key to eradicating malnutrition problems around the globe, which could be attained by employing the knowledge gained through NGS and metabolomics to achieve suitability in crop yield. Advanced technologies can further enhance our understanding in defining the strategy to obtain a specific phenotype of a crop. Integration among bioinformatic tools and molecular techniques, such as marker-assisted, QTLs mapping, creation of reference genome, de novo genome assembly, pan- and/or super-pan-genomes, etc., will boost breeding programs. The current article provides sequential progress in NGS technologies, a broad application of NGS, enhancement of genetic manipulation resources, and understanding the crop response to stress by producing plant metabolites. The NGS and metabolomics utilization in generating stress-tolerant plants/crops without deteriorating a natural ecosystem is considered a sustainable way to improve agriculture production. This highlighted knowledge also provides useful research that explores the suitable resources for agriculture sustainability.

NGS: !generates! massive genomic resources 
NGS: !unveils! genetic potential 
NGS: !enhances! genetic manipulation resources 
NGS: !explores! suitable resources for agriculture sustainability 
Metabolomics: !helps generate! resilient plants against stressors 
Metabolomics: !determines! key metabolites 
Metabolomics: !improves! food nutritional value 
Bioinformatic tools: !integrates with! molecular techniques 
Molecular techniques: !boosts! breeding programs