Robust and automated segmentation of leaves and other backgrounds is a core prerequisite of most approaches in high-throughput field phenotyping. So far, the possibilities of deep learning approaches for this purpose have not been explored adequately, partly due to a lack of publicly available, appropriate datasets. This study presents a workflow based on DeepLab v3+ and on a diverse annotated dataset of 190 RGB (350 x 350 pixels) images. Images of winter wheat plants of 76 different genotypes and developmental stages have been acquired throughout multiple years at high resolution in outdoor conditions using nadir view, encompassing a wide range of imaging conditions. Inconsistencies of human annotators in complex images have been quantified, and metadata information of camera settings has been included. The proposed approach achieves an intersection over union (IoU) of 0.77 and 0.90 for plants and soil, respectively. This outperforms the benchmarked machine learning methods which use Support Vector Classifier and/or Random Forrest. The results show that a small but carefully chosen and annotated set of images can provide a good basis for a powerful segmentation pipeline. Compared to earlier methods based on machine learning, the proposed method achieves better performance on the selected dataset in spite of using a deep learning approach with limited data. Increasing the amount of publicly available data with high human agreement on annotations and further development of deep neural network architectures will provide high potential for robust field-based plant segmentation in the near future. This, in turn, will be a cornerstone of data-driven improvement in crop breeding and agricultural practices of global benefit.

DeepLab v3+: !outperforms! Support Vector Classifier and Random Forrest
DeepLab v3+: !achieves! IoU of 0.77 and 0.90 for plants and soil
metadata information: !included in! DeepLab v3+
human annotators: !quantified for! inconsistencies in complex images
deep neural network architectures: !potential to! provide robust field-based plant segmentation
data-driven improvement: !cornerstone of! crop breeding and agricultural practices