In the breeding of new horticultural crops, fruit shape is an important selection characteristic. A variety of fruit shapes appeared during the gradual process of selection and domestication. However, few studies have been conducted on grape berry shape, especially studies related to mining candidate genes. To discover candidate genes related to grape berry shape, the present study first took the berry shape parameters analyzed by Tomato Analyzer as the target traits and used a genome-wide association analysis to analyze candidate genes. In total, 122 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci had significant correlations with multiple berry shape traits in both years, and some candidate genes were further mined. These genes were mainly related to LRR receptor-like serine/threonine-protein kinase (At1g05700 and At1g07650), transcription factors (GATA transcription factor 23-like, transcription factor VIP1, transcription initiation factor TFIID, and MADS-box transcription factor 6), ubiquitin ligases (F-box protein SKIP19 and RING finger protein 44), and plant hormones (indole-3-acetic acid-amido synthetase GH3.6 and ethylene-responsive transcription factor ERF061). In addition, some important SNP loci were associated with multiple berry-shape traits. The study further revealed some genes that control multiple traits simultaneously, indicating that these berry shape traits are subject to the coordinated regulation of some genes in controlling berry shape. In the present work, we identified interesting genetic determinants of grape berry shape-related traits. The identification of molecular markers that are closely related to these berry-shape traits is of great significance for breeding specific berry-shaped grape varieties.

LRR receptor-like serine/threonine-protein kinase: !affects! Berry shape
GATA transcription factor 23-like: !affects! Berry shape
Transcription factor VIP1: !affects! Berry shape
Transcription initiation factor TFIID: !affects! Berry shape
MADS-box transcription factor 6: !affects! Berry shape
F-box protein SKIP19: !affects! Berry shape
RING finger protein 44: !affects! Berry shape
Indole-3-acetic acid-amido synthetase GH3.6: !affects! Berry shape
Ethylene-responsive transcription factor ERF061: !affects! Berry shape