Redox processes are at the heart of universal life processes, such as metabolism, signaling, or folding of secreted proteins. Redox landscapes differ between cell compartments and are strictly controlled to tolerate changing conditions and to avoid cell dysfunction. While a sophisticated antioxidant network counteracts oxidative stress, our understanding of reductive stress responses remains fragmentary. Here, we observed root growth impairment in Arabidopsis thaliana mutants of mitochondrial alternative oxidase 1a (aox1a) in response to the model thiol reductant dithiothreitol (DTT). Mutants of mitochondrial uncoupling protein 1 (ucp1) displayed a similar phenotype indicating that impaired respiratory flexibility led to hypersensitivity. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress was enhanced in the mitochondrial mutants and limiting ER oxidoreductin capacity in the aox1a background led to synergistic root growth impairment by DTT, indicating that mitochondrial respiration alleviates reductive ER stress. The observations that DTT triggered nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) reduction in vivo and that the presence of thiols led to electron transport chain activity in isolated mitochondria offer a biochemical framework of mitochondrion-mediated alleviation of thiol-mediated reductive stress. Ablation of transcription factor Arabidopsis NAC domain-containing protein17 (ANAC017) impaired the induction of AOX1a expression by DTT and led to DTT hypersensitivity, revealing that reductive stress tolerance is achieved by adjusting mitochondrial respiratory capacity via retrograde signaling. Our data reveal an unexpected role for mitochondrial respiratory flexibility and retrograde signaling in reductive stress tolerance involving inter-organelle redox crosstalk.

Redox processes: !affect! Universal life processes
Mitochondrial alternative oxidase 1a (aox1a): !impairs! Root growth
Mitochondrial uncoupling protein 1 (ucp1): !impairs! Root growth
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress: !enhanced in! Mitochondrial mutants
Thiol reductant dithiothreitol (DTT): !triggers! NAD reduction
Electron transport chain: !activated by! Thiols
Transcription factor Arabidopsis NAC domain-containing protein17 (ANAC017): !impaired by! DTT
Mitochondrial respiratory flexibility: !alleviates! Reductive ER stress
Retrograde signaling: !adjusts! Mitochondrial respiratory capacity