Inorganic phosphate (Pi) is the predominant form of phosphorus (P) readily accessible to plants, and Pi Transporter 1 (PHT1) genes are the major contributors to root Pi uptake. However, the mechanisms underlying the transport and recycling of Pi within plants, which are vital for optimizing P use efficiency, remain elusive. Here, we characterized a functionally unknown rice (Oryza sativa) PHT1 member barely expressed in roots, OsPHT1;7. Yeast complementation and Xenopus laevis oocyte assay demonstrated that OsPHT1;7 could mediate Pi transport. Reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction and histochemical analyses showed that OsPHT1;7 was preferentially expressed in source leaves and nodes. A further fine-localization analysis by immunostaining showed that OsPHT1;7 expression was restricted in the vascular bundle (VB) sheath and phloem of source leaves as well as in the phloem of regular/diffuse- and enlarged-VBs of nodes. In accordance with this expression pattern, mutation of OsPHT1;7 led to increased and decreased P distribution in source (old leaves) and sink organs (new leaves/panicles), respectively, indicating that OsPHT1;7 is involved in P redistribution. Furthermore, OsPHT1;7 showed an overwhelmingly higher transcript abundance in anthers than other PHT1 members, and ospht1;7 mutants were impaired in P accumulation in anthers but not in pistils or husks. Moreover, the germination of pollen grains was significantly inhibited upon OsPHT1;7 mutation, leading to a >80% decrease in seed-setting rate and grain yield. Taken together, our results provide evidence that OsPHT1;7 is a crucial Pi transporter for Pi transport and recycling within rice plants, stimulating both vegetative and reproductive growth.

PHT1: !mediates! Pi transport
OsPHT1;7: !localizes to! VB sheath and phloem of source leaves/enlarged-VBs of nodes
OsPHT1;7: !enhances! P redistribution
OsPHT1;7: !synthesizes! higher transcript abundance in anthers
ospht1;7 mutants: !impaired in! P accumulation in anthers
ospht1;7 mutants: !inhibited! germination of pollen grains
ospht1;7 mutants: !decreased! seed-setting rate/grain yield