Site-specific gene stacking could reduce the number of segregating loci and expedite the introgression of transgenes from experimental lines to field lines. Recombinase-mediated site-specific gene stacking provides a flexible and efficient solution, but this approach requires a recombinase recognition site in the genome. Here, we describe several cotton (Gossypium hirsutum cv. Coker 312) target lines suitable for Mycobacteriophage Bxb1 recombinase-mediated gene stacking. Obtained through the empirical screening of random insertion events, each of these target lines contains a single intact copy of the target construct with precise sequences of RS2, lox, and attP sites that is not inserted within or close to a known gene or near a centromere and shows good expression of the reporter gene gfp. Gene stacking was tested with insertion of different combinations of three candidate genes for resistance to verticillium wilt into three cotton target lines: CTS1, CTS3, and CTS4. Nine site-specific integration events were recovered from 95 independently transformed embryogenic calluses. Southern and DNA sequence analyses of regenerated plants confirmed precise site-specific integration, and resistance to verticillium wilt was observed for plant CTS1i3, which has a single precise copy of site-specifically integrated DNA. These cotton target lines can serve as foundation lines for recombinase-mediated gene stacking to facilitate precise DNA integration and introgression to field cultivars.

Mycobacteriophage Bxb1 recombinase: !facilitates! gene stacking 
gene stacking: !reduces! number of segregating loci 
gene stacking: !expedites! introgression of transgenes 
random insertion events: !produce! target lines 
target lines: !contain! precise sequences of RS2, lox, and attP sites 
target lines: !express! reporter gene gfp 
candidate genes: !inserted into! three cotton target lines 
regenerated plants: !confirmed! precise site-specific integration 
CTS1i3 plant: !showed! resistance to verticillium wilt