In the past and present, human activities have been involved in triggering global warming, causing drought stresses that affect animals and plants. Plants are more defenseless against drought stress; and therefore, plant development and productive output are decreased. To decrease the effect of drought stress on plants, it is crucial to establish a plant feedback mechanism of resistance to drought. The drought reflex mechanisms include the physical stature physiology and biochemical, cellular, and molecular-based processes. Briefly, improving the root system, leaf structure, osmotic-balance, comparative water contents and stomatal adjustment are considered as most prominent features against drought resistance in crop plants. In addition, the signal transduction pathway and reactive clearance of oxygen are crucial mechanisms for coping with drought stress via calcium and phytohormones such as abscisic acid, salicylic acid, jasmonic acid, auxin, gibberellin, ethylene, brassinosteroids and peptide molecules. Furthermore, microorganisms, such as fungal and bacterial organisms, play a vital role in increasing resistance against drought stress in plants. The number of characteristic loci, transgenic methods and the application of exogenous substances [nitric oxide, (C<sub>28</sub>H<sub>48</sub>O<sub>6</sub>) 24-epibrassinolide, proline, and glycine betaine] are also equally important for enhancing the drought resistance of plants. In a nutshell, the current review will mainly focus on the role of phytohormones and related mechanisms involved in drought tolerance in various crop plants.

root system: !improves! drought resistance
leaf structure: !improves! drought resistance
osmotic-balance: !improves! drought resistance
comparative water contents: !improves! drought resistance
stomatal adjustment: !improves! drought resistance
signal transduction pathway: !copes with! drought stress
reactive clearance of oxygen: !copes with! drought stress
calcium: !copes with! drought stress
phytohormones: !copes with! drought stress
abscisic acid: !copes with! drought stress
salicylic acid: !copes with! drought stress
jasmonic acid: !copes with! drought stress
auxin: !copes with! drought stress
gibberellin: !copes with! drought stress
ethylene: !copes with! drought stress
brassinosteroids: !copes with! drought stress
peptide molecules: !copes with! drought stress
microorganisms: !increases! drought resistance
characteristic loci: !enhances! drought resistance
transgenic methods: !enhances! drought resistance
exogenous substances: !enhances! drought