ALDH7B4 promoter analysis in A. thaliana and E. salsugineum reveals that both genetic background and promoter architecture contribute to gene expression in response to stress in different species. Many genes are differentially regulated in a comparison of salinity-sensitive and salinity-tolerant plant species. The aldehyde dehydrogenase 7B4 (ALDH7B4) gene is turgor-responsive in A. thaliana and encodes a highly conserved detoxification enzyme in plants. This study compared the ALDH7B4 gene in A. thaliana (salinity-sensitive) and in the salinity-tolerant close relative Eutrema salsugineum. EsALDH7B4 in E. salsugineum is the ortholog of AtALDH7B4 and the expression is also salinity, drought, and wound responsive. However, E. salsugineum requires higher salinity stress to induce the EsALDH7B4 transcriptional response. The GUS expression driven either by the promoter AtALDH7B4 or EsALDH7B4 was induced under 300 mM NaCl treatment in A. thaliana while 600 mM NaCl treatment was required in E. salsugineum, suggesting that the genetic background plays a crucial role in regulation of gene expression. Promoter sequences of ALDH7B4 are less conserved than the protein coding region. A series of EsALDH7B4 promoter deletion fragments were fused to the GUS reporter gene and promoter activity was determined in A. thaliana. The promoter region that contains two conserved ACGT-containing motifs was identified to be essential for stress induction. Furthermore, a 38 bp "TC" rich motif in the EsALDH7B4 promoter, absent from the AtALDH7B4 promoter, negatively affects EsALDH7B4 expression. A MYB-like transcription factor was identified to bind the "TC" motif and to repress the EsALDH7B4 promoter activity. This study reveals that genetic background and cis-acting elements coordinately regulate gene expression.

ALDH7B4: !responds to! salinity, drought, and wound stress 
ALDH7B4: !encodes! detoxification enzyme 
AtALDH7B4: !induces! GUS expression under 300 mM NaCl 
EsALDH7B4: !induces! GUS expression under 600 mM NaCl 
EsALDH7B4 promoter: !contains! ACGT-containing motifs 
EsALDH7B4 promoter: !contains! 38 bp "TC" rich motif 
"TC" motif: !binds! MYB-like transcription factor 
MYB-like transcription factor: !represses! EsALDH7B4 promoter activity