Transcriptome landscape during early inflorescence developmental stages identified candidate flowering time regulators including Early Flowering 3a. Further genomics approaches validated the role of this gene in flowering time regulation. The early stages of inflorescence development in plants are as crucial as the later floral developmental stages. Several traits, such as inflorescence architecture and flower developmental timings, are determined during those early stages. In chickpea, diverse forms of inflorescence architectures regarding meristem determinacy and the number of flowers per node are observed within the germplasm. Transcriptome analysis in four desi chickpea accessions with such unique inflorescence characteristics identifies the underlying shared regulatory events leading to inflorescence development. The vegetative to reproductive stage transition brings about major changes in the transcriptome landscape. The inflorescence development progression associated genes identified through co-expression network analysis includes both protein-coding genes and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). Few lncRNAs identified in our study positively regulate flowering-related mRNA stability by acting competitively with miRNAs. Bulk segregrant analysis and association mapping narrowed down an InDel marker regulating flowering time in chickpea. Deletion of 11 bp in first exon of a negative flowering time regulator, Early Flowering 3a gene, leads to early flowering phenotype in chickpea. Understanding the key players involved in vegetative to reproductive stage transition and floral meristem development will be useful in manipulating flowering time and inflorescence architecture in chickpea and other legumes.

Early Flowering 3a: !regulates! flowering time
Transcriptome analysis: !identifies! inflorescence development progression associated genes
lncRNAs: !positively regulate! flowering-related mRNA stability
InDel marker: !regulates! flowering time
11 bp deletion: !leads to! early flowering phenotype