Leaf shape is an important leaf trait, with ovate leaves common in many floras. Recently, a new leaf shape model (referred to as the MLRF equation) derived from temperature-dependent bacterial growth was proposed and demonstrated to be valid in describing leaf boundaries of many species with ovate leaf shape. The MLRF model's parameters can provide valuable information of leaf shape, including the ratio of lamina width to length and the lamina centroid location on the lamina length axis. However, the model wasn't tested on a large sample of a single species, thereby limiting its overall evaluation for describing leaf boundaries, for evaluating lamina bilateral asymmetry and for calculating lamina centroid location. In this study, we further test the model using data from two Lauraceae species, <i>Cinnamomum camphora</i> and <i>Machilus leptophylla</i>, with >290 leaves for each species. The equation was found to be credible for describing those shapes, with all adjusted root-mean-square errors (RMSE) smaller than 0.05, indicating that the mean absolute deviation is smaller than 5% of the radius of an assumed circle whose area equals lamina area. It was also found that the larger the extent of lamina asymmetry, the larger the adjusted RMSE, with approximately 50% of unexplained variation by the model accounted for by the lamina asymmetry, implying that this model can help to quantify the leaf bilateral asymmetry in future studies. In addition, there was a significant difference between the two species in their centroid ratio, i.e., the distance from leaf petiole to the point on the lamina length axis associated with leaf maximum width to the leaf maximum length. It was found that a higher centroid ratio does not necessarily lead to a greater investment of mass to leaf petiole relative to lamina, which might depend on the petiole pattern.

MLRF equation: !describes! Leaf shape 
MLRF equation: !quantifies! Leaf bilateral asymmetry 
Lauraceae species: !differ in! Centroid ratio 
Centroid ratio: !not necessarily linked to! Investment of mass to petiole