The plastome of Melocactus glaucescens shows unique rearrangements, IR expansion, and unprecedented gene losses in Cactaceae. Our data indicate tRNA import from the cytosol to the plastids in this species. Cactaceae represents one of the richest families in keystone species of arid and semiarid biomes. This family shows various specific features comprehending morphology, anatomy, and metabolism, which allow them to grow under unfavorable environmental conditions. The subfamily Cactoideae contains the most divergence of species, which are highly variable in growth habit and morphology. This subfamily includes the endangered species Melocactus glaucescens (tribe Cereeae), which is a cactus endemic to the biome Caatinga in Brazil. Aiming to analyze the plastid evolution and develop molecular markers, we sequenced and analyzed in detail the plastome of M. glaucescens. Our analyses revealed that the M. glaucescens plastome is the most divergent among the species of the family Cactaceae sequenced so far. We characterized here unique rearrangements, expanded IRs containing an unusual set of genes, and several gene losses. Some genes related to the ndh complex were lost during the plastome evolution, while others have lost their functionality. Additionally, the loss of three tRNA genes (trnA-UGC, trnV-UAC, and trnV-GAC) suggests tRNA import from the cytosol to the plastids in M. glaucescens. Moreover, we identified high gene divergence, several putative positive signatures, and possible unique RNA-editing sites. Furthermore, we mapped 169 SSRs in the plastome of M. glaucescens, which are helpful to access the genetic diversity of natural populations and conservation strategies. Finally, our data provide new insights into the evolution of plastids in Cactaceae, which is an outstanding lineage adapted to extreme environmental conditions and a notorious example of the atypical evolution of plastomes.

plastome: !shows! unique rearrangements
plastome: !contains! IR expansion
plastome: !has! unprecedented gene losses
tRNA: !imported from! cytosol
Cactaceae: !rich in! keystone species
Cactoideae: !contains! most divergence of species
Melocactus glaucescens: !endangered! species
plastome: !reveals! high gene divergence
plastome: !contains! putative positive signatures
plastome: !maps! 169 SSRs