Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) are a group of important symbiotic microorganisms found in ecosystems. Maize is the second most produced food crop globally. To investigate the mechanisms by which mycorrhizal symbiosis improves maize yields, the effects of mycorrhizal symbiosis on root vigor, nutrient accumulation in various tissues, and root exudates were investigated. We propose the following hypothesis: The secretion of organic acids in root exudates has antagonistic or synergistic effects, which are related to the rhizosphere environment. AMF symbiosis will enhance this effect. Rhizophagus aggreatus, Claroideoglomus etunicatum, and Funneliformis mosseae were used to inoculate maize plants separately; meanwhile, maize was inoculated with the above three fungi together for another processing. The plant tissues were sampled at five growth stages: V12 (twelve-leaf), VT (Tassel), R1 (Silking), R2 (Blister), and R4 (Dough stage). The root vigor, and nutrient content in different maize organs and organic acids in root exudates were determined in these stages. The results show that mycorrhizal symbiosis significantly improved the root vigor of maize, especially for plants inoculated with F. mosseae. AMF symbiosis significantly increased N, P, and K accumulation. Mixed inoculation with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi significantly promoted the accumulation of N and K in maize. P accumulation was significantly promoted by C. etunicatum inoculation. Mycorrhizal symbiosis reduced the levels of protocatechuic, vanillic, citric, and ferulic acid in maize root exudates and increased the levels of p-hydroxybenzoic and caffeic acid. Except for syringic, chlorogenic and succinic acid, the levels of other organic acids in root exudates were higher in plants inoculated with F. mosseae than in other treatments. This study demonstrates that mycorrhizal symbiosis improves root vigor and promotes nutrient accumulation at various sites; in addition, mycorrhizal symbiosis affects the content of organic acids in root exudates.

AMF: !enhances! root vigor
AMF: !promotes! N, P, K accumulation
AMF: !reduces! protocatechuic, vanillic, citric, ferulic acid
AMF: !increases! p-hydroxybenzoic, caffeic acid
AMF: !increases! syringic, chlorogenic, succinic acid