Codon usage bias (CUB) analysis is an effective method for studying specificity, evolutionary relationships, and mRNA translation and discovering new genes among various species. In general, CUB analysis is mainly performed within one species or between closely related species and no such study has been applied among species with distant genetic relationships. Here, seven Rosales species with high economic value were selected to conduct CUB analysis. The results showed that the average GC1, GC2 and GC3 contents were 51.08, 40.52 and 43.12%, respectively, indicating that the A/T content is more abundant and the Rosales species prefer A/T as the last codon. Neutrality plot and ENc plot analysis revealed that natural selection was the main factor leading to CUB during the evolution of Rosales species. All 7 Rosales species contained three high-frequency codons, AGA, GTT and TTG, encoding Arg, Val and Leu, respectively. The 7 Rosales species differed in high-frequency codon pairs and the distribution of GC3, though the usage patterns of closely related species were more consistent. The results of the biclustering heat map among 7 Rosales species and 20 other species were basically consistent with the results of genome data, suggesting that CUB analysis is an effective method for revealing evolutionary relationships among species at the family or order level. In addition, chlorophytes prefer using G/C as ending codon, while monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants prefer using A/T as ending codon. The CUB pattern among Rosales species was mainly affected by natural selection. This work is the first to highlight the CUB patterns and characteristics of Rosales species and provides a new perspective for studying genetic relationships across a wide range of species.

GC1: !averaged! 51.08% 
GC2: !averaged! 40.52% 
GC3: !averaged! 43.12% 
A/T content: !more abundant! Rosales species 
Natural selection: !main factor leading to! CUB 
AGA, GTT, TTG: !encoded! Arg, Val, Leu 
High-frequency codon pairs: !differed! 7 Rosales species 
GC3: !distributed differently! 7 Rosales species 
Biclustering heat map: !consistent with! genome data 
Chlorophytes: !prefer! G/C as ending codon 
Monocotyledonous & dicotyledonous plants: !prefer! A/T as ending codon 
CUB pattern: !mainly affected by! natural selection