Over the past two decades, mass spectrometric (MS)-based proteomics technologies have facilitated the study of signaling pathways throughout biology. Nowhere is this needed more than in plants, where an evolutionary history of genome duplications has resulted in large gene families involved in posttranslational modifications and regulatory pathways. For example, at least 5% of the Arabidopsis thaliana genome (ca. 1,200 genes) encodes protein kinases and protein phosphatases that regulate nearly all aspects of plant growth and development. MS-based technologies that quantify covalent changes in the side-chain of amino acids are critically important, but they only address one piece of the puzzle. A more crucially important mechanistic question is how noncovalent interactions-which are more difficult to study-dynamically regulate the proteome's 3D structure. The advent of improvements in protein 3D technologies such as cryo-electron microscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance, and X-ray crystallography has allowed considerable progress to be made at this level, but these methods are typically limited to analyzing proteins, which can be expressed and purified in milligram quantities. Newly emerging MS-based technologies have recently been developed for studying the 3D structure of proteins. Importantly, these methods do not require protein samples to be purified and require smaller amounts of sample, opening the wider proteome for structural analysis in complex mixtures, crude lysates, and even in intact cells. These MS-based methods include covalent labeling, crosslinking, thermal proteome profiling, and limited proteolysis, all of which can be leveraged by established MS workflows, as well as newly emerging methods capable of analyzing intact macromolecules and the complexes they form. In this review, we discuss these recent innovations in MS-based "structural" proteomics to provide readers with an understanding of the opportunities they offer and the remaining challenges for understanding the molecular underpinnings of plant structure and function.

MS-based technologies: !quantify! covalent changes in amino acids
MS-based technologies: !study! noncovalent interactions
Protein 3D technologies: !analyze! proteins
MS-based technologies: !analyze! intact macromolecules and complexes
MS-based technologies: !leverage! established MS workflows