The RgTyDCs possess typical decarboxylase functional activity in vitro and in vivo and participate in acteoside biosynthesis in R. glutinosa, positively controlling its production via activated acteoside/tyrosine-derived pathways. Acteoside is an important ingredient in Rehmannia glutinosa and an active natural component that contributes to human health. Tyrosine decarboxylase (TyDC) is thought to play an important role in acteoside biosynthesis. Several plant TyDC family genes have been functionally characterized and shown to play roles in some bioactive metabolites' biosynthesis by mediating the decarboxylation of L-tyrosine and L-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA); however, one TyDC (named RgTyDC1) in R. glutinosa has been identified to date, but the family genes that contribute to acteoside biosynthesis remain largely characterized. Here, by in silico and experimental analyses, we isolated and identified three RgTyDCs (RgTyDC2 to RgTyDC4) in this species; these genes' sequences showed 50.92-82.55% identity, included highly conserved domains with homologues in other plants, classified into two subsets, and encoded proteins that localized to the cytosol. Enzyme kinetic analyses of RgTyDC2 and RgTyDC4 indicated that they both efficiently catalysed L-tyrosine and L-dopa. The overexpression of RgTyDC2 and RgTyDC4 in R. glutinosa, which was associated with enhanced TyDC activity, significantly increased tyramine and dopamine contents, which was positively correlated with improved acteoside production; moreover, the overexpression of RgTyDCs led to upregulated expression of some other genes-related to acteoside biosynthesis. This result suggested that the overexpression of RgTyDCs can positively activate the molecular networks of acteoside pathways, enhancing the accumulation of tyramine and dopamine, and promoting end-product acteoside biosynthesis. Our findings provide an evidence that RgTyDCs play vital molecular roles in acteoside biosynthesis pathways, contributing to the increase in acteoside yield in R. glutinosa.

RgTyDCs: !participate in! acteoside biosynthesis 
RgTyDCs: !catalyse! L-tyrosine and L-dopa 
RgTyDCs: !overexpression of! tyramine and dopamine contents 
RgTyDCs: !upregulate! genes related to acteoside biosynthesis 
RgTyDCs: !positively activate! molecular networks of acteoside pathways 
RgTyDCs: !enhance! accumulation of tyramine and dopamine