Botrytis cinerea and fungicides interacted and influenced selected biochemical compounds. DPPH and glutathione are the first line of defence against biotic/abiotic stress. Plant metabolites are correlated with fungicides level during dissipation. Botrytis cinerea is an etiological agent of gray mould in leafy vegetables and is combated by fungicides. Fluazinam and azoxystrobin are commonly used fungicides, which inhibit oxidative phosphorylation in fungi. In this study, lettuce was (i) inoculated with B. cinerea; (ii) sprayed with azoxystrobin or fluazinam; (iii) inoculated with B. cinerea and sprayed with fungicides. This investigation confirmed that B. cinerea and fungicides affected lettuce's biochemistry and stress status. B. cinerea influenced the behaviour of fungicides reflected by shortened dissipation of azoxystrobin compared to non-inoculated plants, while prolonged degradation of fluazinam. Stress caused by B. cinerea combined with fungicides reduced level of chlorophylls (53.46%) and carotenoids (75.42%), whereas increased phenolic compounds (81%), ascorbate concentrations (32.4%), and catalase activity (116.1%). Abiotic stress caused by fungicides contributed most to the induction of carotenoids (107.68 µg g<sup>-1</sup> on dissipation day 3<sup>-1</sup>). Diphenyl picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging activity and glutathione concentration peaked from the first hour of fungicides dissipation. For the first time correlation between the status of plant metabolites and fungicides during their dissipation was observed. These results indicate that non-enzymatic antioxidants could be the first-line compounds against stress factors, whereas ascorbate and antioxidant enzymes tend to mitigate stress only secondarily. The findings of this study help better understand plant biochemistry under biotic/abiotic stress conditions.

Botrytis cinerea: !interacts with! fungicides 
fungicides: !affects! biochemistry 
DPPH: !correlates with! fungicides 
chlorophylls: !reduced by! B. cinerea + fungicides 
carotenoids: !reduced by! B. cinerea + fungicides 
phenolic compounds: !increased by! B. cinerea + fungicides 
ascorbate concentrations: !increased by! B. cinerea + fungicides 
catalase activity: !increased by! B. cinerea + fungicides 
DPPH radical scavenging activity: !peaks from! first hour of fungicides dissipation 
glutathione concentration: !peaks from! first hour of fungicides dissipation