We used mutant <i>cipk17</i> and Nipponbare in field experiments to analyze agronomic traits, photosynthetic parameters, transcriptome, and gene expression. The results demonstrated cytoplasmic localization of <i>OsCIPK17</i>, while GUS allogeneic (<i>A. thaliana</i>) tissue-staining and quantitative analysis showed the gene was expressed in many organs, including flower buds; furthermore, it was involved in root, stem, and leaf growth. Compared to Nipponbare plants, grain filling rate and final grain weight decreased in plants of the knockout mutant owing to a delay in attainment of maximum grain filling rate. Photosystem II (PSII) efficiency was also reduced. Enrichment analysis showed that the functions of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) focused on nucleoside-, nucleotide-, and lipid-binding, as well as hydrolase, transferase, and phosphorylase activities. Signaling pathways mainly included starch and sucrose metabolism, as well as photosynthesis. Additionally, some DEGs were verified by fluorescence analysis. The results showed that knockout of <i>OsCIPK17</i> affected photosynthesis and starch-, sucrose-, and amino acid metabolism-related gene expression; furthermore, the mutation reduced PSII utilization efficiency, it blocked the synthesis and metabolism of starch and sucrose, and affected the formation and transport of assimilates, thereby reducing final grain weight.

OsCIPK17: !localizes to! cytoplasm 
OsCIPK17: !expressed in! many organs 
OsCIPK17: !involved in! root, stem, and leaf growth 
OsCIPK17: !reduces! grain filling rate and final grain weight 
OsCIPK17: !reduces! PSII efficiency 
DEGs: !focus on! nucleoside-, nucleotide-, and lipid-binding, hydrolase, transferase, and phosphorylase activities 
DEGs: !mainly include! starch and sucrose metabolism, photosynthesis 
OsCIPK17: !affects! photosynthesis, starch-, sucrose-, and amino acid metabolism-related gene expression 
OsCIPK17: !blocks! synthesis and metabolism of starch and sucrose 
OsCIPK17: !affects! formation and transport of assimilates