Citrus psyllid is the only insect vector of citrus Huanglongbing (HLB), which is the most destructive disease in the citrus industry. There is no effective treatment for HLB, so detecting citrus psyllids as soon as possible is the key prevention measure for citrus HLB. It is time-consuming and laborious to search for citrus psyllids through artificial patrol, which is inconvenient for the management of citrus orchards. With the development of artificial intelligence technology, a computer vision method instead of the artificial patrol can be adopted for orchard management to reduce the cost and time. The citrus psyllid is small in shape and gray in color, similar to the stem, stump, and withered part of the leaves, leading to difficulty for the traditional target detection algorithm to achieve a good recognition effect. In this work, in order to make the model have good generalization ability under outdoor light condition, a high-definition camera to collect data set of citrus psyllids and citrus fruit flies under natural light condition was used, a method to increase the number of small target pests in citrus based on semantic segmentation algorithm was proposed, and the cascade region-based convolution neural networks (R-CNN) (convolutional neural network) algorithm was improved to enhance the recognition effect of small target pests using multiscale training, combining CBAM attention mechanism with high-resolution feature retention network high-resoultion network (HRNet) as feature extraction network, adding sawtooth atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) structure to fully extract high-resolution features from different scales, and adding feature pyramid networks (FPN) structure for feature fusion at different scales. To mine difficult samples more deeply, an online hard sample mining strategy was adopted in the process of model sampling. The results show that the improved cascade R-CNN algorithm after training has an average recognition accuracy of 88.78% for citrus psyllids. Compared with VGG16, ResNet50, and other common networks, the improved small target recognition algorithm obtains the highest recognition performance. Experimental results also show that the improved cascade R-CNN algorithm not only performs well in citrus psylla identification but also in other small targets such as citrus fruit flies, which makes it possible and feasible to detect small target pests with a field high-definition camera.

Camera: !collects data set of! Citrus psyllids and citrus fruit flies 
Semantic segmentation algorithm: !increases number of! Small target pests 
Cascade region-based convolution neural networks (R-CNN): !enhances recognition effect of! Small target pests 
CBAM attention mechanism: !combines with! High-resolution feature retention network high-resoultion network (HRNet) 
Sawtooth atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP): !fully extracts! High-resolution features 
Feature pyramid networks (FPN): !fuses features at! Different scales 
Online hard sample mining strategy: !mines! Difficult samples