Plastoglobules are ubiquitous under non-stress conditions and their morphology, closely related to their composition, changes differently depending on the specific stress that the plant undergoes. Plastoglobules are lipoprotein structures attached to thylakoid membranes, which participate in chloroplast metabolism and stress responses. Their structure contains a coating lipid monolayer and a hydrophobic core that differ in composition. Their function in chloroplasts has been studied focussing on their composition. However, we currently lack a comprehensive study that quantitatively evaluates the occurrence and morphology of plastoglobules. Following a literature search strategy, we quantified the main morphological attributes of plastoglobules from photosynthetic chloroplasts of more than 1000 TEM images published over the last 53 years, covering more than 100 taxa and 15 stress types. The analysis shows that plastoglobules under non-stress conditions are spherical, with an average diameter of 100-200 nm and cover less than 3% of the chloroplast cross-section area. This percentage rises under almost every type of stress, particularly in senescence. Interestingly, an apparent trade-off between increasing either the number or the diameter of plastoglobules governs this response. Our results show that plastoglobules are ubiquitous in chloroplasts of higher plants under non-stress conditions. Besides, provided the specific molecular composition of the core and coat of plastoglobules, we conclude that specific stress-related variation in plastoglobules attributes may allow inferring precise responses of the chloroplast metabolism.

Plastoglobules: !are ubiquitous in! chloroplasts 
Plastoglobules: !change morphology depending on! stress 
Plastoglobules: !contain! lipid monolayer & hydrophobic core 
Plastoglobules: !have an average diameter of! 100-200 nm 
Plastoglobules: !cover less than! 3% of chloroplast cross-section area 
Stress: !increases! number & diameter of plastoglobules 
Plastoglobules: !allow inferring! precise responses of chloroplast metabolism