Extracellular ATP level induced a transient increase during germination of Arabidopsis seeds, and extracellular ATP could negatively regulate the seed germination by its receptor, DORN1. Extracellular ATP (exATP) acts as a signal molecule for regulating growth, development, and responses of plants to external environments. In this study, we investigated the possible involvement of exATP in regulating the seed germination of Arabidopsis thaliana. Treatments of Arabidopsis seeds with exogenous ATP delayed seed germination, suggesting that exATP could be a repressor for seed germination. During the germination of Arabidopsis seeds, the exATP level of the seeds presented a transient increase. When exogenous application of the glucose-hexokinase system effectively decreased the exATP level of the Arabidopsis seeds during germination, the percentage of germination was significantly enhanced, while the products of ATP hydrolysis had no effects on the germination. Further studies showed that the seeds of dorn 1-3 mutant plants (mutation in exATP receptor) showed a higher germination percentage, compared to the seeds of wide type (WT) plants. In addition, the dorn 1-3 mutant seeds were less sensitive to the delay-effect of exogenous ATP on seed germination than the WT seeds. The dorn 1-3 mutant seeds presented a higher GA (gibberellin) content, lower ABA (abscisic acid) content, and lower ratio of ABA/GA contents before the imbibition, compared to the WT seeds. The regulation of seed germination by exATP was dependent on the external temperature. These data suggest that exATP is involved in regulating Arabidopsis seed germination.

exATP: !represses! seed germination
exATP: !induces! transient increase
glucose-hexokinase system: !enhances! germination percentage
dorn 1-3 mutant plants: !are less sensitive to! delay-effect of exogenous ATP
dorn 1-3 mutant seeds: !have higher GA content than! WT seeds
dorn 1-3 mutant seeds: !have lower ABA content than! WT seeds
dorn 1-3 mutant seeds: !have lower ABA/GA ratio than! WT seeds
regulation of seed germination: !is dependent on! external temperature