Understanding extensive transcriptional reprogramming events mediated by wounding during the oolong tea manufacturing process is essential for improving oolong tea quality. To improve our comprehension of the architecture of the wounding-induced gene regulatory network, we systematically analyzed the high-resolution transcriptomic and metabolomic data from wounding-treated (after turnover stage) tea leaves at 11 time points over a 220-min period. The results indicated that wounding activates a burst of transcriptional activity within 10 min and that the temporal expression patterns over time could be partitioned into 18 specific clusters with distinct biological processes. The transcription factor (TF) activity linked to the TF binding motif participated in specific biological processes within different clusters. A chronological model of the wounding-induced gene regulatory network provides insight into the dynamic transcriptional regulation event after wounding treatment (the turnover stage). Time series data of wounding-induced volatiles reveal the scientific significance of resting for a while after wounding treatment during the actual manufacturing process of oolong tea. Integrating information-rich expression data with information on volatiles allowed us to identify many high-confidence TFs participating in aroma formation regulation after wounding treatment by using weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). Collectively, our research revealed the complexity of the wounding-induced gene regulatory network and described wounding-mediated dynamic transcriptional reprogramming events, serving as a valuable theoretical basis for the quality formation of oolong tea during the post-harvest manufacturing process.

wounding: !activates! transcriptional activity 
TF: !participates in! specific biological processes 
wounding: !induces! gene regulatory network 
volatiles: !reveal! scientific significance 
expression data: !integrates with! information on volatiles 
TFs: !participate in! aroma formation regulation 
wounding: !mediates! dynamic transcriptional reprogramming