Photosynthesis has been mainly studied under steady-state conditions even though this assumption results inadequate for assessing the biochemical responses to rapid variations occurring in natural environments. The combination of mathematical models with available data may enhance the understanding of the dynamic responses of plants to fluctuating environments and can be used to make predictions on how photosynthesis would respond to non-steady-state conditions. In this study, we present a leaf level System Dynamics photosynthesis model based and validated on an experiment performed on two soybean varieties, namely, the wild type Eiko and the chlorophyll-deficient mutant MinnGold, grown in constant and fluctuating light conditions. This mutant is known to have similar steady-state photosynthesis compared to the green wild type, but it is found to have less biomass at harvest. It has been hypothesized that this might be due to an unoptimized response to non-steady-state conditions; therefore, this mutant seems appropriate to investigate dynamic photosynthesis. The model explained well the photosynthetic responses of these two varieties to fluctuating and constant light conditions and allowed to make relevant conclusions on the different dynamic responses of the two varieties. Deviations between data and model simulations are mostly evident in the non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) dynamics due to the oversimplified combination of PsbS- and zeaxanthin-dependent kinetics, failing in finely capturing the NPQ responses at different timescales. Nevertheless, due to its simplicity, the model can provide the basis of an upscaled dynamic model at a plant level.

Photosynthesis: !studied under! Steady-state conditions 
Photosynthesis: !responds to! Fluctuating environments 
System Dynamics Model: !based on! Experiment 
System Dynamics Model: !validated on! Two soybean varieties 
Chlorophyll-deficient Mutant: !has similar! Steady-state photosynthesis 
Chlorophyll-deficient Mutant: !has less! Biomass at harvest 
Model: !explained! Photosynthetic responses 
Model: !allowed! Relevant conclusions 
Deviations: !due to! Oversimplified combination of PsbS- and zeaxanthin-dependent kinetics