High temperatures affect the yield and quality of vegetable crops. Unlike thermosensitive plants, thermotolerant plants have excellent systems for withstanding heat stress. This study evaluated various heat resistance indexes of the thermotolerant cucumber (TT) and thermosensitive cucumber (TS) plants at the seedling stage. The similarities and differences between the regulatory genes were assessed through transcriptome analysis to understand the mechanisms for heat stress resistance in cucumber. The TT plants exhibited enhanced leaf status, photosystem, root viability, and ROS scavenging under high temperature compared to the TS plants. Additionally, transcriptome analysis showed that the genes involved in photosynthesis, the chlorophyll metabolism, and defense responses were upregulated in TT plants but downregulated in TS plants. Zeatin riboside (ZR), brassinosteroid (BR), and jasmonic acid (JA) levels were higher in TT plants than in TS. The heat stress increased gibberellic acid (GA) and indoleacetic acid (IAA) levels in both plant lines; however, the level of GA was higher in TT. Correlation and interaction analyses revealed that heat cucumber heat resistance is regulated by a few transcription factor family genes and metabolic pathways. Our study revealed different phenotypic and physiological mechanisms of the heat response by the thermotolerant and thermosensitive cucumber plants. The plants were also shown to exhibit different expression profiles and metabolic pathways. The heat resistant pathways and genes of two cucumber varieties were also identified. These results enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of cucumber response to high-temperature stress.

High temperatures: !affect! Yield/Quality
TT plants: !enhance! Leaf status/Photosystem/Root viability/ROS scavenging
TS plants: !downregulate! Genes involved in photosynthesis/Chlorophyll metabolism/Defense responses
ZR/BR/JA: !higher in! TT plants
GA/IAA: !increase in! Both plant lines/!higher in! TT plants
Heat resistance: !regulated by! Transcription factor family genes/Metabolic pathways