['35161331', 'More than 95,000 protein-protein interactions of Arabidopsis thaliana have been  published and deposited in databases. This dataset was supplemented by  approximately 900 additional interactions, which were identified in the  literature from the years 2002-2021. These protein-protein interactions were used  as the basis for a Cytoscape network and were supplemented with data on  subcellular localization, gene ontologies, biochemical properties and  co-expression. The resulting network has been exemplarily applied in unraveling  the PPI-network of the plant vacuolar proton-translocating ATPase (V-ATPase),  which was selected due to its central importance for the plant cell. In  particular, it is involved in cellular pH homeostasis, providing proton motive  force necessary for transport processes, trafficking of proteins and, thereby,  cell wall synthesis. The data points to regulation taking place on multiple  levels: (a) a phosphorylation-dependent regulation by 14-3-3 proteins and by  kinases such as WNK8 and NDPK1a, (b) an energy-dependent regulation via HXK1 and  the glucose receptor RGS1 and (c) a Ca(2+)-dependent regulation by SOS2 and IDQ6.  The known importance of V-ATPase for cell wall synthesis is supported by its  interactions with several proteins involved in cell wall synthesis. The resulting  network was further analyzed for (experimental) biases and was found to be  enriched in nuclear, cytosolic and plasma membrane proteins but depleted in  extracellular and mitochondrial proteins, in comparison to the entity of  protein-coding genes. Among the processes and functions, proteins involved in  transcription were highly abundant in the network. Subnetworks were extracted for  organelles, processes and protein families. The degree of representation of  organelles and processes reveals limitations and advantages in the current  knowledge of protein-protein interactions, which have been mainly caused by a  high number of database entries being contributed by only a few publications with  highly specific motivations and methodologies that favor, for instance,  interactions in the cytosol and the nucleus.', '2022 Jan 27', 'Plants (Basel)', '10.3390/plants11030350', 'ORCID:']

V-ATPase: !regulates! Cellular pH homeostasis
14-3-3 proteins: !phosphorylate! V-ATPase
WNK8: !kinases! V-ATPase
NDPK1a: !kinases! V-ATPase
HXK1: !regulates! V-ATPase
RGS1: !regulates! V-ATPase
SOS2: !regulates! V-ATPase
IDQ6: !regulates! V-ATPase
V-ATPase: !interacts with! Proteins involved in cell wall synthesis
Network: !enriched in! Nuclear, cytosolic and plasma membrane proteins
Network: !depleted in! Extracellular and mitochondrial proteins
Proteins: !involved in! Transcription