The present review gives an insight into the salinity stress tolerance responses and mechanisms of underground vegetable crops. Phytoprotectants, agronomic practices, biofertilizers, and modern biotechnological approaches are crucial for salinity stress management. Underground vegetables are the source of healthy carbohydrates, resistant starch, antioxidants, vitamins, mineral, and nutrients which benefit human health. Soil salinity is a serious threat to agriculture that severely affects the growth, development, and productivity of underground vegetable crops. Salt stress induces several morphological, anatomical, physiological, and biochemical changes in crop plants which include reduction in plant height, leaf area, and biomass. Also, salinity stress impedes the growth of the underground organs, which ultimately reduces crop yield. Moreover, salt stress is detrimental to photosynthesis, membrane integrity, nutrient balance, and leaf water content. Salt tolerance mechanisms involve a complex interplay of several genes, transcription factors, and proteins that are involved in the salinity tolerance mechanism in underground crops. Besides, a coordinated interaction between several phytoprotectants, phytohormones, antioxidants, and microbes is needed. So far, a comprehensive review of salinity tolerance responses and mechanisms in underground vegetables is not available. This review aims to provide a comprehensive view of salt stress effects on underground vegetable crops at different levels of biological organization and discuss the underlying salt tolerance mechanisms. Also, the role of multi-omics in dissecting gene and protein regulatory networks involved in salt tolerance mechanisms is highlighted, which can potentially help in breeding salt-tolerant underground vegetable crops.

Salt stress: !affects! Underground vegetable crops
Phytoprotectants: !are crucial for! Salinity stress management
Salt stress: !induces! Morphological, anatomical, physiological, and biochemical changes
Salt tolerance mechanisms: !involve! Genes, transcription factors, and proteins
Multi-omics: !help in! Dissecting gene and protein regulatory networks