Salinity is one of the most common unfavorable environmental conditions that limits plant growth and development, ultimately reducing crop productivity. To investigate the underlying molecular mechanism involved in the salinity response in rice, we initially screened 238 rice cultivars after salt treatment at the seedling stage and identified two highly salt-tolerant cultivars determined by the relative damage rate parameter. The majority of cultivars (94.1%) were ranked as salt-sensitive and highly salt-sensitive. Transcriptome profiling was completed in highly salt-tolerant, moderately salt-tolerant, and salt-sensitive under water and salinity treatments at the seedling stage. Principal component analysis displayed a clear distinction among the three cultivars under control and salinity stress conditions. Several starch and sucrose metabolism-related genes were induced after salt treatment in all genotypes at the seedling stage. The results from the present study enable the identification of the ascorbate glutathione pathway, potentially participating in the process of plant response to salinity in the early growth stage. Our findings also highlight the significance of high-affinity K<sup>+</sup> uptake transporters (HAKs) and high-affinity K<sup>+</sup> transporters (HKTs) during salt stress responses in rice seedlings. Collectively, the cultivar-specific stress-responsive genes and pathways identified in the present study act as a useful resource for researchers interested in plant responses to salinity at the seedling stage.

Salinity: !limits! Plant Growth 
Cultivars: !distinguished by! Relative Damage Rate Parameter 
Transcriptome Profiling: !completed in! Highly Salt-Tolerant, Moderately Salt-Tolerant, and Salt-Sensitive 
Starch/Sucrose Metabolism-Related Genes: !induced after! Salt Treatment 
Ascorbate Glutathione Pathway: !potentially participates in! Process of Plant Response to Salinity 
HAKs/HKTs: !highlighted during! Salt Stress Responses in Rice Seedlings