Salinity is a ubiquitous stressor, depleting osmotic potential and affecting the tomato seedlings' development and productivity. Considering this critical concern, we explored the salinity response in tomato seedlings by evaluating them under progressive salt stress duration (0, 3, 6, and 12 days). Intriguingly, besides the adverse effect of salt stress on tomato growth the findings exhibited a significant role of tomato antioxidative system, RBOH genes, ABA biosynthesis, and signaling transcription factor for establishing tolerance to salinity stress. For instance, the activities of enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants continued to incline positively with the increased levels of reactive oxygen species (O<sub>2</sub><sup>•-</sup>, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>), MDA, and cellular damage, suggesting the scavenging capacity of tomato seedlings against salt stress. Notably, the RBOH transcription factors activated the hydrogen peroxide-mediated signalling pathway that induced the detoxification mechanisms in tomato seedlings. Consequently, the increased gene expression of antioxidant enzymes and the corresponding ratio of non-enzymatic antioxidants AsA-GSH suggested the modulation of antioxidants to survive the salt-induced oxidative stress. In addition, the endogenous ABA level was enhanced under salinity stress, indicating higher ABA biosynthesis and signalling gene expression. Subsequently, the upregulated transcript abundance of ABA biosynthesis and signalling-related genes suggested the ABA-mediated capacity of tomato seedlings to regulate homeostasis under salt stress. The current findings have revealed fascinating responses of the tomato to survive the salt stress periods, in order to improve the abiotic stress tolerance in tomato.

Salt stress: !affects! Tomato seedlings
Reactive oxygen species: !increase! Antioxidant activity
RBOH genes: !activate! Hydrogen peroxide-mediated signalling pathway
Antioxidant enzymes: !modulate! Non-enzymatic antioxidants
ABA biosynthesis: !enhances! Endogenous ABA level
ABA signalling-related genes: !upregulate! Transcript abundance