The present study clearly showed that the optimum root zone temperature of photosynthesis and plant growth was affected by air temperature, and that optimization of root zone temperature depending on an air growth temperature by cooling systems could lead to improvement of plant production. Temperature is one of the critical factors affecting plant growth and yield production. Both air and root zone temperatures can strongly affect growth and development of plants. However, studies on the effects of root zone temperature on plant growth parameters along with air temperature are still limited. In the present study, the effects of air and root zone temperature on plant growth, physiological parameters and photosynthetic characteristics of lettuce plants were investigated to optimize the air and root zone temperature to achieve the best growth conditions for lettuce plants. Two air temperature treatments (30/25 and 25/20ʡC at day/night temperature) and five root zone temperature treatments (15, 20, 25, 30 and 35ʡC) were applied in this study. The present study showed that the maximum plant growth of lettuce plants was higher in air temperatures at 30/25ʡC than in 25/20ʡC. When the plants were grown at an air temperature of 30/25ʡC, the optimum root zone temperature appeared to be 30ʡC. However, when the plants were grown at an air temperature of 25/20ʡC, the optimum root temperature decreased and appeared to be 25ʡC. Furthermore, plants grown under air temperature of 30/25ʡC showed greater CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation rate, stomatal conductance, electron transport rate (ETR) at high light, and lower non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) at high light than those of 25/20ʡC. These results suggest that it is necessary to control and adjust the root zone temperature based on the air temperature.

air temperature: !affects! root zone temperature 
root zone temperature: !affects! plant growth 
air temperature: !enhances! CO2 assimilation rate 
air temperature: !enhances! stomatal conductance 
air temperature: !enhances! electron transport rate 
air temperature: !decreases! non-photochemical quenching