Various adaptive mechanisms can ensure that seedlings are established at the most favourable time and place. These mechanisms include seed dormancy i.e., incapacity to germinate in any environment without a specific environmental trigger and inhibition i.e., incapacity to germinate in an unfavourable environment (water availability, temperature: thermoinhibition and light). The objective of this research was to study in the temperate range for germination of forage and turf grass species perennial ryegrass, if the thermal requirements for germination are under genetic controlled and could be selectively bred. Two divergent selections of three cycles were realized on a natural population: one to select for the capacity to germinate at 10°C vs. the impossibility to germinate at 10°C, and one to select for the capacity to germinate at 32°C vs. the impossibility to germinate at 32°C. Seeds of all the lots obtained from the two divergent selections were then germinated at constant temperatures from 5 to 35°C to evaluate their germination ability. Concerning the positive selection, the first cycle of positive selection at 10°C was highly efficient with a very strong increase in the germination percentage. However, afterward no selection effect was observed during the next two cycles of positive selection. By contrast, the positive selection at 32°C was efficient during all cycles with a linear increase of the percentage of germination at 32°C. Concerning the negative selection, we observed only a large positive effect of the first cycle of selection at 10°C. These findings demonstrate that seed thermoinhibition at 10 and 32°C observed in a natural population of perennial ryegrass has a genetic basis and a single recessive gene seems to be involved at 10°C.

Seed dormancy: !ensures! favourable time/place
Thermoinhibition: !incapacitates! germination in unfavourable environment
Positive selection: !increases! germination percentage at 10°C/32°C
Negative selection: !strongly increases! germination percentage at 10°C
Gene: !controls! thermoinhibition at 10°C