Root system architecture plays an important role in plant adaptation to drought stress. The root system architecture (RSA) consists of several structural features, which includes number and length of main and lateral roots along with the density and length of root hairs. These features exhibit plasticity under water-limited environments and could be critical to developing crops with efficient root systems for adaptation under drought. Recent advances in the omics approaches have significantly improved our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of RSA remodeling under drought and the identification of genes and other regulatory elements. Plant response to drought stress at physiological, morphological, biochemical, and molecular levels in root cells is regulated by various phytohormones and their crosstalk. Stress-induced reactive oxygen species play a significant role in regulating root growth and development under drought stress. Several transcription factors responsible for the regulation of RSA under drought have proven to be beneficial for developing drought tolerant crops. Molecular breeding programs for developing drought-tolerant crops have been greatly benefitted by the availability of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) associated with the RSA regulation. In the present review, we have discussed the role of various QTLs, signaling components, transcription factors, microRNAs and crosstalk among various phytohormones in shaping RSA and present future research directions to better understand various factors involved in RSA remodeling for adaptation to drought stress. We believe that the information provided herein may be helpful in devising strategies to develop crops with better RSA for efficient uptake and utilization of water and nutrients under drought conditions.

QTLs: !regulate! RSA
Signaling components: !regulate! RSA
Transcription factors: !regulate! RSA
microRNAs: !regulate! RSA
Phytohormones: !crosstalk with! each other
Reactive oxygen species: !regulate! root growth and development