The Poales is one of the largest orders of flowering plants with significant economic and ecological values. Reconstructing the phylogeny of the Poales is important for understanding its evolutionary history that forms the basis for biological studies. However, due to sparse taxon sampling and limited molecular data, previous studies have resulted in a variety of contradictory topologies. In particular, there are three nodes surrounded by incongruence: the phylogenetic ambiguity near the root of the Poales tree, the sister family of Poaceae, and the delimitation of the xyrid clade. We conducted a comprehensive sampling and reconstructed the phylogenetic tree using plastid and mitochondrial genomic data from 91 to 66 taxa, respectively, representing all the 16 families of Poales. Our analyses support the finding of Bromeliaceae and Typhaceae as the earliest diverging groups within the Poales while having phylogenetic relationships with the polytomy. The clade of Ecdeiocoleaceae and Joinvilleaceae is recovered as the sister group of Poaceae. The three families, Mayacaceae, Eriocaulaceae, and Xyridaceae, of the xyrid assembly diverged successively along the backbone of the Poales phylogeny, and thus this assembly is paraphyletic. Surprisingly, we find substantial phylogenetic conflicts within the plastid genomes of the Poales, as well as among the plastid, mitochondrial, and nuclear data. These conflicts suggest that the Poales could have a complicated evolutionary history, such as rapid radiation and polyploidy, particularly allopolyploidy through hybridization. In sum, our study presents a new perspicacity into the complex phylogenetic relationships and the underlying phylogenetic conflicts within the Poales.

Bromeliaceae: !sister family of! Poaceae
Typhaceae: !sister family of! Poaceae
Ecdeiocoleaceae: !sister group of! Poaceae
Joinvilleaceae: !sister group of! Poaceae
Mayacaceae: !diverged from! Xyridaceae
Eriocaulaceae: !diverged from! Xyridaceae
Xyridaceae: !diverged from! Poales
plastid genomes: !conflict with! mitochondrial genomes
plastid genomes: !conflict with! nuclear data