During seed maturation, the seed deposits storage compounds (starches, oils, and proteins), synthesizes defense compounds, produces a seed coat, initiates embryo dormancy, and becomes desiccated. During the late-maturation stage, seed storage compound contents and compositions change dramatically. Although maturation has been extensively studied in model species and crops, it remains less well characterized in woody perennial plants. In this study, we conducted morphological and cytological observations, transcriptome profiling, and chemical constituent analysis of elm (Ulmus pumila L.) seeds during the late-maturation stage. Light and electron microscopy revealed that closely packed yet discrete lipid bodies frequently surrounded the densely stained protein bodies, and the protein bodies became irregular or even partially disintegrated at the end of seed development. RNA-seq detected substantial transcriptome changes during the late-maturation stage, and pathway enrichment analysis showed that the differentially expressed genes were associated with phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, starch and sucrose metabolism, plant-pathogen interactions, and hormone signal transduction. Furthermore, we used mass spectrometry imaging to detect the relative intensity and spatial distribution of fatty acids, phospholipids, and waxes in elm seeds. Our findings provide a framework for understanding the changes in cytological features and chemical composition during the final stage of elm seed development, and a detailed reference for seed development in woody plants.

Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis: !affects! Seed storage compounds
Starch and sucrose metabolism: !affects! Seed storage compounds
Plant-pathogen interactions: !affects! Seed storage compounds
Hormone signal transduction: !affects! Seed storage compounds
Lipid bodies: !surround! Protein bodies
RNA-seq: !detects! Transcriptome changes
Mass spectrometry imaging: !detects! Relative intensity and spatial distribution of fatty acids, phospholipids, and waxes