Fruit pedicel is the bridge linking the parent tree and the fruit, which is an important channel for water and nutrients transport to the fruit. The genetic specificity determines the characteristics of the pedicel and the fruit, but the relationship between the pedicel structure and the fruit characteristics is unexplored. Combining the investigation of fruit characteristics, the statistical analysis of the pedicel structural properties, and the 2D and 3D anatomical observation of the pedicel, this study found distinctive contributions of the pedicel elements to the fruit characteristics in four pear species. The European pear (Conference) showed distinct fruit shape index and pedicel structural properties compared with the oriental pears (Akizuki, Yali, and Nanguoli). The fruit size positively correlated with pedicel length, fiber area, pedicel diameter, the area percentage of the cortex, and the area percentage of phloem; however, fruit firmness and soluble solids concentration are showed a stronger positive correlation with xylem area, pith area, the area percentage of xylem, the area percentage of sieve tube, and the area percentage of pith. Pedicel elements, including pith, fiber, and cortex, likely play a certain role in the fruit growth due to the variations of their characteristics demonstrated in the four pear species. The porosity, the ratio of the surface area to the volume, and the spatial arrangement of the vessels showed significant variations across the pear species, indicating the distinction of the hydraulic conductance of the pedicels. Our findings provided direct evidence that pedicel structural elements contributed distinctively to the fruit characteristics among pear species.

Fruit: !correlates with! pedicel length
Fruit: !correlates with! fiber area
Fruit: !correlates with! pedicel diameter
Fruit: !correlates with! cortex area
Fruit: !correlates with! phloem area
Fruit: !correlates with! xylem area
Fruit: !correlates with! pith area
Fruit: !correlates with! sieve tube area
Fruit: !correlates with! porosity
Fruit: !correlates with! vessel arrangement