Witches' broom disease of cacao is caused by the pathogenic fungus Moniliophthora perniciosa. By using tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) cultivar Micro-Tom (MT) as a model system, we investigated the physiological and metabolic consequences of M. perniciosa infection to determine whether symptoms result from sink establishment during infection. Infection of MT by M. perniciosa caused reductions in root biomass and fruit yield, a decrease in leaf gas exchange, and down-regulation of photosynthesis-related genes. The total leaf area and water potential decreased, while ABA levels, water conductance/conductivity, and ABA-related gene expression increased. Genes related to sugar metabolism and those involved in secondary cell wall deposition were up-regulated upon infection, and the concentrations of sugars, fumarate, and amino acids increased. 14C-glucose was mobilized towards infected MT stems, but not in inoculated stems of the MT line overexpressing CYTOKININ OXIDASE-2 (35S::AtCKX2), suggesting a role for cytokinin in establishing a sugar sink. The up-regulation of genes involved in cell wall deposition and phenylpropanoid metabolism in infected MT, but not in 35S::AtCKX2 plants, suggests establishment of a cytokinin-mediated sink that promotes tissue overgrowth with an increase in lignin. Possibly, M. perniciosa could benefit from the accumulation of secondary cell walls during its saprotrophic phase of infection.

M. perniciosa: !causes! Witches' broom disease of cacao
Infection: !reduces! root biomass and fruit yield
Infection: !decreases! leaf gas exchange
Infection: !down-regulates! photosynthesis-related genes
Infection: !decreases! total leaf area and water potential
Infection: !increases! ABA levels, water conductance/conductivity, and ABA-related gene expression
Infection: !up-regulates! genes related to sugar metabolism and secondary cell wall deposition
Infection: !increases! concentrations of sugars, fumarate, and amino acids
14C-glucose: !mobilizes towards! infected MT stems
35S::AtCKX2: !prevents! 14C-glucose mobilization
Infection: !up-regulates! genes involved in cell wall deposition and phenylpropanoid metabolism
Cytokinin: !establishes! sugar sink
Cytokinin: !promotes! tissue overgrowth with an increase in lignin