Chitosan has shown potential for the control of Fusarium head blight (FHB) disease caused by Fusarium graminearum. The objective of this study was to compare the effect of chitosan hydrochloride applied pre- or post-fungal inoculation on FHB and to better understand its' mode of action via an untargeted metabolomics study. Chitosan inhibited fungal growth in vitro and, when sprayed on the susceptible wheat cultivar Remus 24 hours pre-inoculation with F. graminearum, it significantly reduced the number of infected spikelets at 7, 14 and 21 days post-inoculation. Chitosan pre-treatment also increased the average grain weight per head, the number of grains per head and the 1000-grain weight compared to the controls sprayed with water. No significant impact of chitosan on grain yield was observed when the plants were sprayed 24 hours post-inoculation with F. graminearum, even if it did result in a reduced number of infected spikelets at every time point. An untargeted metabolomic study using UHPLC-QTOF-MS on wheat spikes revealed that spraying the spikes with both chitosan and F. graminearum activated known FHB resistance pathways (e.g. jasmonic acid). Additionally, more metabolites were up- or down-regulated when both chitosan and F. graminearum spores were sprayed on the spikes (117), as compared with chitosan (51) or F. graminearum on their own (32). This included a terpene, a terpenoid and a liminoid previously associated with FHB resistance. In this study we showed that chitosan hydrochloride inhibited the spore germination and hyphal development of F. graminearum in vitro, triggered wheat resistance against infection by F. graminearum when used as a pre-inoculant, and highlighted metabolites and pathways commonly and differentially affected by chitosan, the pathogen and both agents. This study provides insights into how chitosan might provide protection or stimulate wheat resistance to infection by F. graminearum. It also unveiled new putatively identified metabolites that had not been listed in previous FHB or chitosan-related metabolomic studies.

Chitosan: !inhibits! F. graminearum 
Chitosan: !triggers! wheat resistance 
F. graminearum: !causes! FHB disease 
Chitosan: !activates! FHB resistance pathways 
Chitosan: !up-/down-regulates! metabolites 
Metabolites: !associated with! FHB resistance