Canopy architecture is critical in determining the light environment and subsequently the photosynthetic productivity of fruit crops. Numerous CCT domain-containing genes are crucial for plant adaptive responses to diverse environmental cues. Two CCT genes, the orthologues of AtPRR5 in pear, have been reported to be strongly correlated with photosynthetic performance under distinct canopy microclimates. However, knowledge concerning the specific expression patterns and roles of pear CCT family genes (PbCCTs) remains very limited. The key roles played by PbCCTs in the light response led us to examine this large gene family in more detail. Genome-wide sequence analysis identified 42 putative PbCCTs in the genome of pear (Pyrus bretschneideri Rehd.). Phylogenetic analysis indicated that these genes were divided into five subfamilies, namely, COL (14 members), PRR (8 members), ZIM (6 members), TCR1 (6 members) and ASML2 (8 members). Analysis of exon-intron structures and conserved domains provided support for the classification. Genome duplication analysis indicated that whole-genome duplication/segmental duplication events played a crucial role in the expansion of the CCT family in pear and that the CCT family evolved under the effect of purifying selection. Expression profiles exhibited diverse expression patterns of PbCCTs in various tissues and in response to varying light signals. Additionally, transient overexpression of PbPRR2 in tobacco leaves resulted in inhibition of photosynthetic performance, suggesting its possible involvement in the repression of photosynthesis. This study provides a comprehensive analysis of the CCT gene family in pear and will facilitate further functional investigations of PbCCTs to uncover their biological roles in the light response.

PbCCTs: !divided into! 5 subfamilies
PbCCTs: !expanded by! whole-genome duplication/segmental duplication
PbCCTs: !exhibit! diverse expression patterns
PbPRR2: !inhibits! photosynthetic performance
PbCCTs: !evolved under! purifying selection