Water stress can severely impact plant growth, productivity and yield. Consequently, plants have evolved various strategies through which they can respond and adapt to their environment. XERICO (XER) is a stress-responsive RING E3 ubiquitin ligase that modulates abscisic acid (ABA) levels and promotes drought tolerance when overexpressed. To better understand the biological role of XER in stress responses, we characterized a xer-1 hypomorphic mutant and a CRISPR/Cas9-induced xer-2 null mutant in Arabidopsis. Both xer mutant alleles exhibited increased drought sensitivity, supporting the results from overexpression studies. Furthermore, we discovered that both xer mutants have greater stomatal indices and that XER is expressed in epidermal cells, indicating that XER functions in the epidermis to repress stomatal development. To explore XER spatiotemporal and stress-dependent regulation, we conducted a yeast one-hybrid screen and found that CBF4/DREB1D associates with the XER 5' untranslated region (5'-UTR). We generated three cbf4 null mutants with CRISPR/Cas9 and showed that CBF4 negatively regulates ABA responses, promotes stomatal development and reduces drought tolerance, in contrast to the roles shown for XER. CBF4 is induced by ABA and osmotic stress, and localizes to the nucleus where it downregulates XER expression via the DRE element in its 5'-UTR. Lastly, genetic interaction studies confirmed that xer is epistatic to cbf4 in stomatal development and in ABA, osmotic and drought stress responses. We propose that the repression of XER by CBF4 functions to attenuate ABA signaling and stress responses to maintain a balance between plant growth and survival under adverse environmental conditions.

XER: !modulates! ABA levels
XER: !represses! stomatal development
CBF4: !associates with! XER 5'-UTR
CBF4: !negatively regulates! ABA responses
CBF4: !promotes! stomatal development
CBF4: !reduces! drought tolerance
CBF4: !induces! ABA and osmotic stress
CBF4: !localizes to! nucleus
CBF4: !downregulates! XER expression
xer: !epistatic to! cbf4