Peach gummosis is one of the most widespread and destructive diseases. It causes growth stunting, yield loss, branch, trunk, and tree death, and is becoming a restrictive factor in healthy and sustainable development of peach production. Although a locus has been identified based on bi-parental quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping, selection of gummosis-resistant cultivars remains challenging due to the lack of resistant parents and of the complexity of an inducing factor. In this study, an integrated approach of genome-wide association study (GWAS) and comparative transcriptome was used to elucidate the genetic architecture associated with the disease using 195 accessions and 145,456 genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). The broad-sense and narrow-sense heritabilities were estimated using 2-year phenotypic data and genotypic data, which gave high values of 70 and 73%, respectively. Evaluation of population structure by neighbor-joining and principal components analysis (PCA) clustered all accessions into three major groups and six subgroups, mainly according to fruit shape, hairy vs. glabrous fruit skin, pedigree, geographic origin, and domestication history. Five SNPs were found to be significantly associated with gummosis disease resistance, of which SNPrs285957, located on chromosome6 across 28 Mb, was detected by both the BLINK and the FarmCPU model. Six candidate genes flanked by or harboring the significant SNPs, previously implicated in biotic stress tolerance, were significantly associated with this resistance. Two highly resistant accessions were identified with low disease severity, which could be potential sources of resistance genes for breeding. Our results provide a fresh insight into the genetic control of peach gummosis disease.

Peach gummosis: !causes! growth stunting, yield loss, branch, trunk, and tree death 
QTL mapping: !identifies! locus 
GWAS & transcriptome: !elucidates! genetic architecture 
2-year phenotypic data & genotypic data: !estimates! broad-sense & narrow-sense heritabilities 
Neighbor-joining & PCA: !clusters! accessions 
SNPs: !associated with! gummosis disease resistance 
Candidate genes: !implicated in! biotic stress tolerance 
Low disease severity: !identifies! highly resistant accessions