Deep learning shows its advantages and potentials in plant disease recognition and has witnessed a profound development in recent years. To obtain a competing performance with a deep learning algorithm, enough amount of annotated data is requested but in the natural world, scarce or imbalanced data are common, and annotated data is expensive or hard to collect. Data augmentation, aiming to create variations for training data, has shown its power for this issue. But there are still two challenges: creating more desirable variations for scarce and imbalanced data, and designing a data augmentation to ease object detection and instance segmentation. First, current algorithms made variations only inside one specific class, but more desirable variations can further promote performance. To address this issue, we propose a novel data augmentation paradigm that can adapt variations from one class to another. In the novel paradigm, an image in the source domain is translated into the target domain, while the variations unrelated to the domain are maintained. For example, an image with a healthy tomato leaf is translated into a powdery mildew image but the variations of the healthy leaf are maintained and transferred into the powdery mildew class, such as types of tomato leaf, sizes, and viewpoints. Second, current data augmentation is suitable to promote the image classification model but may not be appropriate to alleviate object detection and instance segmentation model, mainly because the necessary annotations can not be obtained. In this study, we leverage a prior mask as input to tell the area we are interested in and reuse the original annotations. In this way, our proposed algorithm can be utilized to do the three tasks simultaneously. Further, We collect 1,258 images of tomato leaves with 1,429 instance segmentation annotations as there is more than one instance in one single image, including five diseases and healthy leaves. Extensive experimental results on the collected images validate that our new data augmentation algorithm makes useful variations and contributes to improving performance for diverse deep learning-based methods.

Data Augmentation: !creates variations! scarce and imbalanced data 
Data Augmentation: !adapts variations! source domain to target domain 
Data Augmentation: !leverages prior mask! object detection and instance segmentation model 
Data Augmentation: !reuses original annotations! object detection and instance segmentation model