['35202657', "The Absence of bc(1) Complex (ABC1) is an ancient, atypical protein kinase family  that emerged prior to the archaeal-eubacterial divergence. Loss-of-function  mutants in ABC1 genes are linked to respiratory defects in microbes and humans  and to compromised photosynthetic performance and stress tolerance in plants.  However, demonstration of protein kinase activity remains elusive, hampering  their study. Here, we investigate a homolog from Arabidopsis thaliana, AtABC1K6,  and demonstrate in vitro autophosphorylation activity, which we replicate with a  human ABC1 ortholog. We also show that AtABC1K6 protein kinase activity requires  an atypical buffer composition, including Mn(2+) as a divalent cation cofactor  and a low salt concentration. AtABC1K6 associates with plastoglobule lipid  droplets of A. thaliana chloroplasts, along with five paralogs. We show that the  protein kinase activity associated with isolated A. thaliana plastoglobules was  inhibited at higher salt concentrations, but could accommodate Mg(2+) as well as  Mn(2+), indicating salt sensitivity, but not the requirement for Mn(2+), may be a  general characteristic of ABC1 proteins. Finally, loss of functional AtABC1K6  impairs the developmental transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. This  phenotype was complemented by the wild-type sequence of AtABC1K6, but not by a  kinase-dead point mutant in the unique Ala-triad of the ATP-binding pocket,  demonstrating the physiological relevance of the protein's kinase activity. We  suggest that ABC1s are bona fide protein kinases with a unique regulatory  mechanism. Our results open the door to detailed functional and mechanistic  studies of ABC1 proteins and plastoglobules.", '2022 Apr', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101762', 'Lundquist']

AtABC1K6: !autophosphorylates! in vitro 
AtABC1K6: !associates with! plastoglobule lipid droplets 
AtABC1K6: !requires! atypical buffer composition 
AtABC1K6: !inhibited by! higher salt concentrations 
AtABC1K6: !impairs! developmental transition 
AtABC1K6: !complemented by! wild-type sequence 
AtABC1K6: !not complemented by! kinase-dead point mutant