In eukaryotes, clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs) facilitate the internalization of material from the cell surface as well as the movement of cargo in post-Golgi trafficking pathways. This diversity of functions is partially provided by multiple monomeric and multimeric clathrin adaptor complexes that provide compartment and cargo selectivity. The adaptor-protein assembly polypeptide-1 (AP-1) complex operates as part of the secretory pathway at the trans-Golgi network (TGN), while the AP-2 complex and the TPLATE complex jointly operate at the plasma membrane to execute clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Key to our further understanding of clathrin-mediated trafficking in plants will be the comprehensive identification and characterization of the network of evolutionarily conserved and plant-specific core and accessory machinery involved in the formation and targeting of CCVs. To facilitate these studies, we have analyzed the proteome of enriched TGN/early endosome-derived and endocytic CCVs isolated from dividing and expanding suspension-cultured Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) cells. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis results were validated by differential chemical labeling experiments to identify proteins co-enriching with CCVs. Proteins enriched in CCVs included previously characterized CCV components and cargos such as the vacuolar sorting receptors in addition to conserved and plant-specific components whose function in clathrin-mediated trafficking has not been previously defined. Notably, in addition to AP-1 and AP-2, all subunits of the AP-4 complex, but not AP-3 or AP-5, were found to be in high abundance in the CCV proteome. The association of AP-4 with suspension-cultured Arabidopsis CCVs is further supported via additional biochemical data.

Clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs): !facilitate! Internalization of material
AP-1 complex: !operates at! Trans-Golgi network
AP-2 complex: !jointly operates with! TPLATE complex
AP-4 complex: !associates with! Suspension-cultured Arabidopsis CCVs