Salt tolerance at germination and seedling growth stages was investigated. GWAS revealed nine genomic regions with pleiotropic effects on salt tolerance. Salt tolerant genotypes were identified for future breeding program. With 20% of the irrigated land worldwide affected by it, salinity is a serious threat to plant development and crop production. While wheat is the most stable food source worldwide, it has been classified as moderately tolerant to salinity. In several crop plants; such as barley, maize and rice, it has been shown that salinity tolerance at seed germination and seedling establishment is under polygenic control. As yield was the ultimate goal of breeders and geneticists, less attention has been paid to understanding the genetic architecture of salt tolerance at early stages. Thus, the genetic control of salt tolerance at these stages is poorly understood relative to the late stages. In the current study, 176 genotypes of spring wheat were tested for salinity tolerance at seed germination and seedling establishment. Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS) has been used to identify the genomic regions/genes conferring salt tolerance at seed germination and seedling establishment. Salinity stress negatively impacted all germination and seedling development parameters. A set of 137 SNPs showed significant association with the traits of interest. Across the whole genome, 33 regions showed high linkage disequilibrium (LD). These high LD regions harbored 15 SNPs with pleiotropic effect (i.e. SNPs that control more than one trait). Nine genes belonging to different functional groups were found to be associated with the pleiotropic SNPs. Noteworthy, chromosome 2B harbored the gene TraesCS2B02G135900 that acts as a potassium transporter. Remarkably, one SNP marker, reported in an early study, associated with salt tolerance was validated in this study. Our findings represent potential targets of genetic manipulation to understand and improve salinity tolerance in wheat.

Salt tolerance: !affected by! polygenic control 
GWAS: !revealed! nine genomic regions 
SNPs: !associated with! traits of interest 
Gene: !transports! potassium 
SNP marker: !validated! early study