Flavonoids are a well-known class of specialized metabolites that play key roles in plant development, reproduction, and survival. Flavonoids are also of considerable interest from the perspective of human health, as both phytonutrients and pharmaceuticals. RNA sequencing analysis of an Arabidopsis null allele for chalcone synthase (CHS), which catalyzes the first step in flavonoid metabolism, has uncovered evidence that these compounds influence the expression of genes associated with the plant circadian clock. Analysis of promoter-luciferase constructs further showed that the transcriptional activity of CCA1 and TOC1, two key clock genes, is altered in CHS-deficient seedlings across the day/night cycle. Similar findings for a mutant line lacking flavonoid 3'-hydroxylase (F3'H) activity, and thus able to synthesize mono- but not dihydroxylated B-ring flavonoids, suggests that the latter are at least partially responsible; this was further supported by the ability of quercetin to enhance CCA1 promoter activity in wild-type and CHS-deficient seedlings. The effects of flavonoids on circadian function were also reflected in photosynthetic activity, with chlorophyll cycling abolished in CHS- and F3'H-deficient plants. Remarkably, the same phenotype was exhibited by plants with artificially high flavonoid levels, indicating that neither the antioxidant potential nor the light-screening properties of flavonoids contribute to optimal clock function, as has recently also been demonstrated in animal systems. Collectively, the current experiments point to a previously unknown connection between flavonoids and circadian cycling in plants and open the way to better understanding of the molecular basis of flavonoid action.

CHS: !catalyzes! Flavonoid metabolism 
F3'H: !synthesizes! Mono-dihydroxylated B-ring flavonoids 
Flavonoids: !influence! Expression of clock genes 
CCA1/TOC1: !altered by! CHS-deficient seedlings 
Quercetin: !enhances! CCA1 promoter activity 
CHS/F3'H-deficient plants: !exhibit! Photosynthetic activity phenotype 
Flavonoids: !contribute to! Optimal clock function