['35222493', "Light-triggered transcriptome reprogramming is critical for promoting  photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis seedlings. Nonetheless, recent studies have  shed light on the importance of alternative pre-mRNA splicing (AS) in  photomorphogenesis. The splicing factors splicing factor for phytochrome  signaling (SFPS) and reduced red-light responses in cry1cry2 background1 (RRC1)  are involved in the phytochrome B (phyB) signaling pathway and promote  photomorphogenesis by controlling pre-mRNA splicing of light- and clock-related  genes. However, splicing factors that serve as repressors in phyB signaling  pathway remain unreported. Here, we report that the splicing factor SWELLMAP 2  (SMP2) suppresses photomorphogenesis in the light. SMP2 physically interacts with  phyB and colocalizes with phyB in photobodies after light exposure. Genetic  analyses show that SMP2 antagonizes phyB signaling to promote hypocotyl  elongation in the light. The homologs of SMP2 in yeast and human belong to  second-step splicing factors required for proper selection of the 3' splice site  (3'SS) of an intron. Notably, SMP2 reduces the abundance of the functional  REVEILLE 8 a (RVE8a) form, probably by determining the 3'SS, and thereby inhibits  RVE8-mediated transcriptional activation of clock genes containing evening  elements (EE). Finally, SMP2-mediated reduction of functional RVE8 isoform  promotes phytochrome interacting factor 4 (PIF4) expression to fine-tune  hypocotyl elongation in the light. Taken together, our data unveil a  phyB-interacting splicing factor that negatively regulates photomorphogenesis,  providing additional information for further mechanistic investigations regarding  phyB-controlled AS of light- and clock-related genes.", '2022', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2022.836519', 'Deng']

SFPS: !promotes! photomorphogenesis 
RRC1: !promotes! photomorphogenesis 
SMP2: !interacts with! phyB 
SMP2: !suppresses! photomorphogenesis 
SMP2: !reduces! RVE8a 
RVE8a: !mediates! transcriptional activation 
PIF4: !regulated by! SMP2