Nitrogen deposition is recognized as one of the major threats to the ecosystem function of alpine grasslands on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau (QTP). However, few studies have documented the gradient responses of plant species, functional groups, and communities in alpine grassland ecosystems to various levels of N deposition on the QTP. We applied eight linear mixed-effect models combing acidification, eutrophication, and phosphorus availability to explore if the responses of functional traits (particularly plant height and specific leaf area) of plants from dominant species to functional groups and whole communities in different types of grassland to nitrogen deposition were consistent with the same or different models. We found that the specific leaf area of <i>Stipa capillata</i>, non-forb, and community-weighted mean value in the alpine steppe were synchronous and related to acidification with nitrogen addition; the height of <i>Stipa capillata</i>, non-forb, and community-weighted mean value in the alpine steppe was synchronous and related to acidification, eutrophication, and phosphorus availability with nitrogen addition; the height and specific leaf area of <i>Elymus breviaristatus</i> to functional groups and community-weighted mean value in cultivated grasslands (CGs) were synchronous and related to acidification, eutrophication, and phosphorus availability with nitrogen addition. Most of the responses of functional traits of plants to acidification, eutrophication, and phosphorus availability associated with nitrogen deposition in the alpine steppe and the CG were synchronous, while only the response of the specific leaf area of forb functional groups to eutrophication associated with N deposition in the alpine steppe was asynchronous.

Nitrogen deposition: !affects! Plant height and specific leaf area 
Stipa capillata: !responds to! Acidification, eutrophication, and phosphorus availability 
Elymus breviaristatus: !responds to! Acidification, eutrophication, and phosphorus availability 
Non-forb: !responds to! Acidification, eutrophication, and phosphorus availability 
Community-weighted mean value: !responds to! Acidification, eutrophication, and phosphorus availability 
Forb functional groups: !responds to! Eutrophication