Ceratodon purpureus showed changes in disaccharides, flavonoids, and carotenoids throughout annual seasons. These changes indicate harsher environmental conditions during the dry period, directing metabolic precursors to enhance the antioxidant system. Bryophytes are a group of land plants comprising mosses (Bryophyta), liverworts (Marchantyophyta), and hornworts (Antocerotophyta). This study uses the molecular networking approach to investigate the influence of seasonality (dry and rainy seasons) on the metabolome and redox status of the moss Ceratodon purpureus (Hedw.) Brid., from Campos do Jordão, Brazil. Samples of C. purpureus were submitted to three extraction methods: 80% methanol producing the soluble fraction (intracellular compounds), followed by debris hydrolysis using sodium hydroxide producing the insoluble fraction (cell wall conjugated compounds), both analyzed by HPLC-MS; and extraction using pre-cooled methanol, separated into polar and non-polar fractions, being both analyzed by GC-MS. All fractions were processed using the Global Natural Product Social Molecular Network (GNPS). The redox status was assessed by the analysis of four enzyme activities combined with the analysis of the contents of ascorbate, glutathione, carotenoids, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and malondialdehyde acid (MDA). During the dry period, there was an increase of most biflavonoids, as well as phospholipids, disaccharides, long-chain fatty acids, carotenoids, antioxidant enzymes, ROS, and MDA. Results indicate that C. purpureus is under harsher environmental conditions during the dry period, mainly due to low temperature and less water availability (low rainfall).

Ceratodon purpureus: !showed changes in! disaccharides, flavonoids, and carotenoids 
environmental conditions: !direct metabolic precursors to! enhance antioxidant system 
Global Natural Product Social Molecular Network (GNPS): !processed! all fractions 
redox status: !assessed by! analysis of four enzyme activities 
ascorbate, glutathione, carotenoids, ROS, MDA: !analyzed for! redox status 
dry period: !increase of! biflavonoids, phospholipids, disaccharides, long-chain fatty acids, carotenoids, antioxidant enzymes, ROS, and MDA 
low temperature, less water availability: !indicate harsher environmental conditions during! dry period