Falcarinol-type polyacetylenes (PAs) such as falcarinol (FaOH) and falcarindiol (FaDOH) are produced by several Apiaceae vegetables such as carrot, parsnip, celeriac and parsley. They are known for numerous biological functions and contribute to the undesirable bitter off-taste of carrots and their products. Despite their interesting biological functions, the genetic basis of their structural diversity and function is widely unknown. A better understanding of the genetics of the PA levels present in carrot roots might support breeding of carrot cultivars with tailored PA levels for food production or nutraceuticals. A large carrot F<sub>2</sub> progeny derived from a cross of a cultivated inbred line with an inbred line derived from a Daucus carota ssp. commutatus accession rich in PAs was used for linkage mapping and quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis. Ten QTLs for FaOH and FaDOH levels in roots were identified in the carrot genome. Major QTLs for FaOH and FaDOH with high LOD values of up to 40 were identified on chromosomes 4 and 9. To discover putative candidate genes from the plant fatty acid metabolism, we examined an extended version of the inventory of the carrot FATTY ACID DESATURASE2 (FAD2) gene family. Additionally, we used the carrot genome sequence for a first inventory of ECERIFERUM1 (CER1) genes possibly involved in PA biosynthesis. We identified genomic regions on different carrot chromosomes around the found QTLs that contain several FAD2 and CER1 genes within their 2-LOD confidence intervals. With regard to the major QTLs on chromosome 9 three putative CER1 decarbonylase gene models are proposed as candidate genes. The present study increases the current knowledge on the genetics of PA accumulation in carrot roots. Our finding that carrot candidate genes from the fatty acid metabolism are significantly associated with major QTLs for both major PAs, will facilitate future functional gene studies and a further dissection of the genetic factors controlling PA accumulation. Characterization of such candidate genes will have a positive impact on carrot breeding programs aimed at both lowering or increasing PA concentrations in carrot roots.

Falcarinol-type polyacetylenes: !produced by! Apiaceae vegetables 
F<sub>2</sub> progeny: !used for! linkage mapping and QTL analysis 
QTLs: !identified on! chromosomes 4 and 9 
FAD2 gene family: !examined for! putative candidate genes 
CER1 genes: !inventoried from! carrot genome sequence 
QTLs: !associated with! major FAD2 and CER1 genes 
candidate genes: !characterization of! positive impact on carrot breeding