Soybean (Glycine max) is highly sensitive to photoperiod, which affects flowering time and plant architecture and thus limits the distribution range of elite soybean cultivars. The major maturity gene E1 confers the most prominent effect on photoperiod sensitivity, but its downstream signaling pathway remains largely unknown. Here, we confirm that the encoded E1 protein is a transcriptional repressor. The expression of seven GmMDE genes (Glycine max MADS-box genes downregulated by E1) was suppressed when E1 was overexpressed and promoted when E1 was knocked out through clustered regularly-interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR associated protein 9 (Cas9)-mediated mutagenesis. These GmMDEs exhibited similar tissue specificity and expression patterns, including in response to photoperiod, E1 expression, and E1 genotype. E1 repressed GmMDE promoter activity. Results for two GmMDEs showed that E1 epigenetically silences their expression by directly binding to their promoters to increase H3K27me3 levels. The overexpression of GmMDE06 promoted flowering and post-flowering termination of stem growth. The late flowering phenotype of E1-overexpressing soybean lines was reversed by the overexpression of GmMDE06, placing GmMDE06 downstream of E1. The overexpression of GmMDE06 increased the expression of the soybean FLOWERING LOCUS T orthologs GmFT2a and GmFT5a, leading to feedback upregulation of GmMDE, indicating that GmMDE and GmFT2a/GmFT5a form a positive regulatory feedback loop promoting flowering. GmMDE06 also promoted post-flowering termination of stem growth by repressing the expression of the shoot identity gene Dt1. The E1-GmMDEs-GmFT2a/5a-Dt1 signaling pathway illustrates how soybean responds to photoperiod by modulating flowering time and post-flowering stem termination.

E1: !represses! GmMDE
GmMDE06: !promotes! flowering
GmMDE06: !promotes! post-flowering stem termination
GmMDE06: !upregulates! GmFT2a/5a
GmFT2a/5a: !feedback upregulates! GmMDE
GmMDE06: !represses! Dt1