Low phosphorus (P) availability in acid soils is one of the main limiting factors in sugarcane (<i>Saccharum officinarum</i> L.) production. Reconstruction of the root system architecture (RSA) is a vital mechanism for crop low P adaption, while the RSA of sugarcane has not been studied in detail because of its complex root system. In this study, reconstruction of the RSA and its relationship with P acquisition were investigated in a P-efficient sugarcane genotype ROC22 (R22) and two P-inefficient genotypes Yunzhe 03-103 (YZ) and Japan 2 (JP). An efficient dynamic observation room was developed to monitor the spatiotemporal alternation of sugarcane root length density (RLD) and root distribution in soil with heterogeneous P locations. The sugarcane RSA was reconstructed under P deficiency, and R22 had an earlier response than YZ and JP and presented an obvious feature of root shallowness. Compared with the normal P condition, the shallow RLD was increased by 112% in R22 under P deficiency while decreased by 26% in YZ and not modified in JP. Meanwhile, R22 exhibited a shallower root distribution than YZ and JP under P deficiency, supported by 51 and 24% greater shallow RLD, and 96 and 67% greater shallow root weight, respectively. The ratio of shallow RLD to total RLD in R22 was 91% greater than YZ, and the ratio of shallow root weight to total root weight in R22 was greater than that of YZ and JP by 94 and 30%, respectively. As a result, R22 had a higher shoot P accumulation than YZ and JP, which thereby increased the relative leaf sheath inorganic P concentration (RLPC) by 47 and 56%, relative shoot biomass (RSB) by 36 and 33%, and relative cane weight (RCW) by 31 and 36%, compared with YZ and JP under P deficiency, respectively. We verified the reliability and efficiency of a dynamic observation room and demonstrated that a shallower root distribution contributed to improving topsoil foraging, P acquisition, and low P adaption under P deficiency in sugarcane. Therefore, a shallower root distribution merits consideration as an evaluation trait for breeding P efficient sugarcane genotypes and genetic improvement.

R22: !exhibits! shallower root distribution 
R22: !increases! shallow RLD 
R22: !increases! shallow root weight 
R22: !has higher! shoot P accumulation 
R22: !increases! RLPC 
R22: !increases! RSB 
R22: !increases! RCW 
YZ: !decreases! shallow RLD 
JP: !does not modify! shallow RLD