Plant growth and development depend on the availability of carbohydrates synthesised in photosynthesis (source activity) and utilisation of these carbohydrates for growth (sink activity). External conditions, such as temperature, nutrient availability and stress, can affect source as well as sink activity. Optimal utilisation of resources is under circadian clock control. This molecular timekeeper ensures that growth responses are adjusted to different photoperiod and temperature settings by modulating starch accumulation and degradation accordingly. For example, during the night, starch degradation is required to provide sugars for growth. Under favourable growth conditions, high sugar availability stimulates growth and development, resulting in an overall accelerated life cycle of annual plants. Key signalling components include trehalose-6-phosphate (Tre6P), which reflects sucrose availability and stimulates growth and branching when the conditions are favourable. Under sink limitation, Tre6P does, however, inhibit night-time starch degradation. Tre6P interacts with Sucrose-non-fermenting1-Related Kinase1 (SnRK1), a protein kinase that inhibits growth under starvation and stress conditions and delays development (including flowering and senescence). Tre6P inhibits SnRK1 activity, but SnRK1 increases the Tre6P to sucrose ratio under favourable conditions. Alongside Tre6P, Target of Rapamycin (TOR) stimulates processes such as protein synthesis and growth when sugar availability is high. In annual plants, an accelerated life cycle results in early leaf and plant senescence, thus shortening the lifespan. While the availability of carbohydrates in the form of sucrose and other sugars also plays an important role in seasonal life cycle events (phenology) of perennial plants, the sugar signalling pathways in perennials are less well understood.

Tre6P: !interacts with! SnRK1
SnRK1: !inhibits! growth
Tre6P: !inhibits! SnRK1 activity
TOR: !stimulates! protein synthesis
Tre6P: !reflects! sucrose availability
Sucrose: !stimulates! growth