Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) is a tightly regulated enzyme that plays a crucial anaplerotic role in central plant metabolism. Bacterial-type PEPC (BTPC) of developing castor oil seeds (COS) is highly expressed as a catalytic and regulatory subunit of a novel Class-2 PEPC heteromeric complex. Ricinus communis Ca2+-dependent protein kinase-1 (RcCDPK1) catalyzes in vivo inhibitory phosphorylation of COS BTPC at Ser451. Autokinase activity of recombinant RcCDPK1 was detected and 42 autophosphorylated Ser, Thr or Tyr residues were mapped via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Prior autophosphorylation markedly attenuated the ability of RcCDPK1 to transphosphorylate its BTPC substrate at Ser451. However, fully dephosphorylated RcCDPK1 rapidly autophosphorylated during the initial stages of a BTPC transphosphorylation assay. This suggests that Ca2+-dependent binding of dephospho-RcCDPK1 to BTPC may trigger a structural change that leads to rapid autophosphorylation and subsequent substrate transphosphorylation. Tyr30 was identified as an autophosphorylation site via LC-MS/MS and immunoblotting with a phosphosite-specific antibody. Tyr30 occurs at the junction of RcCDPK1's N-terminal variable (NTVD) and catalytic domains and is widely conserved in plant and protist CDPKs. Interestingly, a reduced rate and extent of BTPC transphosphorylation occurred with a RcCDPK1Y30F mutant. Prior research demonstrated that RcCDPK1's NTVD is essential for its Ca2+-dependent autophosphorylation or BTPC transphosphorylation activities but plays no role in target recognition. We propose that Tyr30 autophosphorylation facilitates a Ca2+-dependent interaction between the NTVD and Ca2+-activation domain that primes RcCDPK1 for transphosphorylating BTPC at Ser451. Our results provide insights into links between the post-translational control of COS anaplerosis, Ca2+-dependent signaling and the biological significance of RcCDPK1 autophosphorylation.

RcCDPK1: !catalyzes! inhibitory phosphorylation of COS BTPC
RcCDPK1: !autophosphorylates! at Tyr30
RcCDPK1: !transphosphorylates! BTPC at Ser451
Tyr30: !facilitates! Ca2+-dependent interaction between NTVD and Ca2+-activation domain