Determine the level of significance of planting strategy and plant architecture and how they affect plant physiology and dry matter accumulation within greenhouses is essential to actual greenhouse plant management and breeding. We thus analyzed four planting strategies (plant spacing, furrow distance, row orientation, planting pattern) and eight different plant architectural traits (internode length, leaf azimuth angle, leaf elevation angle, leaf length, leaflet curve, leaflet elevation, leaflet number/area ratio, leaflet length/width ratio) with the same plant leaf area using a formerly developed functional-structural model for a Chinese Liaoshen-solar greenhouse and tomato plant, which used to simulate the plant physiology of light interception, temperature, stomatal conductance, photosynthesis, and dry matter. Our study led to the conclusion that the planting strategies have a more significant impact overall on plant radiation, temperature, photosynthesis, and dry matter compared to plant architecture changes. According to our findings, increasing the plant spacing will have the most significant impact to increase light interception. E-W orientation has better total light interception but yet weaker light uniformity. Changes in planting patterns have limited influence on the overall canopy physiology. Increasing the plant leaflet area by leaflet N/A ratio from what we could observe for a rose the total dry matter by 6.6%, which is significantly better than all the other plant architecture traits. An ideal tomato plant architecture which combined all the above optimal architectural traits was also designed to provide guidance on phenotypic traits selection of breeding process. The combined analysis approach described herein established the causal relationship between investigated traits, which could directly apply to provide management and breeding insights on other plant species with different solar greenhouse structures.

planting strategy: !affects! plant physiology
planting strategy: !affects! dry matter accumulation
furrow distance: !affects! light interception
row orientation: !affects! total light interception
row orientation: !affects! light uniformity
planting pattern: !affects! canopy physiology
leaflet N/A ratio: !increases! total dry matter
plant architecture: !has more significant impact than! planting strategies