As sessile organisms, plants must adapt to a changing environment, sensing variations in resource availability and modifying their development in response. Light is one of the most important resources for plants, and its perception by sensory photoreceptors (e.g., phytochromes) and subsequent transduction into long-term transcriptional reprogramming have been well characterized. Chromatin changes have been shown to be involved in photomorphogenesis. However, the initial short-term transcriptional changes produced by light and what factors enable these rapid changes are not well studied. Here, we define rapidly light-responsive, Phytochrome Interacting Factor (PIF) direct-target genes (LRP-DTGs). We found that a majority of these genes also show rapid changes in Histone 3 Lysine-9 acetylation (H3K9ac) in response to the light signal. Detailed time-course analysis of transcript and chromatin changes showed that, for light-repressed genes, H3K9 deacetylation parallels light-triggered transcriptional repression, while for light-induced genes, H3K9 acetylation appeared to somewhat precede light-activated transcript accumulation. However, direct, real-time imaging of transcript elongation in the nucleus revealed that, in fact, transcriptional induction actually parallels H3K9 acetylation. Collectively, the data raise the possibility that light-induced transcriptional and chromatin-remodeling processes are mechanistically intertwined. Histone modifying proteins involved in long term light responses do not seem to have a role in this fast response, indicating that different factors might act at different stages of the light response. This work not only advances our understanding of plant responses to light, but also unveils a system in which rapid chromatin changes in reaction to an external signal can be studied under natural conditions.

phytochromes: !sense! Light 
Light: !triggers! H3K9ac 
H3K9ac: !parallels! Transcriptional Repression 
H3K9ac: !precedes! Transcriptional Induction 
Transcriptional Induction: !parallels! H3K9ac