Salix matsudana (Koidz.) is a widely planted ornamental allotetraploid tree species. Genetic engineering can be used to enhance the tolerance of this species to soil salinization, endowing varieties with the ability to grow along coastlines, thereby mitigating afforestation and protecting the environment. The AP2/ERF family of transcription factors (TFs) plays multidimensional roles in plant biotic/abiotic stress tolerance and plant development. In this study, we cloned the SmAP2-17 gene and performed functional analysis of its role in salt tolerance. This study aims to identify key genes for future breeding of stress-resistant varieties of Salix matsudana. SmAP2-17 was predicted to be a homolog of AP2-like ethylene-responsive transcription factor ANT isoform X2 from Arabidopsis, with a predicted ORF of 2058 bp encoding an estimated protein of 685 amino acids containing two conserved AP2 domains (PF00847.20). SmAP2-17 had a constitutive expression pattern and was localized to the nucleus. The overexpression of the native SmAP2-17 CDS sequence in Arabidopsis did not increase salt tolerance because of the reduced expression level of ectopic SmAP2-17, potentially caused by salt-induced RNAi. Transgenic lines with high expression of optimized SmAP2-17 CDS under salt stress showed enhanced tolerance to salt. Moreover, the expression of general stress marker genes and important salt stress signaling genes, including RD29A, ABI5, SOS3, AtHKT1, and RBohF, were upregulated in SmAP2-17-overexpressed lines, with expression levels consistent with that of SmAP2-17 or optimized SmAP2-17. Promoter activity analysis using dual luciferase analysis showed that SmAP2-17 could bind the promoters of SOS3 and ABI5 to activate their expression, which plays a key role in regulating salt tolerance. The SmAP2-17 gene isolated from Salix matsudana (Koidz.) is a positive regulator that improves the resistance of transgenic plants to salt stress by upregulating SOS3 and ABI5 genes. This study provides a potential functional gene resource for future generation of salt-resistant Salix lines by genetic engineering.

SmAP2-17: !enhances! salt tolerance
SmAP2-17: !localizes to! nucleus
SmAP2-17: !activates! SOS3 and ABI5 genes
SOS3 and ABI5: !regulate! salt tolerance