Light stimulates carotenoid synthesis in plants during photomorphogenesis through the expression of PHYTOENE SYNTHASE (PSY), a key gene in carotenoid biosynthesis. The orange carrot (Daucus carota) synthesizes and accumulates high amounts of carotenoids in the taproot that grows underground. Contrary to other organs, light impairs carrot taproot development and represses the expression of carotenogenic genes, such as DcPSY1 and DcPSY2, reducing carotenoid accumulation. By means of RNA sequencing, in a previous analysis, we observed that carrot PHYTOCHROME RAPIDLY REGULATED1 (DcPAR1) is more highly expressed in the underground grown taproot compared with those grown in light. PAR1 is a transcriptional cofactor with a negative role in shade avoidance syndrome regulation in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) through the dimerization with PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTORs (PIFs), allowing a moderate synthesis of carotenoids. Here, we show that overexpressing AtPAR1 in carrot increases carotenoid production in taproots grown underground as well as DcPSY1 expression. The high expression of AtPAR1 and DcPAR1 led us to hypothesize a functional role of DcPAR1 that was verified through in vivo binding to AtPIF7 and overexpression in Arabidopsis, where AtPSY expression and carotenoid accumulation increased together with a photomorphogenic phenotype. Finally, DcPAR1 antisense carrot lines presented a dramatic decrease in carotenoid levels and in relative expression of key carotenogenic genes as well as impaired taproot development. These results suggest that DcPAR1 is a key factor for secondary root development and carotenoid synthesis in carrot taproot grown underground.

Light: !stimulates! carotenoid synthesis
PHYTOENE SYNTHASE (PSY): !synthesizes! carotenoids
Daucus carota: !accumulates! carotenoids
Light: !represses! DcPSY1 & DcPSY2
DcPAR1: !expresses more highly! in underground grown taproots
AtPAR1: !overexpressing! increases carotenoid production & DcPSY1 expression
AtPAR1: !dimerizes with! PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTORs (PIFs)
DcPAR1: !binds to! AtPIF7
AtPAR1: !overexpressing! increases AtPSY expression & carotenoid accumulation
DcPAR1 antisense carrot lines: !present a dramatic decrease in! carotenoid levels & key carotenogenic genes