Environmental signals, especially daylength, play important roles in determining fertility in photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterile (PGMS) lines that are critical to sustain production of high-yielding hybrid rice (Oryza sativa) varieties. However, the mechanisms by which PGMS lines perceive changes in photoperiod and transmit those signals to elicit downstream effects are not well understood. In this study, we compared the transcriptomes from the leaves and anthers of carbon starved anther (csa), a PGMS line, to wild-type (WT) tissues under different photoperiods. Components of circadian clock in the leaves, including Circadian Clock-Associated 1 and Pseudo-Response Regulator (PRR95), played vital roles in sensing the photoperiod signals. Photoperiod signals were weakly transduced to anthers, where gene expression was mainly controlled by the CSA allele. CSA played a critical role in regulating sugar metabolism and cell wall synthesis in anthers under short-day conditions, and transcription of key genes inducing csa-directed sterility was upregulated under long-day (LD) conditions though not to WT levels, revealing a mechanism to explain the partial restoration of fertility in rice under LD conditions. Eight direct targets of CSA regulation were identified, all of which were genes involved in sugar metabolism and transport (cell wall invertases, SWEETs, and monosaccharide transporters) expressed only in reproductive tissues. Several hub genes coordinating the effects of CSA regulation were identified as critical elements determining WT male fertility and further analysis of these and related genes will reveal insights into how CSA coordinates sugar metabolism, cell wall biosynthesis, and photoperiod sensing in rice anther development.

Circadian Clock-Associated 1: !regulates! sugar metabolism 
Pseudo-Response Regulator (PRR95): !regulates! photoperiod signals 
CSA allele: !controls! gene expression in anthers 
CSA allele: !induces! csa-directed sterility 
cell wall invertases: !synthesized by! CSA regulation 
SWEETs: !synthesized by! CSA regulation 
monosaccharide transporters: !synthesized by! CSA regulation 
hub genes: !coordinate! effects of CSA regulation