Phosphorus (P) is essential for cellular processes like respiration, photosynthesis, biosynthesis of membrane phospholipids, etc. To cope with P deficiency stress, plants adopt reprograming of the expression of genes involved in different metabolic/signaling pathways for survival, growth, and development. Plants use transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and/or post-translational machinery to achieve P homeostasis. Several transcription factors (TFs), miRNAs, and P transporters play important roles in P deficiency tolerance; however, the underlying mechanisms responsible for P deficiency tolerance remain poorly understood. Studies on P starvation/deficiency responses in plants at early (seedling) stage of growth have been reported but only a few of them focused on molecular responses of the plant at advanced (tillering or reproductive) stage of growth. To decipher the strategies adopted by rice at tillering stage under P deficiency stress, a pair of contrasting genotypes [Pusa-44 (a high-yielding, P deficiency sensitive cultivar) and its near-isogenic line (NIL-23, P deficiency tolerant) for Pup1 QTL] was used for morphophysiological, biochemical, and molecular analyses. Comparative analyses of shoot and root tissues from 45-day-old plants grown hydroponically under P sufficient (16 ppm) or P deficient (4 ppm) medium confirmed some of the known morphophysiological responses. Moreover, RNA-seq analysis revealed the important roles of phosphate transporters, TFs, auxin-responsive proteins, modulation in the cell wall, fatty acid metabolism, and chromatin architecture/epigenetic modifications in providing P deficiency tolerance to NIL-23, which were brought in due to the introgression of the Pup1 QTL in Pusa-44. This study provides insights into the molecular functions of Pup1 for P deficiency tolerance, which might be utilized to improve P-use efficiency of rice for better productivity in P deficient soils. KEY MESSAGE: Introgression of Pup1 QTL in high-yielding rice cultivar modulates mainly phosphate transporters, TFs, auxin-responsive proteins, cell wall structure, fatty acid metabolism, and chromatin architecture/epigenetic modifications at tillering stage of growth under phosphorus deficiency stress.

Pup1 QTL: !introgressed in! Pusa-44
Phosphorus: !essential for! cellular processes
Transcription factors: !play important roles in! P deficiency tolerance
RNA-seq analysis: !revealed roles of! phosphate transporters
RNA-seq analysis: !revealed roles of! TFs
RNA-seq analysis: !revealed roles of! auxin-responsive proteins
RNA-seq analysis: !revealed roles of! cell wall structure
RNA-seq analysis: !revealed roles of! fatty acid metabolism
RNA-seq analysis: !revealed roles of! chromatin architecture/epigenetic modifications