Plastid genomes (plastomes) present great potential in resolving multiscale phylogenetic relationship but few studies have focused on the influence of genetic characteristics of plastid genes, such as genetic variation and phylogenetic discordance, in resolving the phylogeny within a lineage. Here we examine plastome characteristics of Cycas L., the most diverse genus among extant cycads, and investigate the deep phylogenetic relationships within Cycas by sampling 47 plastomes representing all major clades from six sections. All Cycas plastomes shared consistent gene content and structure with only one gene loss detected in Philippine species C. wadei. Three novel plastome regions (psbA-matK, trnN-ndhF, chlL-trnN) were identified as containing the highest nucleotide variability. Molecular evolutionary analysis showed most of the plastid protein-coding genes have been under purifying selection except ndhB. Phylogenomic analyses that alternatively included concatenated and coalescent methods, both identified four clades but with conflicting topologies at shallow nodes. Specifically, we found three species-rich Cycas sections, namely Stangerioides, Indosinenses and Cycas, were not or only weakly supported as monophyly based on plastomic phylogeny. Tree space analyses based on different tree-inference methods both revealed three gene clusters, of which the cluster with moderate genetic properties showed the best congruence with the favored phylogeny. Our exploration in plastomic data for Cycas supports the idea that plastid protein-coding genes may exhibit discordance in phylogenetic signals. The incongruence between molecular phylogeny and morphological classification reported here may largely be attributed to the uniparental attribute of plastid, which cannot offer sufficient information to resolve the phylogeny. Contrasting to a previous consensus that genes with longer sequences and a higher proportion of variances are superior for phylogeny reconstruction, our result implies that the most effective phylogenetic signals could come from loci that own moderate variation, GC content, sequence length, and underwent modest selection.

plastome: !shares! gene content
plastome: !varies in! nucleotide variability
gene: !undergoes! purifying selection
gene: !exhibits! discordance
gene: !reveals! best congruence
gene: !owns! moderate variation