Acetohydroxyacid synthase (AHAS), the key enzyme in the branched-chain amino acids leucine, isoleucine, and valine biosynthesis pathway, has gained intensive investigation because it is the target of five different AHAS herbicides widely used to control weeds in farmland. In the present study, the AHAS gene family in Brassica juncea and B. carinata and their progenitor species was characterized in combination with bioinformatics, gene-specific PCR and qRT-PCR analyses. The results indicated that B. juncea contains four AHAS genes, of them, BjuAHAS3 and BjuAHAS4 originated from the A genome donor of B. rapa, whereas BjuAHAS6 and BjuAHAS7 from the B genome donor of B. nigra. BjuAHAS3 and BjuAHAS6 are predicted to be functional and constitutively expressed in all vegetative and reproductive tissues in the tested B. juncea accessions. B. carinata contains five AHAS genes, of them, BcaAHAS1, BcaAHAS2, and BcaAHAS5 originated from the C genome donor of B. oleracea, whereas BcaAHAS6 and BcaAHAS7 came from the B genome donor of B. nigra. BcaAHAS1, BcaAHAS2, and BcaAHAS6 are predicted to be functional. BcaAHAS1 and BcaAHAS6 are constitutively expressed in all vegetative and reproductive tissues in the tested B. carinata accessions, however, BcaAHAS2 is mainly expressed in siliques. In addition, translocation events for the AHAS1, AHAS2, and AHAS7 genes occurred when the three amphidiploids species B. napus, B. juncea, and B. carinata were formed by hybridization of their respective diploid species. The findings in this study will provide important basic information for the breeding of herbicide-resistant varieties in B. juncea and B. carinata.

BjuAHAS3: !originates from! A genome donor of B. rapa
BjuAHAS4: !originates from! A genome donor of B. rapa
BjuAHAS6: !originates from! B genome donor of B. nigra
BjuAHAS7: !originates from! B genome donor of B. nigra
BcaAHAS1: !originates from! C genome donor of B. oleracea
BcaAHAS2: !originates from! C genome donor of B. oleracea
BcaAHAS5: !originates from! C genome donor of B. oleracea
BcaAHAS6: !originates from! B genome donor of B. nigra
BcaAHAS7: !originates from! B genome donor of B. nigra
BjuAHAS3: !constitutively expressed in! all vegetative and reproductive tissues
BjuAHAS6: !constitutively expressed in! all vegetative and reproductive tissues
BcaAHAS1: !constitutively expressed in! all vegetative and reproductive tissues
BcaAHAS6: !constitut