Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) is one of the world's most important crops, the cultivated potato is frost-sensitive, and low-temperature severely influences potato production. However, the mechanism by which potato responds to low-temperature stress is unclear. In this research, we apply a combination of second-generation sequencing and third-generation sequencing technologies to sequence full-length transcriptomes in low-temperature-sensitive cultivars to identify the important genes and main pathways related to low-temperature resistance. In this study, we obtained 41,016 high-quality transcripts, which included 15,189 putative new transcripts. Amongst them, we identified 11,665 open reading frames, 6085 simple sequence repeats out of the potato dataset. We used public available genomic contigs to analyze the gene features, simple sequence repeat, and alternative splicing event of 24,658 non-redundant transcript sequences, predicted the coding sequence and identified the alternative polyadenylation. We performed cluster analysis, GO, and KEGG functional analysis of 4518 genes that were differentially expressed between the different low-temperature treatments. We examined 36 transcription factor families and identified 542 transcription factors in the differentially expressed genes, and 64 transcription factors were found in the AP2 transcription factor family which was the most. We measured the malondialdehyde, soluble sugar, and proline contents and the expression genes changed associated with low temperature resistance in the low-temperature treated leaves. We also tentatively speculate that StLPIN10369.5 and StCDPK16 may play a central coordinating role in the response of potatoes to low temperature stress. Overall, this study provided the first large-scale full-length transcriptome sequencing of potato and will facilitate structure-function genetic and comparative genomics studies of this important crop.

Gene: !affects! Low-temperature resistance
Gene: !localizes to! Potato dataset
Gene: !interacts with! Public available genomic contigs
Gene: !enhances! Cluster analysis
Gene: !represses! Alternative splicing event
Gene: !synthesizes! Coding sequence
Gene: !regulates! Transcription factor families
Gene: !influences! Malondialdehyde content
Gene: !controls! Soluble sugar content
Gene: !modulates! Proline content