Crop classification maps are fundamental data for global change research, regional agricultural regulation, fine production, and insurance services. The key to crop classification is samples, but it is very time-consuming in annual field sampling. Therefore, how to use historical samples in crop classification for future years at a lower cost is a research hotspot. By constructing the spectral feature vector of each historical sample in the historical year and its neighboring pixels in the target year, we produced new samples and classified them in the target year. Specifically, based on environmental similarity, we first calculated the similarities of every two pixels between each historical year and target year and took neighboring pixels with the highest local similarity as potential samples. Then, cluster analysis was performed on those potential samples of the same crop, and the class with more pixels is selected as newly generated samples for classification of the target year. The experiment in Heilongjiang province, China showed that this method can generate new samples with the uniform spatial distribution and that the proportion of various crops is consistent with field data in historical years. The overall accuracy of the target year by the newly generated sample and the real sample is 61.57 and 80.58%, respectively. The spatial pattern of maps obtained by two models is basically the same, and the classification based on the newly generated samples identified rice better. For areas with majority fields having no rotation, this method overcomes the problem of insufficient samples caused by difficulties in visual interpretation and high cost on field sampling, effectively improves the utilization rate of historical samples, and provides a new idea for crop mapping in areas lacking field samples of the target year.

Crop classification: !uses! historical samples 
historical samples: !generates! new samples 
cluster analysis: !performs on! potential samples 
classification: !improves utilization rate of! historical samples