A critical investigation into arsenic uptake and transportation, its phytotoxic effects, and defense strategies including complex signaling cascades and regulatory networks in plants. The metalloid arsenic (As) is a leading pollutant of soil and water. It easily finds its way into the food chain through plants, more precisely crops, a common diet source for humans resulting in serious health risks. Prolonged As exposure causes detrimental effects in plants and is diaphanously observed through numerous physiological, biochemical, and molecular attributes. Different inorganic and organic As species enter into the plant system via a variety of transporters e.g., phosphate transporters, aquaporins, etc. Therefore, plants tend to accumulate elevated levels of As which leads to severe phytotoxic damages including anomalies in biomolecules like protein, lipid, and DNA. To combat this, plants employ quite a few mitigation strategies such as efficient As efflux from the cell, iron plaque formation, regulation of As transporters, and intracellular chelation with an array of thiol-rich molecules such as phytochelatin, glutathione, and metallothionein followed by vacuolar compartmentalization of As through various vacuolar transporters. Moreover, the antioxidant machinery is also implicated to nullify the perilous outcomes of the metalloid. The stress ascribed by the metalloid also marks the commencement of multiple signaling cascades. This whole complicated system is indeed controlled by several transcription factors and microRNAs. This review aims to understand, in general, the plant-soil-arsenic interaction, effects of As in plants, As uptake mechanisms and its dynamics, and multifarious As detoxification mechanisms in plants. A major portion of this article is also devoted to understanding and deciphering the nexus between As stress-responsive mechanisms and its underlying complex interconnected regulatory networks.

Transporters: !transport! As
Phytochelatin: !chelates! As
Vacuolar transporters: !compartmentalize! As
Antioxidant machinery: !nullifies! As effects
Transcription factors: !regulate! signaling cascades
microRNAs: !regulate! signaling cascades