Invertases are key enzymes for carbon metabolism, cleaving sucrose into energy-rich and signaling metabolites, glucose and fructose. Invertases play pivotal roles in development and stress response, determining yield and quality of seed production. In this context, the repertoire of invertase gene families is critically scarce in legumes. Here, we performed a systematic search for invertase families in 16 Fabaceae genomes. For instance, we identified 19 invertase genes in the model plant Medicago and 17 accessions in the agronomic crop Pisum sativum. Our comprehensive phylogenetic analysis sets a milestone for the scientific community as we propose a new nomenclature to correctly name plant invertases. Thus, neutral invertases were classified into four clades of cytosolic invertase (CINV). Acid invertases were classified into two cell wall invertase clades (CWINV) and two vacuolar invertase clades (VINV). Then, we explored transcriptional regulation of the pea invertase family, focusing on seed development and water stress. Invertase expression decreased sharply from embryogenesis to seed-filling stages, consistent with higher sucrose and lower monosaccharide contents. The vacuolar invertase PsVINV1.1 clearly marked the transition between both developmental stages. We hypothesize that the predominantly expressed cell wall invertase, PsCWINV1.2, may drive sucrose unloading towards developing seeds. The same candidates, PsVINV1.1 and PsCWINV1.2, were also regulated by water deficit during embryonic stage. We suggest that PsVINV1.1 along with vacuolar sugar transporters maintain cellular osmotic pressure and PsCWINV1.2 control hexose provision, thereby ensuring embryo survival in drought conditions. Altogether, our findings provide novel insights into the regulation of plant carbon metabolism in a challenging environment.

Invertases: !cleave! sucrose 
Invertase gene families: !scarce in! legumes 
Medicago: !contains! 19 invertase genes 
Pisum sativum: !contains! 17 accessions 
Neutral invertases: !classified into! four clades of cytosolic invertase 
Acid invertases: !classified into! two cell wall invertase clades and two vacuolar invertase clades 
PsVINV1.1: !marks! transition between developmental stages 
PsCWINV1.2: !drives! sucrose unloading towards developing seeds 
PsVINV1.1 & PsCWINV1.2: !regulated by! water deficit during embryonic stage