Pollen tubes (PTs) grow by the targeted secretion of new cell wall material to their expanding tip region. Sec1/Munc18 (SM) proteins promote membrane fusion through regulation of the SNARE complex. We have previously shown that disruption of protein glycosylation in the Arabidopsis thaliana hpat1 hpat3 double mutant leads to PT growth defects that can be suppressed by reducing secretion. Here, we identified five point mutant alleles of the SM protein SEC1A as hpat1/3 suppressors. The suppressors increased seed set, reduced PT growth defects and reduced the rate of glycoprotein secretion. In the absence of the hpat mutations, sec1a reduced pollen germination and PT elongation producing shorter and wider PTs. Consistent with a defect in membrane fusion, sec1a PTs accumulated secretory vesicles. Though sec1a had significantly reduced male transmission, homozygous sec1a plants maintained full seed set, demonstrating that SEC1A was ultimately dispensable for pollen fertility. However, when combined with a mutation in another SEC1-like SM gene, keule, pollen fertility was totally abolished. Mutation in sec1b, the final member of the Arabidopsis SEC1 clade, did not enhance the sec1a phenotype. Thus, SEC1A is the major SM protein promoting pollen germination and tube elongation, but in its absence KEULE can partially supply this activity. When we examined the expression of the SM protein family in other species for which pollen expression data were available, we found that at least one Sec1-like protein was highly expressed in pollen samples, suggesting a conserved role in pollen fertility in other species.

Pollen tubes (PTs): !grow by! targeted secretion 
Sec1/Munc18 (SM) proteins: !promote! membrane fusion 
hpat1 hpat3 double mutant: !leads to! PT growth defects 
five point mutant alleles of SEC1A: !suppress! hpat1/3 
SEC1A: !increases! seed set 
SEC1A: !reduces! rate of glycoprotein secretion 
SEC1A: !reduces! pollen germination & PT elongation 
SEC1A: !accumulates! secretory vesicles 
SEC1A: !dispensable for! pollen fertility 
SEC1A & mutation in KEULE: !abolish! pollen fertility 
SEC1B mutation: !does not enhance! sec1a phenotype 
at least one Sec1-like protein: !highly expressed in! pollen samples