AP2/ERF transcription factors are important in a variety of biological activities, including plant growth, development, and responses to biotic and abiotic stressors. However, little study has been done on cotton's AP2/ERF genes, although cotton is an essential fibre crop. We were able to examine the tissue and expression patterns of AP2/ERF genes in cotton on a genome-wide basis because of the recently published whole genome sequence of cotton. Genome-wide analysis of ERF gene family within two diploid species (G. arboreum & G. raimondii) and two tetraploid species (G. barbadense, G. hirsutum) was performed. A total of 118, 120, 213, 220 genes containing the sequence of single AP2 domain were identified in G. arboreum, G. raimondii, G. barbadense and G. hirsutum respectively. The identified genes were unevenly distributed across 13/26 chromosomes of A and D genomes of cotton. Synteny and collinearity analysis revealed that segmental duplications may have played crucial roles in the expansion of the cotton ERF gene family, as well as tandem duplications played a minor role. Cis-acting elements of the promoter sites of Ghi-ERFs genes predict the involvement in multiple hormone responses and abiotic stresses. Transcriptome and qRT-PCR analysis revealed that Ghi-ERF-2D.6, Ghi-ERF-12D.13, Ghi-ERF-6D.1, Ghi-ERF-7A.6 and Ghi-ERF-11D.5 are candidate genes against salinity tolerance in upland cotton. Overwhelmingly, the present study paves the way to better understand the evolution of cotton ERF genes and lays a foundation for future investigation of ERF genes in improving salinity stress tolerance in cotton.

G. arboreum: !contains! 118 AP2 domain genes
G. raimondii: !contains! 120 AP2 domain genes
G. barbadense: !contains! 213 AP2 domain genes
G. hirsutum: !contains! 220 AP2 domain genes
Segmental duplication: !expands! cotton ERF gene family
Tandem duplication: !plays minor role in! expansion of cotton ERF gene family
Cis-acting elements: !predict involvement in! multiple hormone responses and abiotic stresses
Ghi-ERF-2D.6: !candidate gene for! salinity tolerance in upland cotton
Ghi-ERF-12D.13: !candidate gene for! salinity tolerance in upland cotton
Ghi-ERF-6D.1: !candidate gene for! salinity tolerance in upland cotton
Ghi-ERF-7A.6: !candidate gene for! salinity tolerance in upland cotton
Ghi-ERF-11D.5: !candidate gene for! salinity tolerance in upland cotton