The proteome and its time-dependent effects reveal the importance of stress response (including expression regulation of heat-shock proteins) and fatty acid metabolism in cold adaptation and preservation of Hami melon. To better understand the molecular mechanism of how Hami melons respond to low-temperature stress, this study investigated the relevant physiological characteristics, catalytic antibody activity, and quantitative proteomics of Hami melon (Jiashi muskmelon) during low-temperature storage. Jiashi muskmelon was stored inside two refrigerators set at 21 °C (control group) and 3 °C, respectively, for 24 days. Low-temperature storage led to a significantly reduced decay rate, weight loss rate, and loss of relative conductivity. It also maintained fruit firmness, inhibited the production rate of malondialdehyde and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and induced over-expression of antioxidant enzyme and ATPase. A total of 1064 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified during low-temperature storage. Stimulation response was the main process in response to low-temperature. To further verify the proteome data, we selected four heat-shock proteins (HSP) displaying relatively high expression levels. Real-time fluorescence PCR results confirmed that HmHSP90 I, HmHSP90 II, HmHSP70, and HmsHSP were significantly up-regulated upon low-temperature induction. These proteins may protect the Hami melon from physiological and cellular damage due to the low-temperature stress by acting alone or synergistically. Additionally, the main enrichment term of the fatty acid metabolism-related DEPs was fatty acid beta oxidation at 21 °C in contrast to fatty acid biosynthesis processes at 3 °C. It is speculated that Hami melon enhances low-temperature adaptability by slowing down the oxidative degradation of fatty acids and synthesizing new fatty acids at low temperatures. This study provides new insights into the mechanism of low-temperature adaptation and preservation in post-harvest Hami melon during cold storage.

Low-temperature storage: !reduces! decay rate 
Low-temperature storage: !inhibits! production rate of malondialdehyde and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> 
Low-temperature storage: !induces! over-expression of antioxidant enzyme and ATPase 
Heat-shock proteins: !up-regulated! upon low-temperature induction 
Heat-shock proteins: !protect! Hami melon from physiological and cellular damage 
Fatty acid metabolism-related DEPs: !enriched! by fatty acid beta oxidation at 21 °C 
Fatty acid metabolism-related DEPs: !enriched! by fatty acid biosynthesis processes at 3 °C 
Hami melon: !enhances! low-temperature adaptability 
Hami melon: !slows down! oxidative degradation of fatty acids