Celery is an important leafy vegetable that can grow during the cool season and does not tolerate high temperatures. Heat stress is widely acknowledged as one of the main abiotic stresses affecting the growth and yield of celery. The morphological and physiological indices of celery were investigated in the present study to explore the physiological mechanisms in response to high temperatures. Results showed that the antioxidant enzyme activity, proline, relative conductivity, and malondialdehyde were increased, while chlorophyll and the water content of leaves decreased under high-temperature conditions. Short-term heat treatment increased the stomatal conductance to cool off the leaves by transpiration; however, long-term heat treatment led to stomatal closure to prevent leaf dehydration. In addition, high temperature caused a disordered arrangement of palisade tissue and a loose arrangement of spongy tissue in celery leaves. Combined metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses were further used to reveal the regulatory mechanisms in response to heat stress at the molecular level in celery. A total of 1003 differential metabolites were identified and significantly enriched in amino acid metabolism and the tricarboxilic acid (TCA) cycle. Transcriptome sequencing detected 24,264 different genes, including multiple transcription factor families such as HSF, WRKY, MYB, AP2, bZIP, and bHLH family members that were significantly upregulated in response to heat stress, suggesting that these genes were involved in the response to heat stress. In addition, transcriptional and metabolic pathway analyses showed that heat stress inhibited the glycolysis pathway and delayed the TCA cycle but increased the expression of most amino acid synthesis pathways such as proline, arginine, and serine, consistent with the results of physiological indicators. qRT-PCR further showed that the expression pattern was similar to the expression abundance in the transcriptome. The important metabolites and genes in celery that significantly contributed to the response to high temperatures were identified in the present study, which provided the theoretical basis for breeding heat-resistant celery.

Heat Stress: !increases! Antioxidant Enzyme Activity
Heat Stress: !decreases! Chlorophyll Content
Heat Stress: !increases! Proline
Heat Stress: !increases! Relative Conductivity
Heat Stress: !increases! Malondialdehyde
Heat Stress: !causes! Disordered Palisade Tissue Arrangement
Heat Stress: !causes! Loose Spongy Tissue Arrangement
Heat Stress: !inhibits! Glycolysis Pathway
Heat Stress: !delays! TCA Cycle
Heat Stress: !increases! Expression of Amino Acid Synthesis Pathways
Transcription Factor Families: !upregulated in response to! Heat Stress
Metabolites: !significantly enriched in! Amino Acid Metabolism & TCA Cycle
Genes: !involved in! Response to Heat Stress