Circadian clocks govern temporal programs in the green lineage (Chloroplastida) as they do in other photosynthetic pro- and eukaryotes, bacteria, fungi, animals, and humans. Their physiological properties, including entrainment, phase responses, and temperature compensation, are well conserved. The involvement of transcriptional/translational feedback loops in the oscillatory machinery and reversible phosphorylation events are also maintained. Circadian clocks control a large variety of output rhythms in green algae and terrestrial plants, adjusting their metabolism and behavior to the day-night cycle. The angiosperm Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) represents a well-studied circadian clock model. Several molecular components of its oscillatory machinery are conserved in other Chloroplastida, but their functions may differ. Conserved clock components include at least one member of the CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1/REVEILLE and one of the PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR family. The Arabidopsis evening complex members EARLY FLOWERING3 (ELF3), ELF4, and LUX ARRHYTHMO are found in the moss Physcomitrium patens and in the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha. In the flagellate chlorophyte alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, only homologs of ELF4 and LUX (named RHYTHM OF CHLOROPLAST ROC75) are present. Temporal ROC75 expression in C. reinhardtii is opposite to that of the angiosperm LUX, suggesting different clock mechanisms. In the picoalga Ostreococcus tauri, both ELF genes are missing, suggesting that it has a progenitor circadian "green" clock. Clock-relevant photoreceptors and thermosensors vary within the green lineage, except for the CRYPTOCHROMEs, whose variety and functions may differ. More genetically tractable models of Chloroplastida are needed to draw final conclusions about the gradual evolution of circadian clocks within the green lineage.

CIRCADIAN CLOCKS: !govern! temporal programs 
CIRCADIAN CLOCKS: !control! output rhythms 
Arabidopsis: !contains! clock components 
Physcomitrium patens: !contains! ELF3, ELF4, LUX ARRHYTHMO 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: !contains! RHYTHM OF CHLOROPLAST ROC75 
Ostreococcus tauri: !lacks! ELF genes 
CRYPTOCHROMEs: !vary! in variety and functions