The development of basal stem rot (BSR) disease in oil palm is associated with lignin during vegetative growth and salicylic acid (SA) biosynthesis. The increase in the lignin content, SA accumulation, growth, and root biomass could indicate the resistance of oil palm seedlings to BSR disease. Therefore, although there are many studies on the interactions between the Ganoderma boninense and oil palm, research on evaluation of physiological processes, biochemistry, and molecules occurring during early internal symptoms of BSR in roots of oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) are essential. Ganoderma boninense inoculation indicated that C01, C02, and C05 seedlings were susceptible, while the other three seedlings, C03, C07, and C08, were resistant based on Ganoderma Disease Index (GDI). Infection by G. boninense in the most susceptible seedlings C05 reduced fresh weight of roots (FW) by 9.0%, and lignin content by 10.9%. The most resistant seedlings C08 were reduced by only 8.4%, and 0.2% regarding their fresh weight and lignin content, respectively. BSR disease induced SA accumulation in the most susceptible C08 and decreased peroxidase (PRX) enzyme (EC 1.11.1.7) activities in root tissues of oil palm seedlings except C07 and C08 where PRX activities remained high in the 4 months after planting. Infection with G. boninense also increased glutathione S-transferase U19-like (EgGSTU19) gene expression in the root tissues of susceptible seedlings, while laccase-24 (EgLCC24) gene expression was associated with resistance against BSR disease. Based on the relative expression of twelve genes, two genes are categorized as receptors (EgWAKL5, EgMIK1), two genes as biosynthesis signal transduction compound (EgOPR5, EgACO1), five genes as defense responses (EgROMT, EgSOT12, EgLCC24, EgGLT3, EgGSTU19), and one gene as trans-resveratrol di-O-methyltransferase-like (EgRNaseIII) predicted related to BSR infection. While two other genes remain unknown (EgUnk1, EgUnk2). Ganoderma infection-induced SA accumulation and lignification in resistant accessions promote the seedlings root biomass. Oil palm seedlings have a synergistic physical, biochemical, and molecular defense mechanism to the BSR disease. The utilization of nucleotide-based molecular markers using EgLCC24 gene is able to detect resistant oil palm seedlings to G. boninense.

Ganoderma boninense: !induces! SA accumulation
Ganoderma boninense: !reduces! FW & lignin content
Ganoderma boninense: !decreases! PRX enzyme activity
Ganoderma boninense: !increases! EgGSTU19 gene expression
Ganoderma boninense: !associated with! resistance
EgLCC24 gene: !detects! resistant oil palm seedlings