Aronia is a group of deciduous fruiting shrubs, of the Rosaceae family, native to eastern North America. Interest in Aronia has increased because of the high levels of dietary antioxidants in Aronia fruits. Using Illumina RNA-seq transcriptome analysis, this study investigates the molecular mechanisms of polyphenol biosynthesis during Aronia fruit development. Six A. melanocarpa (diploid) accessions were collected at four fruit developmental stages. De novo assembly was performed with 341 million clean reads from 24 samples and assembled into 90,008 transcripts with an average length of 801 bp. The transcriptome had 96.1% complete according to Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs (BUSCOs). The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in flavonoid biosynthetic and metabolic processes, pigment biosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolic processes, and polysaccharide metabolic processes based on significant Gene Ontology (GO) biological terms. The expression of ten anthocyanin biosynthetic genes showed significant up-regulation during fruit development according to the transcriptomic data, which was further confirmed using qRT-PCR expression analyses. Additionally, transcription factor genes were identified among the DEGs. Using a transient expression assay, we confirmed that AmMYB10 induces anthocyanin biosynthesis. The de novo transcriptome data provides a valuable resource for the understanding the molecular mechanisms of fruit anthocyanin biosynthesis in Aronia and species of the Rosaceae family.

Aronia: !produces! Dietary Antioxidants 
Illumina RNA-seq: !analyzes! Molecular Mechanisms 
DEGs: !identify! Flavonoid Biosynthesis 
Pigment Biosynthesis: !involves! Carbohydrate Metabolic Processes 
Polysaccharide Metabolic Processes: !involve! DEGs 
Anthocyanin Biosynthetic Genes: !show! Up-regulation 
qRT-PCR Expression Analyses: !confirm! Anthocyanin Biosynthesis 
Transcription Factor Genes: !identified among! DEGs 
AmMYB10: !induces! Anthocyanin Biosynthesis