We found 34 and 71 key genes potentially involved in flavonoid biosynthesis and cell wall disassembly, respectively, which could be associated with specific peel coloration and softening of each genotype. Cashew apple (Anacardium occidentale) has a great economic importance worldwide due to its high nutritional value, peculiar flavor and aroma. During ripening, the peduncle develops different peel color and becomes quickly fragile due to its oversoftening, impacting its consumers' acceptance. In view of this, the understanding about its transcriptional dynamics throughout ripening is imperative. In this study, we performed a transcriptome sequencing of two cashew apple genotypes (CCP 76 and BRS 265), presenting different firmness and color peel, in the immature and ripe stages. Comparative transcriptome analysis between immature and ripe cashew apple revealed 4374 and 3266 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) to CCP 76 and BRS 265 genotypes, respectively. These genes included 71 and 34 GDEs involved in the cell wall disassembly and flavonoid biosynthesis, respectively, which could be associated with firmness loss and anthocyanin accumulation during cashew apple development. Then, softer peduncle of CCP 76 could be justified by down-regulated EXP and up-regulation of genes involved in pectin degradation (PG, PL and PAE) and in cell wall biosynthesis. Moreover, genes related to flavonoid biosynthesis (PAL, C4H and CHS) could be associated with early high accumulation of anthocyanin in red-peel peduncle of BRS 265. Finally, expression patterns of the selected genes were tested by real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR), and the qRT-PCR results were consistent with transcriptome data. The information generated in this work will provide insights into transcriptome responses to cashew apple ripening and hence, it will be helpful for cashew breeding programs aimed at developing genotypes with improved quality traits.

GDEs: !associated with! firmness loss and anthocyanin accumulation
EXP: !down-regulated in! CCP 76
PG, PL, PAE: !up-regulated in! CCP 76
PAL, C4H, CHS: !up-regulated in! BRS 265
qRT-PCR: !consistent with! transcriptome data