Nano-materials ameliorate the adverse effect of salinity stress on the physiological and biochemical processes in plants. The present investigation was designed to evaluate the physiological mechanisms through which a nano-chitosan-encapsulated nano-silicon fertilizer (NC-NS) can ameliorate the adverse effect of salinity stress on the wheat plants, and compare it with nano-chitosan (NC) and nano-silicon (NS) application. Nano-silicon was encapsulated with a chitosan-tripolyphosphate (TPP) nano-matrix by ionic gelation method for its slow release. The wheat plants were exposed to foliar application of distilled water, NC, NS, and NC-NS with two NaCl irrigation levels at 0 (distilled water) and 100 mM. The foliar application of NC, NS, and NC-NS induced a significant increase in the function of enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant systems of the wheat plants to equilibrate cellular redox homeostasis by balancing H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> content in the leaves and roots, as compared with salt-stressed plants without treatment. The plant's foliar-sprayed with NC, NS, and NC-NS solution exhibited a significant increase in the molecules with osmotic adjustment potentials such as proline, free amino acids, glycine betaine, and sugars to protect cells against osmotic stress-induced by salinity. The observed increase in the antioxidant power and osmoregulatory at NC, NS, and NC-NS application was accompanied by the protection of lipid membrane, proteins and photosynthetic apparatus against salinity stress. In the present study, the beneficial role of NC, NS, and NC-NS application, particularly NC-NS, in alleviating the adverse effect of salinity stress on antioxidant systems and osmotic adjustment in wheat is well documented. An overview of the result of present study assists researchers in providing a potential solution for this increasing salinization threat in crops.

NC: !ameliorates! Salinity Stress
NS: !ameliorates! Salinity Stress
NC-NS: !ameliorates! Salinity Stress
NC: !induces! Antioxidant Systems
NS: !induces! Antioxidant Systems
NC-NS: !induces! Antioxidant Systems
NC: !induces! Osmotic Adjustment
NS: !induces! Osmotic Adjustment
NC-NS: !induces! Osmotic Adjustment