Root-knot nematodes (RKN) (<i>Meloidogyne</i> spp.) constantly communicate with their host to establish and maintain specialized feeding cells. They likely regulate this interaction by monitoring host biology. As plant host biology is influenced by light and gene expression varies correspondingly, RKN gene transcription and biology likely follow similar patterns. We profiled RKN transcripts over a period of 24 h and identified approximately 1,000 differentially expressed genes (DEG) in nematode and model host <i>Medicago truncatula</i>, with the majority of DEG occurring in the middle of the dark period. Many of the plant DEG are involved in defense-response pathways, while the nematode DEG are involved in establishing infection, suggesting a strong host-nematode interaction occurring during the dark. To identify interacting genes, we developed a plant-nematode gene network based on DEG signals. The phenylpropanoid pathway was identified as a significant plant-nematode interacting pathway, representing four of 33 genes in the network. We further examined if this pathway interacts similarly in another host, tomato, by quantifying phenolic and flavonoid compounds produced by this pathway. Phenolic compounds showed a significant increase in production during the day in uninoculated plants as compared with during the night. However, during the dark period, there was an increase in flavonoid content in infected plants when compared with uninfected controls, indicating potential host defense mechanisms active during the height of nematode activity at night. This study elucidated cross-species interacting pathways that could be targeted to develop novel management strategies to these important pests.[Formula: see text] Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Root-knot nematodes: !communicate with! host
RKN gene transcription: !varies with! light
DEG: !occur in! nematode & host
Plant DEG: !involved in! defense-response pathways
Nematode DEG: !involved in! establishing infection
Plant-nematode gene network: !developed based on! DEG signals
Phenylpropanoid pathway: !identified as! significant interacting pathway
Tomato: !examined for! phenolic & flavonoid compounds
Phenolic compounds: !increase during day in! uninoculated plants
Flavonoid content: !increase during dark period in! infected plants