The local and long-distance signaling pathways mediated by the leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase HAR1 suppress root branching and promote primary root length in response to nitrate supply. The root morphology of higher plants changes plastically to effectively absorb nutrients and water from the soil. In particular, legumes develop root organ nodules, in which symbiotic rhizobia fix atmospheric nitrogen in nitrogen-poor environments. The number of nodules formed in roots is negatively regulated by a long-distance signaling pathway that travels through shoots called autoregulation of nodulation (AON). In the model plant Lotus japonicus, defects in AON genes, such as a leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase HYPERNODULATION ABERRANT ROOT FORMATION 1 (HAR1), an orthologue of CLAVATA1, and the F-box protein TOO MUCH LOVE (TML), induce the formation of an excess number of nodules. The loss-of-function mutant of HAR1 exhibits a short and bushy root phenotype in the absence of rhizobia. We show that the har1 mutant exhibits high nitrate sensitivity during root development. The uninfected har1 mutant significantly increased lateral root number and reduced primary root length in the presence of 3 mM nitrate, compared with the wild-type and tml mutant. Grafting experiments indicated that local and long-distance signaling pathways via root- and shoot-acting HAR1 additively regulated root morphology under the moderate nitrate concentrations. These findings allow us to propose that HAR1-mediated signaling pathways control the root system architecture by suppressing lateral root branching and promoting primary root elongation in response to nitrate availability.

HAR1: !suppresses! root branching 
HAR1: !promotes! primary root length 
AON genes: !negatively regulate! nodule formation 
HAR1: !induces! excess number of nodules 
HAR1: !exhibits! high nitrate sensitivity 
HAR1: !increases! lateral root number 
HAR1: !reduces! primary root length 
HAR1: !controls! root system architecture