The high-affinity nitrate transporter 2 (NRT2) proteins play vital roles in both nitrate (NO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>) uptake and translocation in plants. Although the gene families coding the NRT2 proteins have been identified and functionally characterized in many plant species, the systematic identification of NRT2 gene family members has not previously been reported in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum). Moreover, little is known about their expression profiles in response to different environmental stresses. The present study sought to identify the NRT2 gene family members within the tomato genome, and then to characterize them in detail by means of bioinformatics, physiological and expression analyses. Four novel NRT2 genes were identified in the tomato genome, all of which contained the same domain belonging to the major facilitator superfamily (PF07690). The co-expression network of the SlNRT2 genes revealed that they were co-expressed with several other genes in a number of different molecular pathways, including the transport, photosynthesis, fatty acid metabolism and amino acid catabolism pathways. Several phosphorylation sites were predicted in the NRT2 proteins. The SlNRT2 genes interact with many other genes that perform various functions in many crucial pathways within the tomato genome. The sequence variations observed at the gene and protein levels indicate the dynamic regulation of the SlNRT2 gene family members in relation to cell metabolism, particularly with regard to the nitrogen assimilation pathway. The responses of the SlNRT2 genes to drought and salinity stresses are diverse, and they are neither stress- nor tissue-specific. The findings of this study should provide a useful scientific basis for future studies concerning the roles of the NRT2 gene family in plants.

NRT2: !affects! Nitrate uptake and translocation
SlNRT2: !co-express with! Other genes
SlNRT2: !interact with! Other genes
SlNRT2: !regulate! Cell metabolism
SlNRT2: !respond to! Drought and salinity