A comprehensive collection of 1254 tomato accessions, corresponding to European traditional and modern varieties, early domesticated varieties, and wild relatives, was analyzed by genotyping by sequencing. A continuous genetic gradient between the traditional and modern varieties was observed. European traditional tomatoes displayed very low genetic diversity, with only 298 polymorphic loci (95% threshold) out of 64 943 total variants. European traditional tomatoes could be classified into several genetic groups. Two main clusters consisting of Spanish and Italian accessions showed higher genetic diversity than the remaining varieties, suggesting that these regions might be independent secondary centers of diversity with a different history. Other varieties seem to be the result of a more recent complex pattern of migrations and hybridizations among the European regions. Several polymorphic loci were associated in a genome-wide association study with fruit morphological traits in the European traditional collection. The corresponding alleles were found to contribute to the distinctive phenotypic characteristic of the genetic varietal groups. The few highly polymorphic loci associated with morphological traits in an otherwise a low-diversity population suggests a history of balancing selection, in which tomato farmers likely maintained the morphological variation by inadvertently applying a high selective pressure within different varietal types.

genetic gradient: !observed between! traditional and modern varieties 
European traditional tomatoes: !displayed low genetic diversity with! 298 polymorphic loci 
Spanish and Italian accessions: !showed higher genetic diversity than! remaining varieties 
complex pattern of migrations and hybridizations: !among European regions observed in! other varieties 
polymorphic loci: !associated with! fruit morphological traits 
alleles: !contributed to! distinctive phenotypic characteristic 
balancing selection: !likely maintained by! tomato farmers