The rhizome of Polygonatum kingianum Coll. et Hemsl (P. kingianum) is a crucial traditional Chinese medicine, but severe bud dormancy occurs during early rhizome development. Low temperature is a positive factor affecting dormancy release, whereas the variation in carbohydrates during dormancy release has not been investigated systematically. Therefore, the sugar content, related metabolic pathways and gene co-expression were analysed to elucidate the regulatory mechanism of carbohydrates during dormancy release in the P. kingianum rhizome bud. During dormancy transition, starch and sucrose (Suc) exhibited opposing trends in the P. kingianum rhizome bud, representing a critical indicator of dormancy release. Galactose (Gal) and raffinose (Raf) were increased in content and synthesis. Glucose (Glc), cellulose (Cel), mannose (Man), arabinose (Ara), rhamnose (Rha) and stachyose (Sta) showed various changes, indicating their different roles in breaking rhizome bud dormancy in P. kingianum. At the beginning of dormancy release, Glc metabolism may be dominated by anaerobic oxidation (glycolysis followed by ethanol fermentation). After entering the S3 stage, the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) were may be more active possibly. In the gene co-expression network comprising carbohydrates and hormones, HYD1 was identified as a hub gene, and numerous interactions centred on STS/SUS were also observed, suggesting the essential role of brassinosteroids (BRs), Raf and Suc in the regulatory network. We revealed cold-responsive genes related to carbohydrate metabolism, suggesting regulatory mechanisms of sugar during dormancy release in the P. kingianum rhizome bud. Additionally, gene co-expression analysis revealed possible interactions between sugar and hormone signalling, providing new insight into the dormancy release mechanism in P. kingianum rhizome buds.

starch: !opposes! Suc
Gal: !increases in content and synthesis!
Glc: !metabolized by anaerobic oxidation!
TCA/PPP: !activated after S3 stage!
HYD1: !hub gene in co-expression network!
BRs/Raf/Suc: !interact in regulatory network!
cold-responsive genes: !related to carbohydrate metabolism!