Gray mold disease is one of the most frequently occurring diseases in strawberries. Given that it spreads rapidly, rapid countermeasures are necessary through the development of early diagnosis technology. In this study, hyperspectral images of strawberry leaves that were inoculated with gray mold fungus to cause disease were taken; these images were classified into healthy and infected areas as seen by the naked eye. The areas where the infection spread after time elapsed were classified as the asymptomatic class. Square regions of interest (ROIs) with a dimensionality of 16 × 16 × 150 were acquired as training data, including infected, asymptomatic, and healthy areas. Then, 2D and 3D data were used in the development of a convolutional neural network (CNN) classification model. An effective wavelength analysis was performed before the development of the CNN model. Further, the classification model that was developed with 2D training data showed a classification accuracy of 0.74, while the model that used 3D data acquired an accuracy of 0.84; this indicated that the 3D data produced slightly better performance. When performing classification between healthy and asymptomatic areas for developing early diagnosis technology, the two CNN models showed a classification accuracy of 0.73 with regards to the asymptomatic ones. To increase accuracy in classifying asymptomatic areas, a model was developed by smoothing the spectrum data and expanding the first and second derivatives; the results showed that it was possible to increase the asymptomatic classification accuracy to 0.77 and reduce the misclassification of asymptomatic areas as healthy areas. Based on these results, it is concluded that the proposed 3D CNN classification model can be used as an early diagnosis sensor of gray mold diseases since it produces immediate on-site analysis results of hyperspectral images of leaves.

Hyperspectral images: !classified into! healthy and infected areas
Square ROIs: !used as! training data
2D data: !used in! CNN classification model
3D data: !used in! CNN classification model
CNN models: !showed accuracy of! 0.73 for classifying asymptomatic areas
Spectrum data: !smoothed and derivatives expanded to! increase accuracy to 0.77