Cadmium (Cd) is a major environmental contaminant due to its widespread industrial use. Cd contamination of soil and water is rather classical but has emerged as a recent problem. Cd toxicity causes a range of damages to plants ranging from germination to yield suppression. Plant physiological functions, i.e., water interactions, essential mineral uptake, and photosynthesis, are also harmed by Cd. Plants have also shown metabolic changes because of Cd exposure either as direct impact on enzymes or other metabolites, or because of its propensity to produce reactive oxygen species, which can induce oxidative stress. In recent years, there has been increased interest in the potential of plants with ability to accumulate or stabilize Cd compounds for bioremediation of Cd pollution. Here, we critically review the chemistry of Cd and its dynamics in soil and the rhizosphere, toxic effects on plant growth, and yield formation. To conserve the environment and resources, chemical/biological remediation processes for Cd and their efficacy have been summarized in this review. Modulation of plant growth regulators such as cytokinins, ethylene, gibberellins, auxins, abscisic acid, polyamines, jasmonic acid, brassinosteroids, and nitric oxide has been highlighted. Development of plant genotypes with restricted Cd uptake and reduced accumulation in edible portions by conventional and marker-assisted breeding are also presented. In this regard, use of molecular techniques including identification of QTLs, CRISPR/Cas9, and functional genomics to enhance the adverse impacts of Cd in plants may be quite helpful. The review's results should aid in the development of novel and suitable solutions for limiting Cd bioavailability and toxicity, as well as the long-term management of Cd-polluted soils, therefore reducing environmental and human health hazards.

Cd: !contaminates! Soil/Water
Cd: !causes! Plant Damage
Cd: !induces! Metabolic Changes
Cd: !modulates! Plant Growth Regulators
Cd: !reduces! Yield Formation
Bioremediation: !limits! Cd Pollution
QTLs: !identify! Cd Uptake
CRISPR/Cas9: !enhance! Adverse Impacts
Functional Genomics: !reduce! Cd Toxicity