We introduce an integrative process-based crop model for garlic (<i>Allium sativum</i>). Building on our previous model that simulated key phenological, morphological, and physiological features of a garlic plant, the new garlic model provides comprehensive and integrative estimations of biomass accumulation and yield formation under diverse environmental conditions. This model also showcases an application of Cropbox to develop a comprehensive crop model. Cropbox is a crop modeling framework featuring declarative modeling language and a unified simulation interface for building and improving crop models. Using Cropbox, we first evaluated the model performance against three datasets with an emphasis on biomass and yield measured under different environmental conditions and growing seasons. We then applied the model to simulate optimal planting dates under future climate conditions for assessing climate adaptation strategies between two contrasting locations in South Korea: the current growing region (Gosan, Jeju) and an unfavorable cold winter region (Chuncheon, Gangwon). The model simulated the growth and development of a southern-type cultivar (Namdo, ND) reasonably well. Under Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) scenarios, an overall delay in optimal planting date from a week to a month, and a slight increase in potential yield were expected in Gosan. Expansion of growing region to northern area including Chuncheon was expected due to mild winter temperatures in the future and may allow ND cultivar production in more regions. The predicted optimal planting date in the new region was similar to the current growing region that favors early fall planting. Our new integrative garlic model provides mechanistic, process-based crop responses to environmental cues and can be useful for assessing climate impacts and identifying crop specific climate adaptation strategies for the future.

Cropbox: !features! declarative modeling language
Cropbox: !provides! unified simulation interface
Model: !simulates! biomass accumulation and yield formation
Model: !evaluated against! three datasets
Model: !simulates! optimal planting dates
RCP scenarios: !delay! optimal planting date
RCP scenarios: !increase! potential yield
Gosan: !favors! early fall planting
Chuncheon: !allows! ND cultivar production