Wheat plants can be infected by a variety of pathogen species, with some of them causing similar symptoms. For example, <i>Zymoseptoria tritici</i> and <i>Parastagonospora nodorum</i> often occur together and form the Septoria leaf blotch complex. Accurate detection of wheat pathogens is essential in applying the most appropriate disease management strategy. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) is a recent molecular technique that was rapidly adopted for detection of plant pathogens and can be implemented easily for detection in field conditions. The specificity, sensitivity, and facility to conduct the reaction at a constant temperature are the main advantages of LAMP over immunological and alternative nucleic acid-based methods. In plant pathogen detection studies, LAMP was able to differentiate related fungal species and non-target strains of virulent species with lower detection limits than those obtained with PCR. In this review, we explain the amplification process and elements of the LAMP reaction, and the variety of techniques for visualization of the amplified products, along with their advantages and disadvantages compared with alternative isothermal approaches. Then, a compilation of analyses that show the application of LAMP for detection of fungal pathogens and viruses in wheat is presented. We also describe the modifications included in real-time and multiplex LAMP that reduce common errors from post-amplification detection in traditional LAMP assays and allow discrimination of targets in multi-sample analyses. Finally, we discuss the utility of LAMP for detection of pathogens in wheat, its limitations, and current challenges of this technique. We provide prospects for application of real-time LAMP and multiplex LAMP in the field, using portable devices that measure fluorescence and turbidity, or facilitate colorimetric detection. New technologies for detection of plant pathogen are discussed that can be integrated with LAMP to obtain elevated analytical sensitivity of detection.

LAMP: !amplifies! Nucleic Acids 
LAMP: !differentiates! Fungal Species 
LAMP: !detects! Virulent Species 
LAMP: !discriminates! Targets 
Real-time LAMP: !reduces! Common Errors 
Multiplex LAMP: !allows! Discrimination 
Portable Devices: !measure! Fluorescence 
Portable Devices: !facilitate! Colorimetric Detection 
New Technologies: !integrate with! LAMP