Plasma membrane-localized AtAVT6D importing aspartic acid can be targeted to develop plants with enhanced osmotic and nitrogen-starvation tolerance. AtAVT6D promoter can be exploited as a stress-inducible promoter for genetic improvements to raise stress-resilient crops. The AtAVT6 family of amino acid transporters in Arabidopsis thaliana has been predicted to export amino acids like aspartate and glutamate. However, the functional characterization of these amino acid transporters in plants remains unexplored. The present study investigates the expression patterns of AtAVT6 genes in different tissues and under various abiotic stress conditions using quantitative Real-time PCR. The expression analysis demonstrated that the member AtAVT6D was significantly induced in response to phytohormone ABA and stresses like osmotic and drought. The tissue-specific expression analysis showed that AtAVT6D was strongly expressed in the siliques. Taking together these results, we can speculate that AtAVT6D might play a vital role in silique development and abiotic stress tolerance. Further, subcellular localization study showed AtAVT6D was localized to the plasma membrane. The heterologous expression of AtAVT6D in yeast cells conferred significant tolerance to nitrogen-deficient and osmotic stress conditions. The Xenopus oocyte studies revealed that AtAVT6D is involved in the uptake of Aspartic acid. While overexpression of AtAVT6D resulted in smaller siliques in Arabidopsis thaliana. Additionally, transient expression studies were performed with the full-length AtAVT6D promoter and its deletion constructs to study the effect of ACGT-N<sub>24</sub>-ACGT motifs on the reporter gene expression in response to abiotic stresses and ABA treatment. The fluorometric GUS analyses revealed that the promoter deletion construct-2 (Pro.C2) possessing a single copy of ACGT-N<sub>24</sub>-ACGT motif directed the strongest GUS expression under all the abiotic conditions tested. These results suggest that Pro.C2 can be used as a stress-inducible promoter to drive a significant transgene expression.

AtAVT6D: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
AtAVT6D: !imports! aspartic acid 
AtAVT6D: !enhances! osmotic and nitrogen-starvation tolerance 
AtAVT6D: !induces! expression in response to ABA and abiotic stresses 
AtAVT6D: !synthesizes! siliques 
AtAVT6D: !represses! silique size 
AtAVT6D promoter: !enhances! GUS expression under abiotic conditions