Enhanced levels of endogenous melatonin in the root of wheat, mainly through the OMT1 gene, augment the antioxidant system, reestablish redox homeostasis and are associated with combined stress tolerance. A systems biology approach, including a collection of computational analyses and experimental assays, led us to uncover some aspects of a poorly understood phenomenon, namely wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) combined drought and salinity stress tolerance. Accordingly, a cross-study comparison of stress experiments was performed via a meta-analysis of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) data from wheat roots to uncover the overlapping gene network of drought and salinity stresses. Identified differentially expressed genes were functionally annotated by gene ontology enrichment analysis and gene network analysis. Among those genes, O-methyl transferase 1 (OMT1) was highlighted as a more important (hub) gene in the dual-stress response gene network. Afterwards, the potential roles of OMT1 in mediating physiochemical indicators of stress tolerance were investigated in two wheat genotypes differing in abiotic stress tolerance. Regression analysis and correspondence analysis (CA) confirmed that the expression profiles of the OMT1 gene and variations in melatonin content, antioxidant enzyme activities, proline accumulation, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and malondialdehyde (MDA) contents are significantly associated with combined stress tolerance. These results reveal that the OMT1 gene may contribute to wheat combined drought and salinity stress tolerance through augmenting the antioxidant system and re-establishing redox homeostasis, probably via the regulation of melatonin biosynthesis as a master regulator molecule. Our findings provide new insights into the roles of melatonin in wheat combined drought and salinity stress tolerance and suggest a novel plausible regulatory node through the OMT1 gene to improve multiple-stress tolerant crops.

OMT1: !enhances! Melatonin
Melatonin: !augments! Antioxidant system
Melatonin: !reestablishes! Redox homeostasis
OMT1: !associated with! Combined stress tolerance
OMT1: !regulates! Melatonin biosynthesis
OMT1: !contributes to! Wheat combined drought and salinity stress tolerance