Nitraria sibirica Pall. is an economic plant with two kinds of fruit color, widely spreads in the Qinghai Tibet Plateau. The chemical analysis and pharmacological evaluation had been carried out for several tens of years, the mechanism behind the fruit color differentiation is still unclear. In this manuscript, the chemical analysis of the extractions showed that the chemical composition of fruit color was anthocyanin, and two kind of Nitraria sibirica Pall. were caused by the content differentiation with the same anthocyanin kinds. Cyanidin-3-[2"-(6'"-coumaroyl)-glucosyl]-glucoside (C3G) was the major anthocyanin. Transcriptome analysis and the qRT-PCR revealed that the structural genes relative to anthocyanin biosynthesis except CHS, F3'5'H and ANS were up-regulated in the peels of BF (Black fruit) compared with the peels of RF (Red fruit), which indicated that transcript factor should be the reason for the expression difference of the structure genes. In the unigenes of the transcript factor MYB and bHLH, relative to anthocyanin, only NsMYB1 (Cluster 8422.10600), was high-expression and up-expression in the peels of BF. NsMYB1 encoded the same length protein with four amino acid differences in the RF and BF, and both contained the intact DNA, HTH-MYB and SANT domains. NsMYB1 was close to the AtMYB114, AtMYB113 and AtPAP1, regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis, in phylogenetic relationship. Both NsMYB1r and NsMYB1b could promote the transcript of the structural genes, and induced the anthocyanin accumulation in all tissues of transgenic tobacco. The insertion of 'TATA' in the promoter of NsMYB1r gave one more promoter region, and was the reason for higher transcripts in black fruit possibly. Cyanidin-3-[2''-(6'"-coumaroyl)-glucosyl]-glucoside was the major anthocyanin in black fruit of Nitraria sibirica Pall.. NsMYB1 was a functional R2R3-MYB transcription factor, regulated the anthocyanin biosynthesis, and led to the fruit color differentiation in Nitraria sibirica Pall.

Nitraria sibirica Pall.: !produces! Anthocyanin 
NsMYB1: !regulates! Anthocyanin biosynthesis 
NsMYB1: !induces! Anthocyanin accumulation 
'TATA': !enhances! NsMYB1 transcription