Temperature is the primary factor affecting the morpho-physiological, developmental, and yield attributes of soybean. Despite several temperature and soybean studies, functional relationships between temperature and soybean physiology and yield components are limited. An experiment was conducted to determine the optimum temperature for soybean gas exchange and yield components using indeterminate (Asgrow AG5332, AG) and determinate (Progeny P5333 RY, PR) growth habit cultivars. Plants grown outdoors were exposed to 5 day/night temperature treatments, 21/13, 25/17, 29/21, 33/25, and 37°C/29°C, from flowering to maturity using the sunlit plant growth chambers. Significant temperature and cultivar differences were recorded among all measured parameters. Gas exchange parameters declined with increasing temperature treatments during the mid-pod filling stage, and quadratic functions best described the response. The optimum temperature for soybean pod weight, number, and seed number was higher for AG than PR, indicating greater high-temperature tolerance. Soybean exposed to warmer parental temperature (37°C/29°C) during pod filling decreased significantly the transgenerational seed germination when incubated at 18, 28, and 38°C. Our findings suggest that the impact of temperature during soybean development is transferable. The warmer temperature has adverse transgenerational effects on seed germination ability. Thus, developing soybean genotypes tolerant to high temperatures will help growers to produce high-yielding and quality beans. The quantified temperature, soybean physiology, and yield components-dependent functional algorithms would be helpful to develop adaptation strategies to offset the impacts of extreme temperature events associated with future climate change.

Temperature: !affects! Soybean physiology and yield components
Temperature: !influences! Transgenerational seed germination
Soybean cultivar: !determines! Optimum temperature for gas exchange and yield components
Soybean cultivar: !influences! Transgenerational seed germination ability
High temperatures: !decrease! Gas exchange parameters
High temperatures: !reduce! Transgenerational seed germination