Soil salinity is a major abiotic stressor inhibiting plant growth and development by affecting a range of physiological processes. Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) are considered a sustainable option for alleviation of stress and enhancement of plant growth, yet their mode of action is complex and largely unexplored. In this study, an untargeted proteomic approach provided insights into growth and stress response mechanisms elicited in soybean plants by <i>Rhizobium</i> sp. SL42 and <i>Hydrogenophaga</i> sp. SL48 and co-inoculated with <i>Bradyrhizobium japonicum</i> 532C. The plants were grown under optimal and salt-stressed conditions up to their mid-vegetative stage; shoot growth variables were increased in the bacteria-treated plants. Shotgun proteomics of soybean leaf tissue revealed that a number of proteins related to plant growth and stress tolerance were modulated in the bacterial inoculation treatments. Several key proteins involved in major metabolic pathways of photosynthesis, respiration, and photorespiration were upregulated. These include photosystem I psaK, Rubisco subunits, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase, and glycine decarboxylase. Similarly, stress response proteins such as catalase and glutathione S-transferase (antioxidants), proline-rich precursor protein (osmolyte), and NADP-dependent malic enzyme (linked to ABA signaling) were increased under salt stress. The functions of proteins related to plant growth and stress adaptation led to an expanded understanding of plant-microbe interactions. These findings suggest that the PGPR strains regulated proteome expression in soybean leaves through multiple signaling pathways, thereby inducing salinity tolerance, and improving plant growth in the presence of this abiotic stress challenge. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025596.

Rhizobium sp. SL42: !enhances! Plant growth 
Hydrogenophaga sp. SL48: !enhances! Plant growth 
Bradyrhizobium japonicum 532C: !enhances! Plant growth 
Photosystem I psaK: !synthesizes! Photosynthesis 
Rubisco subunits: !synthesizes! Photosynthesis 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase: !synthesizes! Respiration 
Succinate dehydrogenase: !synthesizes! Respiration 
Glycine decarboxylase: !synthesizes! Photorespiration 
Catalase: !synthesizes! Antioxidants 
Glutathione S-transferase: !synthesizes! Antioxidants 
Proline-rich precursor protein: !synthesizes! Osmolyte 
NADP-dependent malic enzyme: !synthesizes! ABA signaling