['35401621', 'Initiation of plant immune signaling requires recognition of conserved molecular  patterns from microbes and herbivores by plasma membrane-localized pattern  recognition receptors. Additionally, plants produce and secrete numerous small  peptide hormones, termed phytocytokines, which act as secondary danger signals to  modulate immunity. In Arabidopsis, the Brassicae-specific SERINE RICH ENDOGENOUS  PEPTIDE (SCOOP) family consists of 14 members that are perceived by the  leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase MALE DISCOVERER 1-INTERACTING RECEPTOR LIKE  KINASE 2 (MIK2). Recognition of SCOOP peptides elicits generic early signaling  responses but knowledge on how and if SCOOPs modulate specific downstream immune  defenses is limited. We report here that depletion of MIK2 or the single  PROSCOOP12 precursor results in decreased Arabidopsis resistance against the  generalist herbivore Spodoptera littoralis but not the specialist Pieris  brassicae. Increased performance of S. littoralis on mik2-1 and proscoop12 is  accompanied by a diminished accumulation of jasmonic acid, jasmonate-isoleucine  and indolic glucosinolates. Additionally, we show transcriptional activation of  the PROSCOOP gene family in response to insect herbivory. Our data therefore  indicate that perception of endogenous SCOOP peptides by MIK2 modulates the  jasmonate pathway and thereby contributes to enhanced defense against a  generalist herbivore.', '2022', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2022.852808', 'Reymond']

pattern recognition receptors: !recognize! conserved molecular patterns 
phytocytokines: !act as! secondary danger signals 
SCOOP family: !perceived by! MALE DISCOVERER 1-INTERACTING RECEPTOR LIKE KINASE 2 
MIK2/PROSCOOP12: !decreases! Arabidopsis resistance against Spodoptera littoralis 
MIK2/PROSCOOP12: !diminishes! accumulation of jasmonic acid, jasmonate-isoleucine and indolic glucosinolates 
insect herbivory: !transcriptionally activates! PROSCOOP gene family 
SCOOP peptides: !modulate! jasmonate pathway 
SCOOP peptides: !contribute to! enhanced defense against generalist herbivore