Invertases (INVs) and pectin methylesterases (PMEs) are essential enzymes coordinating carbohydrate metabolism, stress responses, and sugar signaling. INVs catalyzes the cleavage of sucrose into glucose and fructose, exerting a pivotal role in sucrose metabolism, cellulose biosynthesis, nitrogen uptake, reactive oxygen species scavenging as well as osmotic stress adaptation. PMEs exert a dynamic control of pectin methylesterification to manage cell adhesion, cell wall porosity, and elasticity, as well as perception and signaling of stresses. INV and PME activities can be regulated by specific proteinaceous inhibitors, named INV inhibitors (INVIs) and PME Inhibitors (PMEIs). Despite targeting different enzymes, INVIs and PMEIs belong to the same large protein family named "Plant Invertase/Pectin Methylesterase Inhibitor Superfamily." INVIs and PMEIs, while showing a low aa sequence identity, they share several structural properties. The two inhibitors showed mainly alpha-helices in their secondary structure and both form a non-covalent 1:1 complex with their enzymatic counterpart. Some PMEI members are organized in a gene cluster with specific PMEs. Although the most important physiological information was obtained in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, there are now several characterized INVI/PMEIs in different plant species. This review provides an integrated and updated overview of this fascinating superfamily, from the specific activity of characterized isoforms to their specific functions in plant physiology. We also highlight INVI/PMEIs as biotechnological tools to control different aspects of plant growth and defense. Some isoforms are discussed in view of their potential applications to improve industrial processes. A review of the nomenclature of some isoforms is carried out to eliminate confusion about the identity and the names of some INVI/PMEI member. Open questions, shortcoming, and opportunities for future research are also presented.

INV: !catalyzes! Sucrose cleavage 
PME: !dynamically controls! Pectin methylesterification 
INVI: !inhibits! INV 
PMEI: !inhibits! PME 
INVI/PMEI: !belong to! Plant Invertase/Pectin Methylesterase Inhibitor Superfamily 
INVI/PMEI: !share! Structural properties 
PMEI: !organized in! Gene cluster 
INVI/PMEI: !potential applications! Improve industrial processes