Plants are sedentary organisms that constantly sense changes in their environment and react to various environmental cues. On a short-time scale, plants respond through alterations in their physiology, and on a long-time scale, plants alter their development and pass on the memory of stress to the progeny. The latter is controlled genetically and epigenetically and allows the progeny to be primed for future stress encounters, thus increasing the likelihood of survival. The current study intended to explore the effects of multigenerational heat stress in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana.</i> Twenty-five generations of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> were propagated in the presence of heat stress. The multigenerational stressed lineage F25H exhibited a higher tolerance to heat stress and elevated frequency of homologous recombination, as compared to the parallel control progeny F25C. A comparison of genomic sequences revealed that the F25H lineage had a three-fold higher number of mutations [single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertions and deletions (INDELs)] as compared control lineages, suggesting that heat stress induced genetic variations in the heat-stressed progeny. The F25H stressed progeny showed a 7-fold higher number of non-synonymous mutations than the F25C line. Methylome analysis revealed that the F25H stressed progeny showed a lower global methylation level in the CHH context than the control progeny. The F25H and F25C lineages were different from the parental control lineage F2C by 66,491 and 80,464 differentially methylated positions (DMPs), respectively. F25H stressed progeny displayed higher frequency of methylation changes in the gene body and lower in the body of transposable elements (TEs). Gene Ontology analysis revealed that CG-DMRs were enriched in processes such as response to abiotic and biotic stimulus, cell organizations and biogenesis, and DNA or RNA metabolism. Hierarchical clustering of these epimutations separated the heat stressed and control parental progenies into distinct groups which revealed the non-random nature of epimutations. We observed an overall higher number of epigenetic variations than genetic variations in all comparison groups, indicating that epigenetic variations are more prevalent than genetic variations. The largest difference in epigenetic and genetic variations was observed between control plants comparison (F25C vs. F2C), which clearly indicated that the spontaneous nature of epigenetic variations and heat-inducible nature of genetic variations. Overall, our study showed that progenies derived from multigenerational heat stress displayed a notable adaption in context of phenotypic, genotypic and epigenotypic resilience.

Heat Stress: !induces! Genetic Variations 
Heat Stress: !induces! Epigenetic Variations 
Genetic Variations: !more prevalent than! Epigenetic Variations 
Epimutations: !separate! Heat Stressed and Control Progenies 
Control Plants Comparison: !largest difference in! Epigenetic and Genetic Variations