Leaf senescence is the final stage of leaf development and can be triggered by various external factors, such as hormones and light deprivation. In this study, we demonstrate that the overexpression of the GTP-bound form of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) Ran1 (a Ras-related nuclear small G-protein, AtRan1) efficiently promotes age-dependent and dark-triggered leaf senescence, while Ran-GDP has the opposite effect. Transcriptome analysis comparing AtRan1-GDP- and AtRan1-GTP-overexpressing transgenic plants (Ran1T27Nox and Ran1G22Vox, respectively) revealed that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to the senescence-promoting hormones salicylic acid (SA), jasmonic acid, abscisic acid, and ethylene (ET) were significantly upregulated in dark-triggered senescing leaves of Ran1G22Vox, indicating that these hormones are actively involved in Ran-GTP/-GDP-dependent, dark-triggered leaf senescence. Bioinformatic analysis of the promoter regions of DEGs identified diverse consensus motifs, including the bZIP motif, a common binding site for TGACG-BINDING FACTOR (TGA) transcription factors. Interestingly, TGA2 and its interactor, NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1 (NPR1), which are two positive transcriptional regulators of SA signaling, differed in their extent of accumulation in the nucleus versus cytoplasm of Ran1T27Nox and Ran1G22Vox plants. Moreover, SA-induced, Ran-GTP-/-GDP-dependent functions of NPR1 included genome-wide global transcriptional reprogramming of genes involved in cell death, aging, and chloroplast organization. Furthermore, the expression of AtRan1-GTP in SA signaling-defective npr1 and SA biosynthesis-deficient SA-induction deficient2 genetic backgrounds abolished the effects of AtRan1-GTP, thus retarding age-promoted leaf senescence. However, ET-induced leaf senescence was not mediated by Ran machinery-dependent nuclear shuttling of ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 and ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3-LIKE1 proteins. We conclude that Ran-GTP/-GDP-dependent nuclear accumulation of NPR1 and TGA2 represents another regulatory node for SA-induced leaf senescence.

AtRan1-GTP: !promotes! leaf senescence 
AtRan1-GDP: !inhibits! leaf senescence 
DEGs: !related to! SA, JA, ABA, ET 
TGA motif: !binds! TGA transcription factors 
TGA2/NPR1: !differ in! nuclear/cytoplasmic accumulation 
NPR1: !mediates! SA-induced gene reprogramming 
AtRan1-GTP: !abolishes! age-promoted leaf senescence 
ET: !not mediated by! Ran machinery