Phosphoribulokinase (PRK), one of the enzymes in the Calvin-Benson cycle, is a well-known target of thioredoxin (Trx), which regulates various enzyme activities by the reduction of disulfide bonds in a light-dependent manner. PRK has two Cys pairs conserved in the N-terminal and C-terminal regions, and the N-terminal one near the active site is thought to be responsible for the regulation. The flexible clamp loop located between the N-terminal two Cys residues has been deemed significant to Trx-mediated regulation. However, cyanobacterial PRK is also subject to Trx-dependent activation despite the lack of this clamp loop. We, therefore, compared Trx-mediated regulation of PRK from the cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 (A.7120_PRK) and that from the land plant Arabidopsis thaliana (AtPRK). Interestingly, peptide mapping and site-directed mutagenesis analysis showed that Trx was more effective in changing the redox states of the C-terminal Cys pair in both A.7120_PRK and AtPRK. In addition, the effect of redox state change of the C-terminal Cys pair on PRK activity was different between A.7120_PRK and AtPRK. Trx-mediated redox regulation of the C-terminal Cys pair was also important for complex dissociation/formation with CP12 and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Furthermore, in vivo analysis of the redox states of PRK showed that only one disulfide bond is reduced in response to light. Based on the enzyme activity assay and the complex formation analysis, we concluded that Trx-mediated regulation of the C-terminal Cys pair of PRK is important for activity regulation in cyanobacteria and complex dissociation/formation in both organisms.

Thioredoxin: !regulates! Phosphoribulokinase 
N-terminal Cys pair: !responsible for! Thioredoxin regulation 
Flexible clamp loop: !significant to! Thioredoxin regulation 
C-terminal Cys pair: !more effective in! Trx-mediated regulation 
Redox state change of C-terminal Cys pair: !different between! A.7120_PRK and AtPRK 
C-terminal Cys pair: !important for! complex dissociation/formation 
In vivo analysis: !showed that! one disulfide bond is reduced in response to light