Drought stress, especially at the grain-filling stage, is a major constraint for wheat production. Drought tolerance is a complex trait controlled by a large array of genes and pathways. This study conducted gene expression profiling on two pairs of near-isogenic lines (NILs) for an important <i>qDSI.4B.1</i> QTL conferring drought tolerance on the short arm of chromosome 4B in wheat. Analysis showed 1,614 genome-wide differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the tolerant and susceptible isolines in both NIL pairs. Six common DEGs were found between NIL1 and NIL2 at both 7 and 14 days after stress induction, with two of them having single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants. These six genes that were confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) expression analysis are considered candidate genes for drought tolerance mediated by <i>qDSI.4B.1</i> QTL with their main contributions to gene regulation, cell elongation, protein quality control, secondary metabolism, and hormone signaling. These six candidate genes and the highest number of DEGs and variants (SNPs/indels) were located between 49 and 137 Mbp of 4BS, making this interval the most probable location for the <i>qDSI.4B.1</i> locus. Additionally, 765 and 84 DEGs were detected as responsive genes to drought stress in tolerant and susceptible isolines, respectively. According to gene ontology (GO), protein phosphorylation, oxidation reduction, and regulation of transcription were top biological processes involved in the drought response and tolerance. These results provide insights into stress responses regulated by the 4BS locus and have identified candidate genes and genetic markers that can be used for fine mapping of the <i>qDSI.4B.1</i> locus and, ultimately, in wheat breeding programs for drought tolerance.

qDSI.4B.1: !confers! drought tolerance 
DEGs: !located between! 49-137 Mbp of 4BS 
DEGs: !involved in! protein phosphorylation, oxidation reduction, transcription regulation 
SNPs/indels: !located at! 6 common DEGs 
candidate genes: !contribute to! gene regulation, cell elongation, protein quality control, secondary metabolism, hormone signaling 
drought stress: !induces! 765 and 84 DEGs in tolerant and susceptible isolines respectively