Cucumber (Cucumis sativus) originated in tropical areas and is very sensitive to low temperatures. Cold acclimation is a universal strategy that improves plant resistance to cold stress. In this study, we report that heat shock induces cold acclimation in cucumber seedlings, via a process involving the heat-shock transcription factor HSFA1d. CsHSFA1d expression was improved by both heat shock and cold treatment. Moreover, CsHSFA1d transcripts accumulated more under cold treatment after a heat-shock pre-treatment than with either heat shock or cold treatment alone. After exposure to cold, cucumber lines overexpressing CsHSFA1d displayed stronger tolerance for cold stress than the wild type, whereas CsHSFA1d knockdown lines obtained by RNA interference were more sensitive to cold stress. Furthermore, both the overexpression of CsHSFA1d and heat-shock pre-treatment increased the endogenous jasmonic acid (JA) content in cucumber seedlings after cold treatment. Exogenous application of JA rescued the cold-sensitive phenotype of CsHSFA1d knockdown lines, underscoring that JA biosynthesis is key for CsHSFA1d-mediated cold tolerance. Higher JA content is likely to lead to the degradation of CsJAZ5, a repressor protein of the JA pathway. We also established that CsJAZ5 interacts with CsICE1. JA-induced degradation of CsJAZ5 would be expected to release CsICE1, which would then activate the ICE-CBF-COR pathway. After cold treatment, the relative expression levels of ICE-CBF-COR signaling pathway genes, such as CsICE1, CsCBF1, CsCBF2 and CsCOR1, in CsHSFA1d overexpression lines were significantly higher than in the wild type and knockdown lines. Taken together, our results help to reveal the mechanism underlying heat shock-induced cold acclimation in cucumber.

HSFA1d: !induces! Cold Acclimation 
Heat Shock: !induces! CsHSFA1d Expression 
CsHSFA1d: !enhances! Cold Tolerance 
RNA Interference: !reduces! CsHSFA1d Expression 
CsHSFA1d: !increases! JA Content 
JA: !rescues! Cold-Sensitive Phenotype 
CsJAZ5: !interacts with! CsICE1 
JA: !degrades! CsJAZ5 
CsICE1: !activates! ICE-CBF-COR Pathway 
CsHSFA1d: !increases! ICE-CBF-COR Signaling Pathway Genes