In cells of growing rye roots, xyloglucans and homogalacturonans demonstrate developmental stage specificity, while different xylans have tissue specificity. Mannans, arabinans and galactans are also detected within the protoplast. Mannans form films on sections of fresh material. The primary cell walls of plants represent supramolecular exocellular structures that are mainly composed of polysaccharides. Cell wall properties and architecture differ between species and across tissues within a species. We revised the distribution of cell wall polysaccharides and their dynamics during elongation growth and histogenesis in rye roots using nonfixed material and the spectrum of antibodies. Rye is a member of the Poaceae family and thus has so-called type II primary cell walls, which are supposed to be low in pectins and xyloglucans and instead have arabinoxylans and mixed-linkage glucans. However, rye cell walls at the earliest stages of cell development were enriched with the epitopes of xyloglucans and homogalacturonans. Mixed-linkage glucan, which is often considered an elongation growth-specific polysaccharide in plants with type II cell walls, did not display such dynamics in rye roots. The cessation of elongation growth and even the emergence of root hairs were not accompanied by the disappearance of mixed-linkage glucans from cell walls. The diversity of xylan motifs recognized by different antibodies was minimal in the meristem zone of rye roots, but this diversity increased and showed tissue specificity during root growth. Antibodies specific for xyloglucans, galactans, arabinans and mannans bound the cell content. When rye root cells were cut, the epitopes of xyloglucans, galactans and arabinans remained within the cell content, while mannans developed net-like or film-like structures on the surface of sections.

xyloglucans: !demonstrate! developmental stage specificity
homogalacturonans: !demonstrate! developmental stage specificity
xylans: !have! tissue specificity
mannans: !form! films on sections of fresh material
mixed-linkage glucans: !do not display! elongation growth-specific dynamics
xyloglucans: !increase! diversity and show tissue specificity
galactans: !remain! within cell content
arabinans: !remain! within cell content
mannans: !develop! net-like or film-like structures