Panax notoginseng PnMYB2 is a transcriptional activator of primary and secondary cell wall formation by promoting the PCW-specific gene CesA3 and key lignin biosynthetic gene CCoAOMT1, respectively. R2R3-MYB transcription factors play important roles in regulation secondary cell wall (SCW) formation. However, there are few reports on the functions of MYB transcription factors which involved in both primary cell wall (PCW) and SCW formation. Here, we isolated an R2R3-MYB transcription factor, PnMYB2, from Panax notoginseng roots which are widely used in Chinese traditional medicines and contain abundant cellulose and lignin. The expression pattern of PnMYB2 was similar to the accumulation pattern of cellulose and lignin contents in different organs. PnMYB2 localized in the nucleus and may function as a transcriptional activator. Overexpression of PnMYB2 in Arabidopsis thaliana enhanced cellulose and lignin biosynthesis, and remarkably increased thickness of PCW and SCW in the stem of transgenic plants compared with wild-type plants. The expression levels of genes associated with PCW-specific cellulose synthase (CesA) genes and key SCW-specific lignin biosynthetic genes were significantly increased in PnMYB2-overexpressing plants compared to the wild type plants. Furthermore, yeast one-hybrid, dual-luciferase reporter assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) results verified that PnMYB2 could bind and activate the promoters of AtCesA3 and PnCesA3, which are the PCW-specific cellulose biosynthetic genes, and AtCCoAOMT1 and PnCCoAOMT1, which are the key lignin biosynthetic genes. These results demonstrated the central role of PnMYB2 in PCW-specific cellulose formation and SCW-specific lignin biosynthesis.

PnMYB2: !promotes! PCW-specific gene CesA3 
PnMYB2: !promotes! key lignin biosynthetic gene CCoAOMT1 
PnMYB2: !localizes to! nucleus 
PnMYB2: !enhances! cellulose and lignin biosynthesis 
PnMYB2: !increases! thickness of PCW and SCW 
PnMYB2: !increases! expression levels of genes associated with PCW-specific cellulose synthase 
PnMYB2: !binds and activates! promoters of AtCesA3 and PnCesA3 
PnMYB2: !binds and activates! promoters of AtCCoAOMT1 and PnCCoAOMT1