In nature, heavy metal (HM) stress is one of the most destructive abiotic stresses for plants. Heavy metals produce toxicity by targeting key molecules and important processes in plant cells. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade transfers the signals perceived by cell membrane surface receptors to cells through phosphorylation and dephosphorylation and targets various effector proteins or transcriptional factors so as to result in the stress response. Signal molecules such as plant hormones, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and nitric oxide (NO) can activate the MAPK cascade through differentially expressed genes, the activation of the antioxidant system and synergistic crosstalk between different signal molecules in order to regulate plant responses to HMs. Transcriptional factors, located downstream of MAPK, are key factors in regulating plant responses to heavy metals and improving plant heavy metal tolerance and accumulation. Thus, understanding how HMs activate the expression of the genes related to the MAPK cascade pathway and then phosphorylate those transcriptional factors may allow us to develop a regulation network to increase our knowledge of HMs tolerance and accumulation. This review highlighted MAPK pathway activation and responses under HMs and mainly focused on the specificity of MAPK activation mediated by ROS, NO and plant hormones. Here, we also described the signaling pathways and their interactions under heavy metal stresses. Moreover, the process of MAPK phosphorylation and the response of downstream transcriptional factors exhibited the importance of regulating targets. It was conducive to analyzing the molecular mechanisms underlying heavy metal accumulation and tolerance.

Heavy metal: !activates! MAPK cascade
Signal molecules: !activate! MAPK cascade
MAPK cascade: !targets! effector proteins/transcriptional factors
Transcriptional factors: !regulate! plant responses to HMs
ROS/NO/plant hormones: !interact! with each other
MAPK: !phosphorylates! transcriptional factors