Leaf lamina mass and area are closely correlated with the photosynthetic capacity and competitive ability of plants, whereas leaf age has been demonstrated to affect physiological processes such as photosynthesis. However, it remains unknown whether the lamina mass vs. area scaling relationship is influenced by leaf age, which is important for understanding plant adaptive strategies and, more broadly, resource utilization and growth. We measured the leaf functional traits of five leaf-age groups of <i>Photinia</i> × <i>fraseri</i> for a total of 1,736 leaves. ANOVA followed by Tukey's honestly significant difference test was used to compare the functional traits among the five leaf-age groups. Reduced major axis regression protocols were used to fit the scaling relationship between lamina mass and area, and the bootstrap percentile method was used to compare the lamina mass vs. area scaling relationships among the leaf-age groups. Lamina area, and the ratio of lamina dry mass to lamina fresh mass increased with increasing leaf age. Lamina fresh mass per unit area, and lamina dry mass per unit area both exhibited a parabolic-like trend as leaf age increased, i.e., at the leaf maturation stage, it showed a slight but significant decline. The phenomenon called diminishing returns were confirmed by each of the five leaf-age groups, i.e., all of the numerical values of the scaling exponents of lamina mass vs. area were significantly greater than 1. There were significant differences in the scaling exponents of lamina mass vs. area for the leaves across different sampling times. The scaling exponents were lower at the early rapid growth stage, indicating a lower cost for increasing leaf area compared to the leaf maturation stage. These data are consistent with leaves undergoing a transition from resource acquisition to resource conservation in the process of their development and growth.

leaf age: !affects! lamina area 
leaf age: !affects! ratio of lamina dry mass to lamina fresh mass 
leaf age: !affects! lamina fresh mass per unit area 
leaf age: !affects! lamina dry mass per unit area 
scaling exponents: !lower at! early rapid growth stage 
scaling exponents: !higher at! leaf maturation stage