Acylsugars are defensive, trichome-synthesized sugar esters produced in plants across the Solanaceae (nightshade) family. Although assembled from simple metabolites and synthesized by a relatively short core biosynthetic pathway, tremendous within- and across-species acylsugar structural variation is documented across the family. To advance our understanding of the diversity and the synthesis of acylsugars within the Nicotiana genus, trichome extracts were profiled across the genus coupled with transcriptomics-guided enzyme discovery and in vivo and in vitro analysis. Differences in the types of sugar cores, numbers of acylations, and acyl chain structures contributed to over 300 unique annotated acylsugars throughout Nicotiana. Placement of acyl chain length into a phylogenetic context revealed that an unsaturated acyl chain type was detected in a few closely related species. A comparative transcriptomics approach identified trichome-enriched Nicotiana acuminata acylsugar biosynthetic candidate enzymes. More than 25 acylsugar variants could be produced in a single enzyme assay with four N. acuminata acylsugar acyltransferases (NacASAT1-4) together with structurally diverse acyl-CoAs and sucrose. Liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry screening of in vitro products revealed the ability of these enzymes to make acylsugars not present in Nicotiana plant extracts. In vitro acylsugar production also provided insights into acyltransferase acyl donor promiscuity and acyl acceptor specificity as well as regiospecificity of some ASATs. This study suggests that promiscuous Nicotiana acyltransferases can be used as synthetic biology tools to produce novel and potentially useful metabolites.

Acylsugars: !synthesized by! trichomes 
Acylsugars: !vary in! structure 
Nicotiana: !produces! over 300 unique acylsugars 
N. acuminata: !contains! acylsugar biosynthetic candidate enzymes 
NacASAT1-4: !produce! more than 25 acylsugar variants 
NacASAT1-4: !reveal! acyltransferase acyl donor promiscuity 
NacASAT1-4: !provide insights into! acyl acceptor specificity