['35474139', "Plant-pest interactions involve multifaceted processes encompassing a complex  crosstalk of pathways, molecules, and regulators aimed at overcoming defenses  developed by each interacting organism. Among plant defensive compounds against  phytophagous arthropods, cyanide-derived products are toxic molecules that  directly target pest physiology. Here, we identified the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis  thaliana) gene encoding hydroxynitrile lyase (AtHNL, At5g10300) as one gene  induced in response to spider mite (Tetranychus urticae) infestation. AtHNL  catalyzes the reversible interconversion between cyanohydrins and derived  carbonyl compounds with free cyanide. AtHNL loss- and gain-of-function  Arabidopsis plants showed that specific activity of AtHNL using mandelonitrile as  substrate was higher in the overexpressing lines than in wild-type (WT) and  mutant lines. Concomitantly, mandelonitrile accumulated at higher levels in  mutant lines than in WT plants and was significantly reduced in the AtHNL  overexpressing lines. After mite infestation, mandelonitrile content increased in  WT and overexpressing plants but not in mutant lines, while hydrogen cyanide  (HCN) accumulated in the three infested Arabidopsis genotypes. Feeding bioassays  demonstrated that the AtHNL gene participated in Arabidopsis defense against T.  urticae. The reduced leaf damage detected in the AtHNL overexpressing lines  reflected the mite's reduced ability to feed on leaves, which consequently  restricted mite fecundity. In turn, mites upregulated TuCAS1 encoding  beta-cyanoalanine synthase to avoid the respiratory damage produced by HCN. This  detoxification effect was functionally demonstrated by reduced mite fecundity  observed when dsRNA-TuCAS-treated mites fed on WT plants and hnl1 mutant lines.  These findings add more players in the Arabidopsis-T. urticae interplay to  overcome mutual defenses.", '2022 Aug 1', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1093/plphys/kiac170', 'ORCID:']

AtHNL: !catalyzes! cyanohydrins 
AtHNL: !induces! response to spider mite infestation 
AtHNL: !enhances! Arabidopsis defense against T. urticae 
TuCAS1: !encodes! beta-cyanoalanine synthase 
TuCAS1: !detoxifies! HCN damage