Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) is a carboxylating enzyme with important roles in plant metabolism. Most studies in C<sub>4</sub> plants have focused on photosynthetic PEPC, but less is known about non-photosynthetic PEPC isozymes, especially with respect to their physiological functions. In this work, we analyzed the precise roles of the sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) PPC3 isozyme by the use of knock-down lines with the SbPPC3 gene silenced (Ppc3 lines). Ppc3 plants showed reduced stomatal conductance and plant size, a delay in flowering time, and reduced seed production. In addition, silenced plants accumulated stress indicators such as Asn, citrate, malate, and sucrose in roots and showed higher citrate synthase activity, even in control conditions. Salinity further affected stomatal conductance and yield and had a deeper impact on central metabolism in silenced plants compared to wild type, more notably in roots, with Ppc3 plants showing higher nitrate reductase and NADH-glutamate synthase activity in roots and the accumulation of molecules with a higher N/C ratio. Taken together, our results show that although SbPPC3 is predominantly a root protein, its absence causes deep changes in plant physiology and metabolism in roots and leaves, negatively affecting maximal stomatal opening, growth, productivity, and stress responses in sorghum plants. The consequences of SbPPC3 silencing suggest that this protein, and maybe orthologs in other plants, could be an important target to improve plant growth, productivity, and resistance to salt stress and other stresses where non-photosynthetic PEPCs may be implicated.

SbPPC3: !affects! stomatal conductance 
SbPPC3: !affects! plant size 
SbPPC3: !affects! flowering time 
SbPPC3: !affects! seed production 
SbPPC3: !affects! stress indicators 
SbPPC3: !affects! citrate synthase activity 
SbPPC3: !affects! nitrate reductase activity 
SbPPC3: !affects! NADH-glutamate synthase activity 
SbPPC3: !affects! molecules with a higher N/C ratio 
SbPPC3: !affects! maximal stomatal opening 
SbPPC3: !affects! growth 
SbPPC3: !affects! productivity 
SbPPC3: !affects! stress responses