Strigolactones (SLs) are carotenoid-derived phytohormones governing a wide range of physiological processes, including drought-associated stomatal closure. We have previously shown in tomato that SLs regulate the so-called after-effect of drought, whereby stomatal conductance is not completely restored for some time during recovery after a drought spell, irrespective of the water potential. To ease the elucidation of its molecular underpinnings, we investigated whether this SL effect is conserved in Arabidopsis thaliana by contrasting the physiological performances of the wild-type with SL-depleted (more axillary growth 4, max4) and insensitive (dwarf 14, d14) mutants in a drought and recovery protocol. Physiological analyses showed that SLs are important to achieve a complete after-effect in A. thaliana, while transcriptome results suggested that the SL-dependent modulation of drought responses extends to a large subset (about 4/5) of genes displaying memory transcription patterns. Among these, we show that the activation of over 30 genes related to abscisic acid metabolism and signaling strongly depends on SL signaling. Furthermore, by using promoter-enrichment tools, we identified putative cis- and trans-acting factors that may be important in the SL-dependent and SL-independent regulation of genes during drought and recovery. Finally, in order to test the accuracy of our bioinformatic prediction, we confirmed one of the most promising transcription factor candidates mediating SL signaling effects on transcriptional drought memory-BRI-EMS SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1). Our findings reveal that SLs are master regulators of Arabidopsis transcriptional memory upon drought and that this role is partially mediated by the BES1 transcription factor.

Strigolactones: !regulate! Physiological processes 
Wild-type: !contrasted with! SL-depleted and insensitive mutants 
SLs: !important for! After-effect in A. thaliana 
Transcriptome results: !suggest! SL-dependent modulation of drought responses 
30 genes: !related to! Abscisic acid metabolism and signaling 
Putative cis- and trans-acting factors: !identified! For SL-dependent and SL-independent regulation 
BES1 transcription factor: !confirmed! As mediating SL signaling effects