Methylglyoxal (MG) is a metabolically generated highly cytotoxic compound that accumulates in all living organisms, from Escherichia coli to humans, under stress conditions. To detoxify MG, nature has evolved reduced glutathione (GSH)-dependent glyoxalase and NADPH-dependent aldo-keto reductase systems. But both GSH and NADPH have been reported to be limiting in plants under stress conditions, and thus detoxification might not be performed efficiently. Recently, glyoxalase III (GLY III)-like enzyme activity has been reported from various species, which can detoxify MG without any cofactor. In the present study, we have tested whether an E. coli gene, hchA, encoding a functional GLY III, could provide abiotic stress tolerance to living systems. Overexpression of this gene showed improved tolerance in E. coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells against salinity, dicarbonyl, and oxidative stresses. Ectopic expression of the E. coli GLY III gene (EcGLY-III) in transgenic tobacco plants confers tolerance against salinity at both seedling and reproductive stages as indicated by their height, weight, membrane stability index, and total yield potential. Transgenic plants showed significantly increased glyoxalase and antioxidant enzyme activity that resisted the accumulation of excess MG and reactive oxygen species (ROS) during stress. Moreover, transgenic plants showed more anti-glycation activity to inhibit the formation of advanced glycation end product (AGE) that might prevent transgenic plants from stress-induced senescence. Taken together, all these observations indicate that overexpression of EcGLYIII confers salinity stress tolerance in plants and should be explored further for the generation of stress-tolerant plants.

Methylglyoxal: !detoxified by! Glyoxalase III 
Glyoxalase III: !overexpressed in! E. coli 
E. coli: !improves tolerance to! Abiotic Stress 
Glyoxalase III: !overexpressed in! Transgenic Tobacco Plants 
Transgenic Tobacco Plants: !show increased! Glyoxalase Activity 
Transgenic Tobacco Plants: !show increased! Antioxidant Enzyme Activity 
Transgenic Tobacco Plants: !show increased! Anti-Glycation Activity