Pollinators are attracted to vibrant flower colors. That is why flower color is the key agent to allow successful fruit set in food or ornamental crops. However, black flower color is the least attractive to pollinators, although a number of plant species produce black flowers. Cyanidin-based anthocyanins are thought to be the key agents to induce black color in the ornamental and fruit crops. R2R3-MYB transcription factors (TFs) play key roles for the tissue-specific accumulation of anthocyanin. MYB1 and MYB11 are the key TFs regulating the expression of anthocyanin biosynthesis genes for black color accumulation. Post-transcriptional silencing of <i>flavone synthase II</i> (<i>FNS</i>) gene is the technological method to stimulate the accumulation of cyanidin-based anthocyanins in black cultivars. Type 1 promoter of <i>DvIVS</i> takes the advantage of <i>FNS</i> silencing to produce large amounts of black anthocyanins. Exogenous ethylene application triggers anthocyanin accumulation in the fruit skin at ripening. Environment cues have been the pivotal regulators to allow differential accumulation of anthocyanins to regulate black color. Heat stress is one of the most important environmental stimulus that regulates concentration gradient of anthocyanins in various plant parts, thereby affecting the color pattern of flowers. Stability of black anthocyanins in the extreme environments can save the damage, especially in fruits, caused by abiotic stress. White flowers without anthocyanin face more damages from abiotic stress than dark color flowers. The intensity and pattern of flower color accumulation determine the overall fruit set, thereby controlling crop yield and human food needs. This review paper presents comprehensive knowledge of black flower regulation as affected by high temperature stress, and the molecular regulators of anthocyanin for black color in ornamental and food crops. It also discusses the black color-pollination interaction pattern affected by heat stress for food and ornamental crops.

R2R3-MYB TFs: !regulate! anthocyanin biosynthesis genes
MYB1/11: !regulate! expression of anthocyanin biosynthesis genes
FNS gene: !silenced by! post-transcriptional silencing
DvIVS type 1 promoter: !takes advantage of! FNS silencing
Exogenous ethylene: !triggers! anthocyanin accumulation
Heat stress: !regulates! concentration gradient of anthocyanins
Anthocyanins: !stabilize! black color in extreme environments
White flowers: !face more damage from! abiotic stress