Mung bean is characterized by having a good edible and medicinal value, while its flowers and pods have low production. Being a tertiary amine, DCPTA [2-(3,4-dichlorophenoxy) triethylamine] substantially regulates the growth and development of crops, maintaining production. Yet it is still limited in terms of the regulation of DCPTA on growth and development, including the yield and sugar metabolism of mung bean. In this study, DCPTA was sprayed at the beginning of mung flowering through a two-season cultivation, to assess its effects on the yield, leaf area per plant, plant height, seed setting rate, photosynthesis, chlorophyll content, and endogenous protective enzymes. Experimental results illustrated that relative to the control (CK), the DCPTA application significantly (<i>p</i> < 0.05) improved the yield of Bailv 11 mung bean, which rose to 6.9% in 2020 and 7.8% in 2021, respectively. This effect positively corresponded to a significant (<i>p</i><0.05) increase in the number of pods and grains per plant and pod setting rate, but a non-significant difference in 1,000-grain weight. DCPA application also increased the area and fresh weight of leaf, mung height, and its organ dry weight (i.e., leaf, branch, and stem). During plant growth over DCPTA application, the increased activities of SOD, POD, and CAT improved the net photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance, and transpiration. In addition, transcriptome sequencing further demonstrated that DCPTA treatment significantly (<i>p</i> < 0.05) up-regulated the sucrose synthase, invertase, and fructose kinase in all organs (i.e., leaves, pod skins, and grains) of the plant. In particular, this effect was much greater in the sucrose synthesis (i.e., sucrose content) in leaves. Our study, therefore, concludes that DCPTA application promotes the yield of mung bean via likely enhancing its photosynthetic capacity and sucrose synthase, fructokinase, and beta-fructofuranosidase expression regulation.

DCPTA: !enhances! yield 
DCPTA: !increases! number of pods/grains per plant 
DCPTA: !improves! net photosynthetic rate 
DCPTA: !up-regulates! sucrose synthase 
DCPTA: !up-regulates! invertase 
DCPTA: !up-regulates! fructose kinase 
Sucrose Synthase: !synthesizes! sucrose