miR6024 acts as a negative regulator of R genes, hence of Tomato plant immunity, and facilitates disease by the necrotrophic pathogen A. solani. Plant resistance genes or Nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat (NLR) genes, integral components of plant disease stress-signaling are targeted by variable groups of miRNAs. However, the significance of miRNA-mediated regulation of NLRs during a pathogen stress response, specifically for necrotrophic fungus, is poorly understood. A thorough examination of Tomato NLRs and miRNAs could map substantial interactions of which half the annotated NLRs were targets of Solanaceae-specific and conserved miRNAs, at the NB subdomain. The Solanaceae-specific miR6024 and its NLR targets analysed in different phytopathogenic stresses revealed differential and mutually antagonistic regulation. Interestingly, miR6024-targeted cleavage of a target NLR also triggered the generation of secondary phased siRNAs which could potentially amplify the defense signal. RNA-seq analysis of leaf tissues from miR6024 overexpressing Tomato plants evidenced a perturbation in the defense transcriptome with the transgenics showing unwarranted immune response-related genes' expression with or without infection with necrotrophic Alternaria solani, though no adverse effect could be observed in the growth and development of the transgenic plants. Transgenic plants exhibited constitutive downregulation of the target NLRs, aggravated disease phenotype with an enhanced lesion, greater ROS generation and hypersusceptibility to A. solani infection, thus establishing that miR6024 negatively impacts plant immune response during necrotrophic pathogenesis. Limited knowledge about the outcome of NLR-miRNA interaction during necrotrophic pathogenesis is a hindrance to the deployment of miRNAs in crop improvement programs. With the elucidation of the necrotrophic disease-synergistic role played by miR6024, it becomes a potent candidate for biotechnological manipulation for the rapid development of pathogen-tolerant solanaceous plants.

miR6024: !regulates! R genes 
R genes: !targeted by! miRNAs 
miR6024: !targets! NLRs 
NLRs: !regulated by! miR6024 
miR6024: !generates! secondary phased siRNAs 
miR6024: !downregulates! target NLRs 
miR6024: !enhances! disease phenotype 
miR6024: !synergizes with! necrotrophic pathogenesis