Bacterial wilt, a severe disease involving vascular system blockade, is caused by Ralstonia solanacearum. Although both plant immunity and dehydration tolerance might contribute to disease resistance, whether and how they are related remains unclear. Herein, we showed that immunity against R. solanacearum and dehydration tolerance are coupled and regulated by the CaPti1-CaERF3 module. CaPti1 and CaERF3 are members of the serine/threonine protein kinase and ethylene-responsive factor families, respectively. Expression profiling revealed that CaPti1 and CaERF3 were upregulated by R. solanacearum inoculation, dehydration stress, and exogenously applied abscisic acid (ABA). They in turn phenocopied each other in promoting resistance of pepper (Capsicum annuum) to bacterial wilt not only by activating salicylic acid-dependent CaPR1, but also by activating dehydration tolerance-related CaOSM1 and CaOSR1 and inducing stomatal closure to reduce water loss in an ABA signaling-dependent manner. Our yeast two hybrid assay showed that CaERF3 interacted with CaPti1, which was confirmed using co-immunoprecipitation, bimolecular fluorescence complementation, and pull-down assays. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that upon R. solanacearum inoculation, CaPR1, CaOSM1, and CaOSR1 were directly targeted and positively regulated by CaERF3 and potentiated by CaPti1. Additionally, our data indicated that the CaPti1-CaERF3 complex might act downstream of ABA signaling, as exogenously applied ABA did not alter regulation of stomatal aperture by the CaPti1-CaERF3 module. Importantly, the CaPti1-CaERF3 module positively affected pepper growth and the response to dehydration stress. Collectively, the results suggested that immunity and dehydration tolerance are coupled and positively regulated by CaPti1-CaERF3 in pepper plants to enhance resistance against R. solanacearum.

CaPti1: !interacts with! CaERF3
CaPti1: !enhances! resistance to R. solanacearum
CaERF3: !interacts with! CaPti1
CaERF3: !regulates! CaPR1, CaOSM1, and CaOSR1
CaERF3: !positively regulates! pepper growth and response to dehydration stress