Maize (<i>Zea mays</i> L.) is an annual grass that originated in tropical and subtropical regions of the New World. Maize is highly sensitive to cold stress during seed gemination and the seedling phase, which can lead to reductions in plant vigor and grain production. There are large differences in the morphological and physiological changes caused by cold stress among maize varieties. In general, cold tolerant varieties have a stronger ability to maintain such changes in traits related to seed germination, root phenotypes, and shoot photosynthesis. These morphological and physiological characteristics have been widely used to evaluate the cold tolerance of maize varieties in genetic analyses. In recent years, considerable progress has been made in elucidating the mechanisms of maize in response to cold tolerance. Several QTL, GWAS, and transcriptomic analyses have been conducted on various maize genotypes and populations that show large variations in cold tolerance, resulting in the discovery of hundreds of candidate cold regulation genes. Nevertheless, only a few candidate genes have been functionally characterized. In the present review, we summarize recent progress in molecular, physiological, genetic, and genomic analyses of cold tolerance in maize. We address the advantages of joint analyses that combine multiple genetic and genomic approaches to improve the accuracy of identifying cold regulated genes that can be further used in molecular breeding. We also discuss the involvement of long-distance signaling in plant cold tolerance. These novel insights will provide a better mechanistic understanding of cold tolerance in maize.

Maize: !sensitive to! cold stress 
cold tolerant varieties: !maintain! traits related to seed germination 
QTL, GWAS, transcriptomic analyses: !discover! candidate cold regulation genes 
multiple genetic and genomic approaches: !improve accuracy of! identifying cold regulated genes 
long-distance signaling: !involvement in! plant cold tolerance