The wheat grain three-dimensional (3D) phenotypic characters are of great significance for final yield and variety breeding, and the ventral sulcus traits are the important factors to the wheat flour yield. The wheat grain trait measurements are necessary; however, the traditional measurement method is still manual, which is inefficient, subjective, and labor intensive; moreover, the ventral sulcus traits can only be obtained by destructive measurement. In this paper, an intelligent analysis method based on the structured light imaging has been proposed to extract the 3D wheat grain phenotypes and ventral sulcus traits. First, the 3D point cloud data of wheat grain were obtained by the structured light scanner, and then, the specified point cloud processing algorithms including single grain segmentation and ventral sulcus location have been designed; finally, 28 wheat grain 3D phenotypic characters and 4 ventral sulcus traits have been extracted. To evaluate the best experimental conditions, three-level orthogonal experiments, which include rotation angle, scanning angle, and stage color factors, were carried out on 125 grains of 5 wheat varieties, and the results demonstrated that optimum conditions of rotation angle, scanning angle, and stage color were 30°, 37°, black color individually. Additionally, the results also proved that the mean absolute percentage errors (MAPEs) of wheat grain length, width, thickness, and ventral sulcus depth were 1.83, 1.86, 2.19, and 4.81%. Moreover, the 500 wheat grains of five varieties were used to construct and validate the wheat grain weight model by 32 phenotypic traits, and the cross-validation results showed that the <i>R</i> <sup>2</sup> of the models ranged from 0.77 to 0.83. Finally, the wheat grain phenotype extraction and grain weight prediction were integrated into the specialized software. Therefore, this method was demonstrated to be an efficient and effective way for wheat breeding research.

Structured light imaging: !extracts! 3D wheat grain phenotypes 
3D point cloud data: !obtains! Structured light scanner 
Single grain segmentation: !locates! Ventral sulcus traits 
Orthogonal experiments: !evaluate! Optimum conditions 
MAPEs: !measure! Wheat grain length, width, thickness, and ventral sulcus depth 
Wheat grain weight model: !constructs! 32 phenotypic traits 
Cross-validation results: !validate! Wheat grain weight prediction