Globally, rice is being consumed as a main staple food and faces different kinds of biotic and abiotic stresses such drought, salinity, and pest attacks. Through the cytokinin signaling, Type-B authentic response regulators (ARR-Bs) respond positively towards the environmental stimuli. ARR-Bs are involved in abiotic stress tolerance and plant development but their molecular mechanisms in fragrant rice are still not fully explored. The current study showed the genome-wide characterization of OsARR-B genes under alkaline salt stress. Results showed that in total, 24 OsARR-B genes were found and divided into four subgroups on the basis of a phylogenetic analysis. These genes were located on all rice chromosomes except 8 and 10. Analysis of gene duplications, gene structure, cis-elements, protein-protein interactions, and miRNA were performed. Gene ontology analysis showed that OsARR-B genes are involved in plant development through the regulation of molecular functions, biological processes, and cellular components. Furthermore, 117 and 192 RNA editing sites were detected in chloroplast and mitochondrial genes, respectively, encoding proteins of OsARR-B. In chloroplast and mitochondrial genes, six and nine types of amino acid changes, respectively, were caused by RNA editing, showing that RNA editing has a role in the alkaline salt stress tolerance in fragrant rice. We also used a comparative transcriptome approach to study the gene expression changes in alkaline tolerant and susceptible genotypes. Under alkaline salt stress, OsARR-B5, OsARR-B7, OsARR-B9, OsARR-B10, OsARR-B16, OsARR-B22, and OsARR-B23 showed higher transcript levels in alkaline salt tolerant genotypes as compared to susceptible ones. Quantitative RT-PCR showed upregulation of gene expression in the alkaline tolerant genotypes under alkaline stress. Our study explored the gene expression profiling and RESs of two rice contrasting genotypes, which will help to understand the molecular mechanisms of alkaline salt tolerance in fragrant rice.

OsARR-B: !responds to! environmental stimuli 
OsARR-B: !divided into! four subgroups 
OsARR-B: !located on! all rice chromosomes 
OsARR-B: !involved in! plant development 
RNA editing: !detected in! chloroplast and mitochondrial genes 
RNA editing: !causes! amino acid changes 
Comparative transcriptome: !studied! gene expression changes 
Quantitative RT-PCR: !showed! upregulation of gene expression