Rice is attacked by an armada of pathogens. Present review provides a critical evaluation of the potential of different biotic agents used to protect rice yield drop from pathogenicity and an account of unexplored areas, which might be taken into consideration to manage rice diseases. Rice (Oryza sativa L.), is the most important staple food of Asian countries. Rice production is significantly limited by a diversity of pathogens, leading to yield loss and deficit in current rice supply. Application of agrochemicals of diverse types has been considered as the only option to control pathogens and enhance rice production, thereby causing environmental concerns and making the pathogens resistant to the active ingredients. Increase in population and resistance of pathogen towards agrochemicals put pressure on the agronomists to search for safe, novel, eco-friendly alternative ways to manage rice pathogens. Inducing resistance in rice by using different biotic/abiotic agents provides an environmental friendly alternative way to effectively manage bacterial, fungal, and viral rice pathogens. In recent years, a number of protocols have been developed for inducing pathogen resistance by bio-priming of rice. However, a comprehensive evaluation of the potential of different biotic agents to protect rice crop loss from pathogens is hitherto lacking due to which the research on induction of defense against pathogens in rice is discontinuous. This review deals with the detailed analysis of the bacterial and fungal agents used to induce defense against rice pathogens, their mode of application, mechanism (physiological, biochemical, and molecular) of defense induction, and effect of defense induction on the yield of rice. It also provides an account of gaps in the research and the unexplored areas, which might be taken into consideration to effectively manage rice pathogens.

Rice: !attacked by! Pathogens 
Agrochemicals: !used to control! Pathogens 
Biotic/Abiotic Agents: !used to induce resistance in! Rice 
Bio-priming: !used to induce defense against! Rice Pathogens 
Bacterial/Fungal Agents: !used to induce defense against! Rice Pathogens 
Mode of Application: !used to induce defense against! Rice Pathogens 
Physiological/Biochemical/Molecular Mechanism: !used to induce defense against! Rice Pathogens 
Defense Induction: !affects! Yield of Rice