Hexaploid wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is a leading cereal crop worldwide. Understanding the mechanism of calcium (Ca) accumulation in wheat is important to reduce the risk of human micronutrient deficiencies. However, the mechanisms of Ca accumulation in wheat grain are only partly understood. Here, a genome-wide association study (GWAS) was performed to dissect the genetic basis of Ca accumulation in wheat grain using an association population consisting of 207 varieties, with phenotypic data from three locations. In total, 11 non-redundant genetic loci associated with Ca concentration were identified and they explained, on average, 9.61-26.93% of the phenotypic variation. Cultivars containing more superior alleles had increased grain Ca concentrations. Notably, four non-redundant loci were mutually verified by different statistical models in at least two environments, indicating their stability across different environments. Four putative candidate genes linked to Ca accumulation were revealed from the stable genetic loci. Among them, two genes, associated with the stable genetic loci on chromosomes 4A (AX-108912427) and 3B (AX-110922471), encode the subunits of V-type Proton ATPase (TraesCS4A02G428900 and TraesCS3B02G241000), which annotated as the typical generators of a proton gradient that might be involved in Ca homeostasis in wheat grain. To identify genetic loci associated with Ca accumulation, we conducted GWAS on Ca concentrations and detected 11 genetic loci; whereas four genetic loci were stable across different environments. A genetic loci hot spot exists at the end of chromosome 4A and associated with the putative candidate gene TraesCS4A02G428900. The candidate gene TraesCS4A02G428900 encodes V-type proton ATPase subunit e and highly expressed in wheat grains, and it possibly involved in Ca accumulation. This study increases our understanding of the genetic architecture of Ca accumulation in wheat grains, which is potentially helpful for wheat Ca biofortification pyramid breeding.

GWAS: !identifies! 11 genetic loci
loci: !explain! phenotypic variation
loci: !verify! stability across environments
loci: !link to! candidate genes
candidate gene: !encodes! V-type proton ATPase subunit e
candidate gene: !highly expressed in! wheat grains
candidate gene: !possibly involved in! Ca accumulation