Recognition of a pathogen by the plant immune system often triggers a form of regulated cell death traditionally known as the hypersensitive response (HR). This type of cell death occurs precisely at the site of pathogen recognition, and it is restricted to a few cells. Extensive research has shed light on how plant immune receptors are mechanistically activated. However, two central key questions remain largely unresolved: how does cell death zonation take place, and what are the mechanisms that underpin this phenomenon? Consequently, bona fide transcriptional indicators of HR are lacking, which prevents deeper insight into its mechanisms before cell death becomes macroscopic and precludes early or live observation. In this study, to identify the transcriptional indicators of HR we used the paradigmatic Arabidopsis thaliana-Pseudomonas syringae pathosystem and performed a spatiotemporally resolved gene expression analysis that compared infected cells that will undergo HR upon pathogen recognition with bystander cells that will stay alive and activate immunity. Our data revealed unique and time-dependent differences in the repertoire of differentially expressed genes, expression profiles, and biological processes derived from tissue undergoing HR and that of its surroundings. Furthermore, we generated a pipeline based on concatenated pairwise comparisons between time, zone, and treatment that enabled us to define 13 robust transcriptional HR markers. Among these genes, the promoter of an uncharacterized AAA-ATPase was used to obtain a fluorescent reporter transgenic line that displays a strong spatiotemporally resolved signal specifically in cells that will later undergo pathogen-triggered cell death. This valuable set of genes can be used to define cells that are destined to die upon infection with HR-triggering bacteria, opening new avenues for specific and/or high-throughput techniques to study HR processes at a single-cell level.

Pathogen: !triggers! HR
Immune receptors: !mechanistically activate! Plant immune system
HR: !zonates! Cell death
Transcriptional indicators: !lack! Deeper insight into mechanisms
Arabidopsis thaliana-Pseudomonas syringae pathosystem: !compared! Infected cells & bystander cells
Differentially expressed genes: !revealed! Unique expression profiles
Pipeline: !generated! 13 robust transcriptional HR markers
AAA-ATPase promoter: !used to obtain! Fluorescent reporter transgenic line
Set of genes: !used to define! Cells destined to die upon infection