This review provides an overview on the role of camalexin in plant immunity taking into account various plant-pathogen and beneficial microbe interactions, regulation mechanisms and the contribution in basal and induced plant resistance. In a hostile environment, plants evolve complex and sophisticated defense mechanisms to counteract invading pathogens and herbivores. Several lines of evidence support the assumption that secondary metabolites like phytoalexins which are synthesized de novo, play an important role in plant defenses and contribute to pathogens' resistance in a wide variety of plant species. Phytoalexins are synthesized and accumulated in plants upon pathogen challenge, root colonization by beneficial microbes, following treatment with chemical elicitors or in response to abiotic stresses. Their protective properties against pathogens have been reported in various plant species as well as their contribution to human health. Phytoalexins are synthesized through activation of particular sets of genes encoding specific pathways. Camalexin (3'-thiazol-2'-yl-indole) is the primary phytoalexin produced by Arabidopsis thaliana after microbial infection or abiotic elicitation and an iconic representative of the indole phytoalexin family. The synthesis of camalexin is an integral part of cruciferous plant defense mechanisms. Although the pathway leading to camalexin has been largely elucidated, the regulatory networks that control the induction of its biosynthetic steps by pathogens with different lifestyles or by beneficial microbes remain mostly unknown. This review thus presents current knowledge regarding camalexin biosynthesis induction during plant-pathogen and beneficial microbe interactions as well as in response to microbial compounds and provides an overview on its regulation and interplay with signaling pathways. The contribution of camalexin to basal and induced plant resistance and its detoxification by some pathogens to overcome host resistance are also discussed.

Gene: !synthesizes! Camalexin
Pathogen: !induces! Camalexin synthesis
Beneficial Microbe: !induces! Camalexin synthesis
Chemical Elicitor: !induces! Camalexin synthesis
Abiotic Stress: !induces! Camalexin synthesis
Camalexin: !enhances! Plant Resistance
Pathogen: !detoxifies! Camalexin