Although multiple vital genes with strong effects on the tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) ripening process have been identified via the positional cloning of ripening mutants and cloning of ripening-related transcription factors (TFs), recent studies suggest that it is unlikely that we have fully characterized the gene regulatory networks underpinning this process. Here, combining comparative transcriptomics and expression QTLs, we identified 16 candidate genes involved in tomato fruit ripening and validated them through virus-induced gene silencing analysis. To further confirm the accuracy of the approach, one potential ripening regulator, SlWD40 (WD-40 repeats), was chosen for in-depth analysis. Co-expression network analysis indicated that master regulators such as RIN (ripening inhibitor) and NOR (nonripening) as well as vital TFs including FUL1 (FRUITFUL1), SlNAC4 (NAM, ATAF1,2, and CUC2 4), and AP2a (Activating enhancer binding Protein 2 alpha) strongly co-expressed with SlWD40. Furthermore, SlWD40 overexpression and RNAi lines exhibited substantially accelerated and delayed ripening phenotypes compared with the wild type, respectively. Moreover, transcriptome analysis of these transgenics revealed that expression patterns of ethylene biosynthesis genes, phytoene synthase, pectate lyase, and branched chain amino transferase 2, in SlWD40-RNAi lines were similar to those of rin and nor fruits, which further demonstrated that SlWD40 may act as an important ripening regulator in conjunction with RIN and NOR. These results are discussed in the context of current models of ripening and in terms of the use of comparative genomics and transcriptomics as an effective route for isolating causal genes underlying differences in genotypes.

RIN: !regulates! SlWD40
NOR: !regulates! SlWD40
FUL1: !co-expresses with! SlWD40
SlNAC4: !co-expresses with! SlWD40
AP2a: !co-expresses with! SlWD40
SlWD40: !accelerates! Ripening
SlWD40: !delays! Ripening
SlWD40: !affects! Ethylene Biosynthesis Genes