Halophytes have evolved specialized strategies to cope with high salinity. The extreme halophyte sea lavender (Limonium bicolor) lacks trichomes but possesses salt glands on its epidermis that can excrete harmful ions, such as sodium, to avoid salt damage. Here, we report a high-quality, 2.92-Gb, chromosome-scale L.막icolor genome assembly based on a combination of Illumina short reads, single-molecule, real-time long reads, chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C) data, and Bionano genome maps, greatly enriching the genomic information on recretohalophytes with multicellular salt glands. Although the L.막icolor genome contains genes that show similarity to trichome fate genes from Arabidopsis thaliana, it lacks homologs of the decision fate genes GLABRA3, ENHANCER OF GLABRA3, GLABRA2, TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA2, and SIAMESE, providing a molecular explanation for the absence of trichomes in this species. We identified key genes (LbHLH and LbTTG1) controlling salt gland development among classical trichome homologous genes and confirmed their roles by showing that their mutations markedly disrupted salt gland initiation, salt secretion, and salt tolerance, thus offering genetic support for the long-standing hypothesis that salt glands and trichomes may share a common origin. In addition, a whole-genome duplication event occurred in the L.막icolor genome after its divergence from Tartary buckwheat and may have contributed to its adaptation to high salinity. The L.막icolor genome resource and genetic evidence reported in this study provide profound insights into plant salt tolerance mechanisms that may facilitate the engineering of salt-tolerant crops.

LbHLH: !controls! salt gland development
LbTTG1: !controls! salt gland development
GLABRA3: !lacks homologs in! L. bicolor
ENHANCER OF GLABRA3: !lacks homologs in! L. bicolor
GLABRA2: !lacks homologs in! L. bicolor
TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA2: !lacks homologs in! L. bicolor
SIAMESE: !lacks homologs in! L. bicolor
whole-genome duplication: !occurred in! L. bicolor