Trapa L. is a floating-leaved aquatic plant with important economic and ecological values. However, the species identification and phylogenetic relationship within Trapa are still controversial, which necessitates the need for plastid genome information of Trapa. In this study, complete chloroplast genomes of 13 Trapa species/taxa were sequenced and annotated. Combined with released sequences, comparative analyses of chloroplast genomes were performed on the 15 Trapa species/taxa for the first time. The Trapa chloroplast genomes exhibited typical quadripartite structures with lengths from 155,453 to 155,559 bp. The gene orders and contents within Trapa were conservative, but several changes were found in the microstructure. The intron loss of rpl2, also detected in Lythraceae, was found in all Trapa species/taxa, suggesting close genetic relationship between Lythraceae and Trapaceae. Notably, two small-seed species (T. incisa and T. maximowiczii) showed the smallest genome size with 155,453 and 155,477 bp, respectively. Each cp genome contained the same 130 genes consisting of 85 protein-coding genes, 37 tRNA genes and 8 rRNA genes. Trapa species/taxa showed 37 (T. incisa and T. maximowiczii) to 41 (T. sibirica) long repeats, including forward, palindromic, reversed and complementary repeats. There were 110 (T. quadrispinosa) to 123 (T. incisa and T. maximowiczii) SSR (simple sequence repeat) loci in Trapa chloroplast genomes. Comparative analyses revealed that two hotspot regions (atpA-atpF and rps2-rpoC2) in Trapa chloroplast genomes could be served as potential molecular markers. Three phylogenetic analyses (ML, MP and BI) consistently showed that there were two clusters within Trapa, including large- and small-seed species/taxa, respectively; for the large-seed Trapa, they clustered according to their geographical origin and tubercle morphology on the surface of seeds. In summary, we have acquired the sequences of 13 Trapa chloroplast genomes, and performed the comparative analyses within Trapa for the first time. The results have helped us better identify the Trapa species/taxa and deepen the understanding of genetic basis and phylogenetic relationship of Trapa, which will facilitate the effective management and utilization of the important genetic resources in the future.

Trapa: !has! 130 genes 
Trapa: !exhibits! quadripartite structure 
intron loss of rpl2: !found in! Trapa & Lythraceae 
T. incisa & T. maximowiczii: !have smallest! genome size 
Trapa: !contains! 37-41 long repeats 
Trapa: !has! 110-123 SSR loci 
Trapa: !divided into! two clusters 
Trapa: !clusters according to! geographical origin & tubercle morphology