Focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy is well suited for volumetric extractions and 3D reconstructions of plant cells and its organelles. The three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of individual plant cells is an important tool to extract volumetric data of organelles and is necessary to fully understand ultrastructural changes and adaptations of plants to their environment. Methods such as the 3D reconstruction of cells based on light microscopical images often lack the resolution necessary to clearly reconstruct all cell compartments within a cell. The 3D reconstruction of cells through serial sectioning transmission electron microscopy (ssTEM) and focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) are powerful alternatives but not widely used in plant sciences. Here, we present a method for the 3D reconstruction and volumetric extraction of plant cells based on FIB milling and compare the results with 3D reconstructions obtained with ssTEM. When compared to 3D reconstruction based on ssTEM, FIB-SEM delivered similar results. The data extracted in this study demonstrated that tobacco cells were larger (31410 µm<sup>3</sup>) than pumpkin cells (20697 µm<sup>3</sup>) and contained more chloroplasts (175 vs. 124), mitochondria (1317 vs. 291) and peroxisomes (745 vs. 79). While individual chloroplasts, mitochondria, peroxisomes were larger in pumpkin plants (25, 53, and 50%, respectively) they covered more total volume in tobacco plants (5390, 395, 374 µm<sup>3</sup>, respectively) due to their higher number per cell when compared to pumpkin plants (4762, 134, 59 µm<sup>3</sup>, respectively). While image acquisition with FIB-SEM was automated, software controlled, and less difficult than ssTEM, FIB milling was slower and sections could not be revised or re-imaged as they were destroyed by the ion beam. Nevertheless, the results in this study demonstrated that both, FIB-SEM and ssTEM, are powerful tools for the 3D reconstruction of and volumetric extraction from plant cells and that there were large differences in size, number, and organelle composition between pumpkin and tobacco cells.

FIB-SEM: !compared to! ssTEM
tobacco cells: !larger than! pumpkin cells
chloroplasts: !more in! tobacco cells
mitochondria: !more in! tobacco cells
peroxisomes: !more in! tobacco cells
chloroplasts: !larger in! pumpkin cells
mitochondria: !larger in! pumpkin cells
peroxisomes: !larger in! pumpkin cells
chloroplasts: !covered more volume in! tobacco cells
mitochondria: !covered more volume in! tobacco cells
peroxisomes: !covered more volume in! tobacco cells
FIB-SEM: !slower than! ssTEM
FIB-SEM: !automated and software controlled! ssTEM