Lignin contributes substantially to the recalcitrance of biomass toward saccharification. To circumvent this problem, researchers have genetically altered lignin, although, in a number of cases, these efforts have resulted in an undesirable yield penalty. Recent findings have shown that by knocking out two subunits (MED5A and MED5B) of the transcriptional regulatory complex Mediator, the stunted growth phenotype of mutants in p-coumaroyl shikimate 3'-hydroxylase, reduced epidermal fluorescence 8-1 (ref8-1), can be alleviated. Furthermore, these plants synthesize a lignin polymer almost entirely derived from p-coumaryl alcohol. Plants deficient in cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) are notable in that they primarily incorporate coniferaldehyde and sinapaldehyde into their lignin. We tested the hypothesis that by stacking mutations in the genes encoding for the CAD paralogs C and D on an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) med5a/5b ref8-1 genetic background, the biosynthesis of p-coumaryl alcohol would be blocked, making p-coumaraldehyde available for polymerization into a novel kind of lignin. The med5a/5b ref8-1 cadc cadd plants are viable, but lignin analysis demonstrated that they continue to synthesize p-hydroxyphenyl lignin despite being mutated for the CADs typically considered to be required for monolignol biosynthesis. In addition, enzyme activity tests showed that even in the absence of CADC and CADD, there is high CAD activity in stems. We tested the potential involvement of other CADs in p-coumaraldehyde biosynthesis in the quintuple mutant by mutating them using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Lignin analysis demonstrated that the resulting hextuple mutant plants continue to deposit p-coumaryl alcohol-derived lignin, demonstrating a route for the synthesis of p-hydroxyphenyl lignin in Arabidopsis independent of four CAD isoforms.

MED5A: !affects! MED5B 
MED5A/5B: !alleviates! stunted growth phenotype 
p-coumaroyl shikimate 3'-hydroxylase: !synthesizes! p-coumaryl alcohol 
CAD: !incorporates! coniferaldehyde and sinapaldehyde 
CADC/CADD: !blocks! p-coumaryl alcohol biosynthesis 
CAD: !synthesizes! p-hydroxyphenyl lignin 
CRISPR/Cas9: !mutates! other CAD isoforms 
hextuple mutant plants: !deposit! p-coumaryl alcohol-derived lignin