Soil salinity is one of the most serious threats to plant growth and productivity. Due to global climate change, burgeoning population and shrinking arable land, there is an urgent need to develop crops with minimum reduction in yield when cultivated in salt-affected areas. Salinity stress imposes osmotic stress as well as ion toxicity, which impairs major plant processes such as photosynthesis, cellular metabolism, and plant nutrition. One of the major effects of salinity stress in plants includes the disturbance of ion homeostasis in various tissues. In the present study, we aimed to review the regulation of uptake, transport, storage, efflux, influx, and accumulation of various ions in plants under salinity stress. We have summarized major research advancements towards understanding the ion homeostasis at both cellular and whole-plant level under salinity stress. We have also discussed various factors regulating the function of ion transporters and channels in maintaining ion homeostasis and ionic interactions under salt stress, including plant antioxidative defense, osmo-protection, and osmoregulation. We further elaborated on stress perception at extracellular and intracellular levels, which triggers downstream intracellular-signaling cascade, including secondary messenger molecules generation. Various signaling and signal transduction mechanisms under salinity stress and their role in improving ion homeostasis in plants are also discussed. Taken together, the present review focuses on recent advancements in understanding the regulation and function of different ion channels and transporters under salt stress, which may pave the way for crop improvement.

Salinity stress: !imposes! osmotic stress 
Salinity stress: !impairs! major plant processes 
Ion homeostasis: !disturbed by! salinity stress 
Ion transporters/channels: !regulate! ion homeostasis 
Plant antioxidative defense: !regulates! function of ion transporters/channels 
Osmo-protection/osmoregulation: !regulates! function of ion transporters/channels 
Stress perception: !triggers! downstream intracellular-signaling cascade 
Signaling/signal transduction mechanisms: !improve! ion homeostasis in plants