Photosynthesis holds the promise of sustainable generation of useful products using light energy. Key to realizing this potential is the ability to rationally design photosynthesis to redirect energy and reductant derived from photons to desired products. Cytochrome P450s (P450s), which catalyze a broad array of reactions, have been engineered into a variety of photosynthetic organisms, where their activity has been shown to be photosynthesis-dependent, thus acting as heterologous sinks of electrons derived from photosynthesis. Furthermore, the addition of P450s can increase the photosynthetic capacity of the host organism. In this study, we developed this technology further using a P450 (CYP1A1) expressed in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. We show that rationally engineering photosynthesis by the removal of a competing electron sink, the respiratory terminal oxidase cytochrome c oxidase, increased the activity of CYP1A1. We provide evidence that this enhanced CYP1A1 activity was facilitated via an increase in the flux of electrons through Photosystem I. We also conducted a transcriptomic analysis on the designed strains to gain a more holistic understanding of how the cell responds to rational engineering. We describe a complex response including changes in expression of genes involved in photosynthesis and electron transfer linked to respiration. Specifically, the expression of CYP1A1 resulted in the reduction in expression of other natural electron dissipation pathways. This study emphasizes the potential for engineering photosynthetic organisms in biotechnology but also highlights the need to consider the broader impacts on cellular metabolism of any rationally induced changes.

Photosynthesis: !promises! Sustainable generation of useful products
P450s: !catalyze! Broad array of reactions
P450s: !engineered into! Variety of photosynthetic organisms
P450s: !increase! Photosynthetic capacity of host organism
CYP1A1: !expressed in! Cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002
Removal of competing electron sink: !increases! Activity of CYP1A1
Increase in flux of electrons: !facilitates! Enhanced CYP1A1 activity
Transcriptomic analysis: !reveals! Complex response to rational engineering
Expression of CYP1A1: !reduces! Expression of other natural electron dissipation pathways