Sheath blight is an important disease caused by Rhizoctonia cerealis that affects wheat yields worldwide. No wheat varieties have been identified with high resistance or immunity to sheath blight. Understanding the sheath blight resistance mechanism is essential for controlling this disease. In this study, we investigated the response of wheat to Rhizoctonia cerealis infection by analyzing the cytological changes and transcriptomes of common wheat 7182 with moderate sensitivity to sheath blight and H83 with moderate resistance. The cytological observation showed that the growth of Rhizoctonia cerealis on the surface and its expansion inside the leaf sheath tissue were more rapid in the susceptible material. According to the transcriptome sequencing results, a total of 88685 genes were identified in both materials, including 20156 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of which 12087 was upregulated genes and 8069 was downregulated genes. At 36 h post-inoculation, compared with the uninfected control, 11498 DEGs were identified in resistant materials, with 5064 downregulated genes and 6434 upregulated genes, and 13058 genes were detected in susceptible materials, with 6759 downregulated genes and 6299 upregulated genes. At 72 h post-inoculation, compared with the uninfected control, 6578 DEGs were detected in resistant materials, with 2991 downregulated genes and 3587 upregulated genes, and 7324 genes were detected in susceptible materials, with 4119 downregulated genes and 3205 upregulated genes. Functional annotation and enrichment analysis showed that the main pathways enriched for the DEGs included biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, carbon metabolism, plant hormone signal transduction, and plant-pathogen interaction. In particular, phenylpropane biosynthesis pathway is specifically activated in resistant variety H83 after infection. Many DEGs also belonged to the MYB, AP2, NAC, and WRKY transcription factor families. Thus, we suggest that the normal functioning of plant signaling pathways and differences in the expression of key genes and transcription factors in some important metabolic pathways may be important for defending wheat against sheath blight. These findings may facilitate further exploration of the sheath blight resistance mechanism in wheat and the cloning of related genes.

Rhizoctonia cerealis: !causes! Sheath blight 
Wheat 7182: !has moderate sensitivity to! Sheath blight 
H83: !has moderate resistance to! Sheath blight 
Rhizoctonia cerealis: !expands more rapidly in! Wheat 7182 
DEGs: !are identified in! Wheat 7182 and H83 
Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites: !is enriched for! DEGs 
Carbon metabolism: !is enriched for! DEGs 
Plant hormone signal transduction: !is enriched for! DEGs 
Plant-pathogen interaction: !is enriched for! DEGs 
Phenylpropane biosynthesis pathway: !is specifically activated in! H83 
MYB, AP2, NAC, WRKY transcription factor families: !belong to! DEGs