Plants worldwide are often stressed by low Fe availability around the world, especially in aerobic soils. Therefore, the plant growth, seed yield, and quality of crop species are severely inhibited under Fe deficiency. Fe metabolism in plants is controlled by a series of complex transport, storage, and regulatory mechanisms in cells. Allohexaploid wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is a staple upland crop species that is highly sensitive to low Fe stresses. Although some studies have been previously conducted on the responses of wheat plants to Fe deficiency, the key mechanisms underlying adaptive responses are still unclear in wheat due to its large and complex genome. Transmission electron microscopy showed that the chloroplast structure was severely damaged under Fe deficiency. Paraffin sectioning revealed that the division rates of meristematic cells were reduced, and the sizes of elongated cells were diminished. ICP-MS-assisted ionmics analysis showed that low-Fe stress significantly limited the absorption of nutrients, including N, P, K, Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn, Cu, Zn, and B nutrients. High-throughput transcriptome sequencing identified 378 and 2,619 genome-wide differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the shoots and roots between high-Fe and low-Fe conditions, respectively. These DEGs were mainly involved in the Fe chelator biosynthesis, ion transport, photosynthesis, amino acid metabolism, and protein synthesis. Gene coexpression network diagrams indicated that TaIRT1b-4A, TaNAS2-6D, TaNAS1a-6A, TaNAS1-6B, and TaNAAT1b-1D might function as key regulators in the adaptive responses of wheat plants to Fe deficiency. These results might help us fully understand the morpho-physiological and molecular responses of wheat plants to low-Fe stress, and provide elite genetic resources for the genetic modification of efficient Fe use.

Fe deficiency: !inhibits! Plant growth
Fe deficiency: !reduces! Division rates of meristematic cells
Fe deficiency: !limits! Absorption of nutrients
Fe deficiency: !involves! Fe chelator biosynthesis
Fe deficiency: !involves! Ion transport
Fe deficiency: !involves! Photosynthesis
Fe deficiency: !involves! Amino acid metabolism
Fe deficiency: !involves! Protein synthesis
TaIRT1b-4A: !regulates! Adaptive responses to Fe deficiency
TaNAS2-6D: !regulates! Adaptive responses to Fe deficiency
TaNAS1a-6A: !regulates! Adaptive responses to Fe deficiency
TaNAS1-6B: !regulates! Adaptive responses to Fe deficiency
TaNAAT1b-1D: !regulates! Adaptive responses to Fe deficiency