Type III protein secretion systems of nitrogen-fixing rhizobia deliver effector proteins into leguminous host cells to promote or inhibit the nodule symbiosis. However, mechanisms underlying effector-triggered inhibition of nodulation remain largely unknown. Nodulation outer protein T (NopT) of Sinorhizobium sp. NGR234 is an effector protease related to the Pseudomonas effector Avirulence protein Pseudomonas phaseolicola B (AvrPphB). Here, we constructed NGR234 mutants producing different NopT variants and found that protease activity of NopT negatively affects nodulation of smooth crotalaria (Crotalaria pallida). NopT variants lacking residues required for autocleavage and subsequent lipidation showed reduced symbiotic effects and were not targeted to the plasma membrane. We further noticed that Sinorhizobium fredii strains possess a mutated nopT gene. Sinorhizobium fredii USDA257 expressing nopT of NGR234 induced considerably fewer nodules in soybean (Glycine max) cv. Nenfeng 15 but not in other cultivars. Effector perception was further examined in NopT-expressing leaves of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and found to be dependent on the protein kinase Arabidopsis AvrPphB Susceptible 1 (AtPBS1) and the associated resistance protein Arabidopsis Resistance to Pseudomonas syringae 5 (AtRPS5). Experiments with Nicotiana benthamiana plants indicated that the soybean homolog GmPBS1-1 associated with AtRPS5 can perceive NopT. Further analysis showed that NopT cleaves AtPBS1 and GmPBS1-1 and thus can activate these target proteins. Insertion of a DKM motif at the cleavage site of GmPBS1-1 resulted in increased proteolysis. Nodulation tests with soybeans expressing an autoactive GmPBS1-1 variant indicated that activation of a GmPBS1-1-mediated resistance pathway impairs nodule formation in cv. Nenfeng 15. Our findings suggest that legumes face an evolutionary dilemma of either developing effector-triggered immunity against pathogenic bacteria or establishing symbiosis with suboptimally adapted rhizobia producing pathogen-like effectors.

NopT: !negatively affects! nodulation 
NopT: !targets to! plasma membrane 
Sinorhizobium fredii: !possesses mutated! nopT gene 
AtPBS1: !interacts with! AtRPS5 
GmPBS1-1: !interacts with! AtRPS5 
NopT: !cleaves! AtPBS1 
NopT: !cleaves! GmPBS1-1 
GmPBS1-1: !activated by! NopT