Transient and chronic waterlogging constrains crop production in many regions of the world. Here, we invoke a novel iTRAQ-based proteomic strategy to elicit protein synthesis and regulation responses to waterlogging in tolerant (XM 55) and sensitive genotypes (YM 158). Of the 7,710 proteins identified, 16 were distinct between the two genotypes under waterlogging, partially defining a proteomic basis for waterlogging tolerance (and sensitivity). We found that 11 proteins were up-regulated and 5 proteins were down-regulated; the former included an Fe-S cluster assembly factor, heat shock cognate 70, GTP-binding protein SAR1A-like and CBS domain-containing protein. Down-regulated proteins contained photosystem II reaction center protein H, carotenoid 9, 10 (9', 10')-cleavage dioxygenase-like, psbP-like protein 1 and mitochondrial ATPase inhibitor. We showed that nine proteins responded to waterlogging with non-cultivar specificity: these included 3-isopropylmalate dehydratase large subunit, solanesyl-diphosphate synthase 2, DEAD-box ATP-dependent RNA helicase 3, and 3 predicted or uncharacterized proteins. Sixteen of the 28 selected proteins showed consistent expression patterns between mRNA and protein levels. We conclude that waterlogging stress may redirect protein synthesis, reduce chlorophyll synthesis and enzyme abundance involved in photorespiration, thus influencing synthesis of other metabolic enzymes. Collectively, these factors accelerate the accumulation of harmful metabolites in leaves in waterlogging-susceptible genotypes. The differentially expressed proteins enumerated here could be used as biological markers for enhancing waterlogging tolerance as part of future crop breeding programs.

Transient and chronic waterlogging: !constrains! crop production
iTRAQ-based proteomic strategy: !elicits! protein synthesis and regulation responses
Fe-S cluster assembly factor: !up-regulated! by waterlogging
Photosystem II reaction center protein H: !down-regulated! by waterlogging
3-isopropylmalate dehydratase large subunit: !responds to! waterlogging
Chlorophyll synthesis: !reduced! by waterlogging
Enzyme abundance: !influences! synthesis of other metabolic enzymes
Harmful metabolites: !accumulated! in leaves in waterlogging-susceptible genotypes
Differentially expressed proteins: !used as! biological markers