We identified 66 melon SAUR genes by bioinformatic analyses. CmSAUR19, 38, 58, 62 genes are specifically expressed in different stages of fruit growth, suggesting their participation in regulating fruit development. Auxin plays a crucial role in plant growth by regulating the multiple auxin response genes. However, in melon (Cucumis melo L.), the functions of the auxin early response gene family SAUR (Small auxin up RNA) genes in fruit development are still poorly understood. Through genome-wide characterization of CmSAUR family in melon, we identified a total of 66 CmSAUR genes. The open reading frames of the CmSAUR genes ranged from 234 to 525 bp, containing only one exon and lacking introns. Chromosomal position and phylogenetic tree analyses found that the two gene clusters in the melon chromosome are highly homologous in the Cucurbitaceae plants. Among the four conserved motifs in CmSAUR proteins, motif 1, motif 2, and motif 3 located in most of the family protein sequences, and motif 4 showed a close correlation with the two gene clusters. The CmSAUR28 and CmSAUR58 genes have auxin response elements located in the promoters, suggesting they may be involved in the auxin signaling pathway to regulate fruit development. Through transcriptomic profiling in the four developmental stages of fruit and different lateral organs, we selected 16 differentially-expressed SAUR genes for performing further expression analyses. qRT-PCR results showed that five SAUR genes are specifically expressed in flower organs and ovaries. CmSAUR19 and CmSAUR58 were significantly accumulated in the early developmental stage of the fruit. CmSAUR38 and CmAUR62 showed high expression in the climacteric and post-climacteric stages, suggesting their specific role in controlling fruit ripening. This work provides a foundation for further exploring the function of the SAUR gene in fruit development.

CmSAUR19: !specifically expressed in! different stages of fruit growth
CmSAUR58: !specifically expressed in! different stages of fruit growth
Auxin: !regulates! multiple auxin response genes
CmSAUR28: !involved in! auxin signaling pathway
CmSAUR58: !involved in! auxin signaling pathway
CmSAUR19: !accumulated in! early developmental stage of the fruit
CmSAUR38: !high expression in! climacteric and post-climacteric stages
CmAUR62: !high expression in! climacteric and post-climacteric stages