The increasing demand for forestry resources is driving the need for smarter systems capable of saving and protecting forests that can optimize agile forestry production. This study uses the continuous hot-pressing process of wooden medium-density fiberboard (MDF) to investigate the possibility of automatic quality control of the continuous flat pressing process. For this purpose, conceptual digital twin modeling for mechanism and sequence parameter control was conducted based on the cellular automata (CA) theory. A distributed coordination mode framework was constructed, and a craft control programming method was proposed for the quality control of MDF continuous flat pressing. Based on the MDF continuous flat press craft mechanism and control standards, a framework of five distributed flat press cooperative control mode elements for the cylinder array of the continuous panel system (CPS) was defined. To satisfy the distributed distance servo and pressure servo demands of the multi-stage hot pressing craft design, five kinds of synergy collaborative control modes of multiple rack groups were constructed using mode elements: For the four types of typical deviations in slab production, i.e., thickness, slope, depression, and bulge, a multi-zone mutual cooperative mode craft control sequence was programmed. According to the type and intensity of real-time deviation, the corresponding regulation sequence was applied. This effectively counteracts the deviation caused by the uncertainty interference due to the multi-field coupling effect in actual production. The application tests demonstrate that the adjustment and response time of the continuous flat press were greatly improved, and the quality superiority rate is controlled above 95%, thereby confirming the effectiveness of the control strategy.

MDF: !controlled by! Craft Control Programming
CPS: !coordinated by! Distributed Coordination Mode Framework
Deviation: !counteracted by! Regulation Sequence
Multi-Field Coupling Effect: !regulated by! Multi-Zone Mutual Cooperative Mode Craft Control Sequence