Embolism spreading in xylem is an important component of plant drought resistance. Since embolism resistance has been shown to be mechanistically linked to pit membrane characters in stem xylem, we speculate that similar mechanisms account for leaf xylem. We conducted transmission electron microscopy to investigate pit membrane characters in leaf xylem across 18 Neotropical tree species. We also conducted gold perfusion and polar lipid detection experiments on three species covering the full range of leaf embolism resistance. We then related these observations to previously published data on embolism resistance of leaf xylem. We also incorporated previously published data on stem embolism resistance and stem xylem pit membranes to investigate the link between vulnerability segmentation (i.e. difference in embolism resistance) and leaf-stem anatomical variation. Maximum pit membrane thickness (Tpm,max) and the pit membrane thickness-to-diameter ratio (Tpm,max/Dpm) were predictive of leaf embolism resistance, especially when vestured pits were taken into account. Variation in Tpm,max/Dpm was the only trait predictive of vulnerability segmentation between leaves and stems. Gold particles of 5- and 10-nm infiltrated pit membranes in three species, while the entry of 50-nm particles was blocked. Moreover, polar lipids were associated with inner conduit walls and pits. Our results suggest that mechanisms related to embolism spreading are determined by Tpm, pore constrictions (i.e. the narrowest bottlenecks along pore pathways), and lipid surfactants, which are largely similar between leaf and stem xylem and between temperate and tropical trees. However, our mechanistic understanding of embolism propagation and the functional relevance of Tpm,max/Dpm remains elusive.

Embolism: !linked to! pit membrane characters 
Tpm,max/Dpm: !predictive of! leaf embolism resistance 
Tpm,max/Dpm: !predictive of! vulnerability segmentation 
Gold particles: !infiltrated by! 5- and 10-nm 
Polar lipids: !associated with! inner conduit walls and pits