Trehalose can improve the tolerance of plants to various types of environmental stress. Nonetheless, information respecting the molecular networks of wheat seedlings to exogenous trehalose under heat stress is limited. Here, two wheat varieties pretreated with exogenous trehalose were selected to explore the molecular mechanism by which trehalose improves the heat tolerance of wheat (<i>Triticum aestivum</i> L.). The results indicated that exogenous trehalose improved the physiological state of wheat seedlings under heat stress. Through RNA sequencing and metabolomics analysis, the genes and metabolites specifically expressed in trehalose pretreatment were identified. After heat stress, there were 18,352 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the control and trehalose-treated (H_vs_TreH) groups of Yangmai 18 and 9045 DEGs in Yannong 19. Functional annotation and enrichment analyses showed that the DEGs in the two wheat varieties were mainly involved in carbohydrate metabolism and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. Through a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry platform, 183 differential metabolites in H_vs_TreH groups of Yangmai 18 and 77 differential metabolites in Yannong 19 were identified. Compared with the control group, many protective metabolites, such as amino acids, purines, phenylpropanoids and flavonoids, showed significant differences under heat stress. The results indicated that exogenous trehalose protected the wheat biomembrane system, enhanced carbohydrate metabolism and signal transduction, strengthened the activity of the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle), regulated purine metabolism, gene expression and metabolite accumulation in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and flavonoid biosynthesis pathways, thus improving the heat tolerance of wheat.

Trehalose: !improves! Heat tolerance of wheat
Exogenous trehalose: !regulates! Gene expression
Exogenous trehalose: !enhances! Carbohydrate metabolism
Exogenous trehalose: !strengthens! TCA cycle
Exogenous trehalose: !protects! Biomembrane system
Amino acids: !show! Significant differences under heat stress
Purines: !show! Significant differences under heat stress
Phenylpropanoids: !accumulate! Under heat stress
Flavonoids: !accumulate! Under heat stress