In the thylakoid membrane of cyanobacteria and chloroplasts, many proteins involved in photosynthesis are associated with or integrated into the fluid bilayer matrix formed by four unique glycerolipid classes, monogalactosyldiacylglycerol, digalactosyldiacylglycerol, sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol, and phosphatidylglycerol. Biochemical and molecular genetic studies have revealed that these glycerolipids play essential roles not only in the formation of thylakoid lipid bilayers but also in the assembly and functions of photosynthetic complexes. Moreover, considerable advances in structural biology have identified a number of lipid molecules within the photosynthetic complexes such as PSI and PSII. These data have provided important insights into the association of lipids with protein subunits in photosynthetic complexes and the distribution of lipids in the thylakoid membrane. Here, we summarize recent high-resolution observations of lipid molecules in the structures of photosynthetic complexes from plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, and evaluate the distribution of lipids among photosynthetic protein complexes and thylakoid lipid bilayers. By integrating the structural information into the findings from biochemical and molecular genetic studies, we highlight the conserved and differentiated roles of lipids in the assembly and functions of photosynthetic complexes among plants, algae, and cyanobacteria.

Monogalactosyldiacylglycerol: !forms! Thylakoid lipid bilayers 
Digalactosyldiacylglycerol: !forms! Thylakoid lipid bilayers 
Sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol: !forms! Thylakoid lipid bilayers 
Phosphatidylglycerol: !forms! Thylakoid lipid bilayers 
Lipids: !associated with! Photosynthetic complexes 
Lipids: !distributed in! Thylakoid membrane 
Photosynthetic complexes: !contain! Lipids 
Biochemical studies: !reveal! Essential roles of lipids 
Molecular genetic studies: !reveal! Essential roles of lipids 
Structural biology: !identifies! Lipids in photosynthetic complexes 
High-resolution observations: !provide! Insights into lipid association 
Plants, algae, cyanobacteria: !conserved and differentiated roles of! Lipids