Plant molecular biology and bacterial behaviour research in the future could focus on using genetically engineered bacteria as a sensor, hormonal/disease detector, and target gene expression, as well as establishing a bioluminescence feedback communication system. Over the last two decades, understanding plant signal transduction pathways of plant hormones has become an active research field to understand plant behavior better. To accomplish signal transduction, plants use a variety of hormones for inter- and intra-communication, and biotic or abiotic stressors activate those. Signal transduction pathways refer to the use of various communication methods by effectors to elicit a response at the molecular level. Research methodologies such as inter-kingdom signaling have been introduced to study signal transduction and communication pathways, or what we can term plant molecular communication. However, stochastic qualities are inherent in most technologies used to monitor these biological processes. Molecular communication (MC) is a new research topic that uses the natural features of biological organisms to communicate and aims to manipulate their stochastic nature to achieve the desired results. MC is a multidisciplinary research field inspired by the use of molecules to store, spread, and receive information between biological organisms known as "Biological Nanomachines." It has been used to demonstrate how biological entities may be characterised, modelled, and engineered as communication devices in the same manner as traditional communication technologies are. We attempted to link MC and PLANT'S MC in this study and we believe that reasonable combined efforts may be made to use the functional applications of MC for detecting and understanding molecular-level activities such as signaling transduction pathways in crops.

Hormones: !activate! Signal transduction pathways
Biotic/Abiotic stressors: !activate! Hormones
Inter-kingdom signaling: !studies! Signal transduction pathways
Molecular communication: !uses! Biological organisms
Molecular communication: !manipulates! Stochastic nature
Molecular communication: !characterises, models, engineers! Communication devices
Molecular communication: !links with! Plant molecular communication