Sugar not only is an important biomacromolecule that plays important roles in plant growth, development, and biotic and abiotic stress tolerance but also provides a skeleton for other macromolecules, such as proteins and nucleic acids. Sugar transporter proteins (STPs) play essential roles in plant sugar transport and ultimately affect the abovementioned life processes. However, the evolutionary dynamics of this important gene family in Brassicaceae crops are still largely unknown, and the functional differentiation of radish STP genes remains unclear. In the present study, a comparative genomic study of STP genes in five representative Brassicaceae crops was conducted, and a total of 25, 25, 28, 36 and 49 STP genes were individually identified in Raphanus sativus (Rs), Brassica oleracea (Bo), B. rapa (Br), B. napus (Bn) and B. juncea (Bj), which were divided into four clades by phylogenetic analysis. The number of STP genes was no direct correlation with genome size and the total number of coding genes in Brassicaceae crops, and their physical and chemical properties showed no significant difference. Expression analysis showed that radish STP genes play vital roles not only in flower and seedpod development but also under heavy metal (cadmium, chromium and lead), NaCl and PEG-6000 stresses, Agrobacterium tumefaciens infection, and exogenous sugar treatment. RsSTP13.2 was significantly upregulated in the resistant radish cultivar by A. tumefaciens infection and induced by heavy metal, NaCl and PEG-6000 stress, indicating that it is involved in resistance to both biotic and abiotic stress in radish. The present study provides insights into the evolutionary patterns of the STP gene family in Brassicaceae genomes and provides a theoretical basis for future functional analysis of STP genes in Brassicaceae crops.

Sugar: !provides skeleton for! macromolecules
STP genes: !affect! plant sugar transport
STP genes: !divided into! four clades
STP genes: !play roles in! flower/seedpod development
STP genes: !involved in! biotic/abiotic stress resistance
RsSTP13.2: !upregulated in! resistant radish cultivar