GIGANTEA (GI) is a plant-specific, circadian clock-regulated, nuclear protein with pleiotropic functions found in many plant species. This protein is involved in flowering, circadian clock control, chloroplast biogenesis, carbohydrate metabolism, stress responses, and volatile compound synthesis. In potato (Solanum tuberosum L.), its only role appears to be tuber initiation; however, based on findings in other plant species, we hypothesised that the function of GI in potatoes is not restricted only to tuberisation. To test this hypothesis, the expression of a GI gene in the commercial potato cultivar 'Désirée' was repressed, and the effects of repression at morphological and transcriptome level were investigated. Previously, two copies of GI genes in potato were found. A construct to reduce the mRNA levels of one of these genes (StGI.04) was assembled, and the effects of antisense repression were studied in greenhouse-grown plants. The highest level of repression reached around 50%. However, this level did not influence tuber formation and yield but did cause a reduction in tuber colour. Using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), significant reductions in cyanidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside and pelargonidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside contents of tuber peels were detected. Anthocyanins are synthesized through a branch of the phenylpropanoid pathway. The transcriptome analysis indicated down-regulation in the expression of PHENYLALANINE AMMONIA LYASE (PAL), the LEUCOANTHOCYANIDIN OXIDISING enzyme gene LDOX, and the MYB-RELATED PROTEIN Hv1 (MYB-Hv1), a transcription factor coding gene, which is presumably involved in the regulation of flavonoid biosynthesis, in the leaves of a selected StGI.04-repressed line. Furthermore, alterations in expression of genes affecting the circadian clock, flowering, starch synthesis, and stress responses were detected in the leaves of the selected StGI.04-repressed line. We tested the effects of antisense repression of StGI.04 expression in potatoes and found that as with GI in other plant species, it influences the expression of the key genes of the circadian clock, flowering, starch synthesis, and stress responses. Furthermore, we detected a novel function of a GI gene in influencing the anthocyanin synthesis and potato tuber skin colour.

GIGANTEA (GI): !affects! Circadian clock control
GI: !affects! Flowering
GI: !affects! Chloroplast biogenesis
GI: !affects! Carbohydrate metabolism
GI: !affects! Stress responses
GI: !affects! Volatile compound synthesis
GI: !affects! Anthocyanin synthesis
PAL: !repressed by! GI
LDOX: !repressed by! GI
MYB-Hv1: !repressed by! GI