Intensive cereal production has brought about increasingly serious environmental threats, including global warming, environmental acidification, and water shortage. As an important grain producer in the world, the rice cultivation system in central China has undergone excessive changes in the past few decades. However, few articles focused on the environmental impacts of these shifts from the perspective of ecological footprints. In this study, a 2-year field trial was carried out in Hubei province, China, to gain insight into carbon footprint (CF), nitrogen footprint (NF), and water footprint (WF) performance. The three treatments were, namely, double-rice system (DR), ratoon rice system (RR), and rice-wheat system (RW). Results demonstrated that RR significantly increased the grain yield by 10.22-15.09% compared with DR, while there was no significant difference in the grain yield between RW and DR in 2018-2019. All of the calculation results by three footprint approaches followed the order: RR < RW < DR; meanwhile, RR was always significantly lower than DR. Methane and NH<sub>3</sub> field emissions were the hotspots of CF and NF, respectively. Blue WF accounts for 40.90-42.71% of DR, which was significantly higher than that of RR and RW, primarily because DR needs a lot of irrigation water in both seasons. The gray WF of RW was higher than those of DR and RR, mainly due to the higher application rate of N fertilizer. In conclusion, RR possesses the characteristics of low agricultural inputs and high grain yield and can reduce CF, NF, and WF, considering the future conditions of rural societal developments and rapid demographic changes; we highlighted that the RR could be a cleaner and sustainable approach to grain production.

Ratoon Rice System: !increases! Grain Yield
Ratoon Rice System: !lowers! Carbon Footprint
Ratoon Rice System: !lowers! Nitrogen Footprint
Ratoon Rice System: !lowers! Water Footprint
Methane: !hotspot of! Carbon Footprint
NH<sub>3</sub>: !hotspot of! Nitrogen Footprint
Blue Water Footprint: !higher in! Double-Rice System
Gray Water Footprint: !higher in! Rice-Wheat System