Eukaryotic precursor mRNAs often harbor noncoding introns that must be removed prior to translation. Accurate splicing of precursor messenger RNA depends on placement and assembly of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) sub-complexes of the spliceosome. Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) studies established a role in splice-site selection for PRE-RNA PROCESSING8 (PRP8), a conserved spliceosome scaffolding protein of the U5 snRNP. However, analogous splice-site selection studies in multicellular eukaryotes are lacking. Such studies are crucial for a comprehensive understanding of alternative splicing, which is extensive in plants and animals but limited in yeast. In this work, we describe an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) prp8a mutant that modulates splice-site selection. We isolated prp8a-14 from a screen for suppressors of pex14-6, which carries a splice-site mutation in the PEROXIN14 (PEX14) peroxisome biogenesis gene. To elucidate Arabidopsis PRP8A function in spliceosome fidelity, we combined prp8a-14 with various pex14 splice-site mutations and monitored the double mutants for physiological and molecular consequences of dysfunctional and functional peroxisomes that correspond to impaired and recovered splicing, respectively. prp8a-14 restored splicing and PEX14 function to alleles with mutations in the exonic guanine of the 5'-splice site but did not restore splicing or function to alleles with mutations in the intronic guanine of 5'- or 3'-splice sites. We used RNA-seq to reveal the systemic impact of prp8a-14 and found hundreds of differentially spliced transcripts and thousands of transcripts with significantly altered levels. Among differentially spliced transcripts, prp8a-14 significantly altered 5'- and 3'-splice-site utilization to favor sites resulting in shorter introns. This study provides a genetic platform for probing splicing in plants and hints at a role for plant PRP8 in splice-site selection.

PRP8: !affects! Splice-site selection 
prp8a-14: !restores! Splicing and PEX14 function 
RNA-seq: !reveals! Systemic impact of prp8a-14 
prp8a-14: !alters! 5'- and 3'-splice-site utilization 
prp8a-14: !favors! Shorter introns