The adverse effects of climate change on crop production are constraining breeders to develop high-quality environmentally stable varieties. Hence, efforts are being made to identify key genes that could be targeted for enhancing crop tolerance to environmental stresses. ERF transcription factors play an important role in various abiotic stresses in plants. However, the roles of the ERF family in abiotic stresses tolerance are still largely unknown in sesame, the "queen" of oilseed crops. In total, 114 sesame ERF genes (SiERFs) were identified and characterized. 96.49% of the SiERFs were distributed unevenly on the 16 linkage groups of the sesame genome. The phylogenetic analysis with the Arabidopsis ERFs (AtERFs) subdivided SiERF subfamily proteins into 11 subgroups (Groups I to X; and VI-L). Genes in the same subgroup exhibited similar structure and conserved motifs. Evolutionary analysis showed that the expansion of ERF genes in sesame was mainly induced by whole-genome duplication events. Moreover, cis-acting elements analysis showed that SiERFs are mostly involved in environmental responses. Gene expression profiles analysis revealed that 59 and 26 SiERFs are highly stimulated under drought and waterlogging stress, respectively. In addition, qRT-PCR analyses indicated that most of SiERFs are also significantly up-regulated under osmotic, submerge, ABA, and ACC stresses. Among them, SiERF23 and SiERF54 were the most induced by both the abiotic stresses, suggesting their potential for targeted improvement of sesame response to multiple abiotic stresses. This study provides a comprehensive understanding of the structure, classification, evolution, and abiotic stresses response of ERF genes in sesame. Moreover, it offers valuable gene resources for functional characterization towards enhancing sesame tolerance to multiple abiotic stresses.

SiERF: !distributed on! 16 linkage groups
SiERF: !subdivided into! 11 subgroups
SiERF: !expanded by! whole-genome duplication events
SiERF: !involved in! environmental responses
SiERF: !highly stimulated under! drought & waterlogging stress
SiERF23 & SiERF54: !most induced by! abiotic stresses