Conventional breeding techniques for crop improvement have reached their full potential, and hence, alternative routes are required to ensure a sustained genetic gain in lentils. Although high-throughput omics technologies have been effectively employed in major crops, less-studied crops such as lentils have primarily relied on conventional breeding. Application of genomics and transcriptomics in lentils has resulted in linkage maps and identification of QTLs and candidate genes related to agronomically relevant traits and biotic and abiotic stress tolerance. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) complemented with high-throughput phenotyping (HTP) technologies is shown to provide new opportunities to identify genomic regions and marker-trait associations to increase lentil breeding efficiency. Recent introduction of image-based phenotyping has facilitated to discern lentil responses undergoing biotic and abiotic stresses. In lentil, proteomics has been performed using conventional methods such as 2-D gel electrophoresis, leading to the identification of seed-specific proteome. Metabolomic studies have led to identifying key metabolites that help differentiate genotypic responses to drought and salinity stresses. Independent analysis of differentially expressed genes from publicly available transcriptomic studies in lentils identified 329 common transcripts between heat and biotic stresses. Similarly, 19 metabolites were common across legumes, while 31 were common in genotypes exposed to drought and salinity stress. These common but differentially expressed genes/proteins/metabolites provide the starting point for developing high-yielding multi-stress-tolerant lentils. Finally, the review summarizes the current findings from omic studies in lentils and provides directions for integrating these findings into a systems approach to increase lentil productivity and enhance resilience to biotic and abiotic stresses under changing climate.

Conventional breeding: !reached full potential! lentils 
Omics technologies: !employed in! major crops 
Linkage maps: !identified! QTLs and candidate genes 
NGS: !complemented with! HTP technologies 
Image-based phenotyping: !facilitated! lentil responses 
2-D gel electrophoresis: !performed! seed-specific proteome 
Metabolomic studies: !led to! key metabolites 
Differentially expressed genes: !identified! 329 common transcripts 
Differentially expressed metabolites: !common across! legumes 
Common but differentially expressed genes/proteins/metabolites: !provide starting point for! developing high-yielding multi-stress-tolerant lentils