Rapeseed (<i>Brassica napus</i> L.) is an important oil crop species and plays a crucial role in supplying edible oil worldwide. However, rapeseed production in the field is often severely inhibited due to nitrogen (N) deficiency. Metabolites play key roles in plant growth and resistance to environmental stress, but little is known about the differential synthesis and accumulation of metabolites underlying rapeseed adaptation to N deficiency. Here, we studied the phenotypic response and used LC-electrospray ionization (ESI), ESI-MS/MS, and widely untargeted metabolomic approaches to detect differences in rapeseed under normal N (HN) and N-deficient (LN) conditions. The results showed that N deficiency severely inhibited rapeseed shoot growth and promoted rapeseed root architectural changes under LN conditions. In total, 574 metabolites were detected, and there were 175 and 166 differentially accumulated metabolites in the leaves and roots between the HN and LN conditions, respectively. The significantly differentially accumulated metabolites were involved in four primary metabolic pathways, namely, sucrose, phenylalanine, amino acid, and tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolism. Notably, we found that plant hormones have distinct accumulation patterns in rapeseed and coordinate to play crucial roles in both maintaining growth and protecting against damage from plant disease under HN and LN conditions. Moreover, our results indicated that flavonoid compounds, especially anthocyanins and rutin, may play important roles in increasing root cell resistance to oxidative damage and soil pathogen infections. Overall, this work provides valuable information for understanding the overall metabolite changes in rapeseed under N deficiency conditions, which may be beneficial for improving and producing new varieties of rapeseed capable of high yields under low N conditions.

N-deficiency: !inhibits! shoot growth
N-deficiency: !promotes! root architectural changes
Metabolites: !involved in! four primary metabolic pathways
Hormones: !coordinate to play crucial roles! in maintaining growth and protecting against damage
Flavonoid compounds: !play important roles! in increasing root cell resistance