The aged seeds have a significant influence on seed vigor and corn growth. Therefore, it is vital for the planting industry to identify aged seeds. In this study, hyperspectral reflectance imaging (1,000-2,000 nm) was employed for identifying aged maize seeds using seeds harvested in different years. The average spectra of the embryo side, endosperm side, and both sides were extracted. The support vector machine (SVM) algorithm was used to develop classification models based on full spectra to evaluate the potential of hyperspectral imaging for maize seed detection and using the principal component analysis (PCA) and ANOVA to reduce data dimensionality and extract feature wavelengths. The classification models achieved perfect performance using full spectra with an accuracy of 100% for the prediction set. The performance of models established with the first three principal components was similar to full spectrum models, but that of PCA loading models was worse. Compared to other spectra, the two-band ratio (1,987 nm/1,079 nm) selected by ANOVA from embryo-side spectra achieved a better classification accuracy of 95% for the prediction set. The image texture features, including histogram statistics (HS) and gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM), were extracted from the two-band ratio image to establish fusion models. The results demonstrated that the two-band ratio selected from embryo-side spectra combined with image texture features achieved the classification of maize seeds harvested in different years with an accuracy of 97.5% for the prediction set. The overall results indicated that combining the two wavelengths with image texture features could detect aged maize seeds effectively. The proposed method was conducive to the development of multi-spectral detection equipment.

Hyperspectral reflectance imaging: !identifies! aged maize seeds 
Support vector machine algorithm: !develops! classification models 
Principal component analysis: !reduces! data dimensionality 
ANOVA: !extracts! feature wavelengths 
Two-band ratio: !achieves! better classification accuracy 
Image texture features: !establish! fusion models