Plant viruses are devastating plant pathogens that severely affect crop yield and quality. Plants have developed multiple lines of defense systems to combat viral infection. Gene silencing/RNA interference is the key defense system in plants that inhibits the virulence and multiplication of pathogens. The general mechanism of RNAi involves (i) the transcription and cleavage of dsRNA into small RNA molecules, such as microRNA (miRNA), or small interfering RNA (siRNA), (ii) the loading of siRNA/miRNA into an RNA Induced Silencing Complex (RISC), (iii) complementary base pairing between siRNA/miRNA with a targeted gene, and (iv) the cleavage or repression of a target gene with an Argonaute (AGO) protein. This natural RNAi pathway could introduce transgenes targeting various viral genes to induce gene silencing. Different RNAi pathways are reported for the artificial silencing of viral genes. These include Host-Induced Gene Silencing (HIGS), Virus-Induced Gene Silencing (VIGS), and Spray-Induced Gene Silencing (SIGS). There are significant limitations in HIGS and VIGS technology, such as lengthy and time-consuming processes, off-target effects, and public concerns regarding genetically modified (GM) transgenic plants. Here, we provide in-depth knowledge regarding SIGS, which efficiently provides RNAi resistance development against targeted genes without the need for GM transgenic plants. We give an overview of the defense system of plants against viral infection, including a detailed mechanism of RNAi, small RNA molecules and their types, and various kinds of RNAi pathways. This review will describe how RNA interference provides the antiviral defense, recent improvements, and their limitations.

dsRNA: !cleaves into! miRNA/siRNA 
miRNA/siRNA: !loads into! RISC 
miRNA/siRNA: !complementarily pairs with! targeted gene 
AGO protein: !cleaves or represses! target gene 
HIGS/VIGS: !limited by! lengthy processes/off-target effects/public concerns 
SIGS: !provides resistance to! targeted genes