QTL mapping studies identified three reliable QTLs of rhizome enlargement in lotus. NnBEL6 located within the confidence interval of the major QTL cqREI-LG2 is a key candidate gene enhancing rhizome enlargement. Lotus (Nelumbo) is perennial aquatic plant with nutritional, pharmacological, and ornamental significance. Rhizome is an underground lotus stem that acts as a storage organ and as a reproductive tissue for asexual production. The enlargement of lotus rhizome is an important adaptive strategy for surviving the cold winter. The aims of this study were to identify quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for rhizome enlargement traits including rhizome enlargement index (REI) and number of enlarged rhizome (NER), and to uncover their associated candidate genes. A high-density genetic linkage map was constructed, consisting of 2935 markers binned from 236,840 SNPs. A total of 14 significant QTLs were detected for REI and NER, which explained 6.7-22.3% of trait variance. Three QTL regions were repeatedly identified in at least 2 years, and a major QTL, designated cqREI-LG2, with a rhizome-enlargement effect and about 20% of the phenotypic contribution was identified across the 3 climatic years. A candidate NnBEL6 gene located within the confidence interval of cqREI-LG2 was considered to be putatively involved in lotus rhizome enlargement. The expression of NnBEL6 was exclusively induced by rhizome swelling. Sequence comparison of NnBEL6 among lotus cultivars revealed a functional Indel site in its promoter that likely initiates the rhizome enlargement process. Transgenic potato assay was used to confirm the role of NnBEL6 in inducing tuberization. The successful identification QTLs and functional validation of NnBEL6 gene reported in this study will enrich our knowledge on the genetic basis of rhizome enlargement in lotus.

QTL mapping: !identifies! QTLs
QTLs: !explain! trait variance
cqREI-LG2: !contributes to! rhizome enlargement
NnBEL6: !localizes to! cqREI-LG2
NnBEL6: !enhances! rhizome enlargement
Indel site: !initiates! rhizome enlargement process
Transgenic potato assay: !confirms! role of NnBEL6