Cross-pollination can improve the percentage of fruit set and fruit weight for most red flesh varieties in pitaya. The technology of pollen storage was very important for successful cross-pollination. However, till present, the technology of pollen storage is unsatisfactory in pitaya production. In this study, pitaya pollen stored at low temperature was taken as the research object, and its physicochemical indexes, metabolomics, and transcriptomics were studied. The results showed that <i>in vitro</i> pollen germination rate decreased significantly with the increase in storage time. Soluble sugar and soluble protein content of pollen peaked on the first day of storage, whereas its relative conductivity, and manlondialdehyde (MDA) and proline contents increased gradually during storage. At the same time, the antioxidant enzyme system of pollen was also affected. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity decreased, while the activities of catalase (CAT) and peroxidase (POD) increased and superoxide anion generation rate increased gradually during storage. According to the metabolomics results, amino acid, peptide, nucleotide, plant hormone, terpene, alcohol, phenol, flavonoid, sterol, vitamin, ester, sphingolipid, and ketone contents increased significantly during storage, whereas flavonoid and pigment contents declined gradually. During pollen storage, the gene expressions related to carbohydrate metabolism, protein metabolism, acid and lipid metabolism, sterol metabolism, plant hormone metabolism, and signal transductions were significantly downregulated. With KEGG pathway analysis, isoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis, tyrosine metabolism, alanine, aspartate, and glutamate metabolism of pollen were affected significantly during low-temperature storage. Correlation analysis showed that the gene expression patterns of <i>HuRP2, HuUPL1</i>, and <i>HuAAT2</i> had significant effects on pollen germination. D-arabinose 5-phosphate and myricetin were positively correlated with pollen germination rate, which was valuable for studying preservation agents. In this study, the changes in pollen during low-temperature storage were described from the level of metabolites and genes, which could provide theoretical support for the research and development of pollen long-term storage technology in pitaya.

Pollen: !decreases! Germination Rate
Pollen: !increases! MDA & Proline Content
Pollen: !decreases! SOD Activity
Pollen: !increases! CAT & POD Activity
Pollen: !increases! Amino Acid, Peptide, Nucleotide, Plant Hormone, Terpene, Alcohol, Phenol, Flavonoid, Sterol, Vitamin, Ester, Sphingolipid, & Ketone Content
Pollen: !decreases! Flavonoid & Pigment Content
Pollen: !downregulates! Carbohydrate Metabolism, Protein Metabolism, Acid & Lipid Metabolism, Sterol Metabolism, Plant Hormone Metabolism, & Signal Transductions
HuRP2: !affects! Pollen Germination
HuUPL1: !affects! Pollen Germination
HuAAT2: !affects! Pollen Germination
D-arabinose 5-phosphate: !correlates with! Pollen Germination Rate
Myricetin: !correlates with! Pollen Germination Rate