Pre-mRNA splicing is an important step in the posttranscriptional processing of transcripts and a key regulator of development. The heterotrimeric retention and splicing (RES) complex plays vital roles in the growth and development of yeast, zebrafish, and humans by mediating pre-mRNA splicing of multiple genes. However, whether the RES complex is conserved in plants and what specific functions it has remain unknown. In this study, we identified Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) BUD13 (AtBUD13), GROWTH, DEVELOPMENT AND SPLICING 1 (GDS1), and DAWDLE (DDL) as the counterparts of the yeast RES complex subunits Bud site selection protein 13 (Bud13), U2 snRNP component Snu17 (Snu17), and Pre-mRNA leakage protein 1, respectively. Moreover, we showed that RES is an ancient complex evolutionarily conserved in eukaryotes. GDS1 directly interacts with both AtBUD13 and DDL in nuclear speckles. The BUD13 domain of AtBUD13 and the RNA recognition motif domain of GDS1 are necessary and sufficient for AtBUD13-GDS1 interaction. Mutants of AtBUD13, GDS1, and DDL failed to properly splice multiple genes involved in cell proliferation and showed defects in early embryogenesis and root development. In addition, we found that GDS1 and DDL interact, respectively, with the U2 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins auxiliary factor AtU2AF65B and the NineTeen Complex-related splicing factor SKIP, which are essential for early steps of spliceosome assembly and recognition of splice sites. Altogether, our work reveals that the Arabidopsis RES complex is important for root and early embryo development by modulating pre-mRNA splicing.

AtBUD13: !interacts with! GDS1
GDS1: !interacts with! AtBUD13
AtBUD13: !interacts with! DDL
GDS1: !interacts with! DDL
DDL: !interacts with! GDS1
AtU2AF65B: !interacts with! GDS1
SKIP: !interacts with! DDL
AtBUD13: !affects! pre-mRNA splicing
GDS1: !affects! pre-mRNA splicing
DDL: !affects! pre-mRNA splicing
AtBUD13: !affects! cell proliferation
GDS1: !affects! cell proliferation
DDL: !affects! cell proliferation
AtBUD13: !affects! root development
GDS1: !affects! root development
DDL: !affects! root development
AtBUD13: !affects! early embryogenesis
GDS1: !affects! early embryogenesis
DDL: !affects! early embryogenesis