Phylogenomic data increase the possibilities of resolving the evolutionary and systematic relationships among taxa. This is especially valuable in groups with few and homoplasious morphological characters, in which systematic and taxonomical delimitations have been traditionally difficult. Such is the case of several lineages within Bryophyta, like Orthotrichaceae, the second most diverse family of mosses. Members of tribe Orthotricheae are common in temperate and cold regions, as well as in high tropical mountains. In extratropical areas, they represent one of the main components of epiphytic communities, both in dry and oceanic or hyperoceanic conditions. The epiphytic environment is considered a hostile one for plant development, mainly due to its low capacity of moisture retention. Thus, the diversification of the Orthotrichaceae in this environment could be seen as striking. Over the last two decades, great taxonomic and systematic progresses have led to a rearrangement at the generic level in this tribe, providing a new framework to link environment to patterns of diversification. Here, we use nuclear loci targeted with the GoFlag 408 enrichment probe set to generate a well-sampled phylogeny with well-supported suprageneric taxa and increasing the phylogenetic resolution within the two recognized subtribes. Specifically, we show that several genera with <i>Ulota</i>-like morphology jointly constitute an independent lineage. Within this lineage, the recently described <i>Atlantichella</i> from Macaronesia and Western Europe appears as the sister group of <i>Ulota bellii</i> from Zealandia. This latter species is here segregated in the new genus <i>Rehubryum</i>. Assessment of the ecological and biogeographical affinities of the species within the phylogenetic framework suggests that niche adaptation (including climate and substrate) may be a key evolutionary driver that shaped the high diversification of Orthotricheae.

Phylogenomic data: !increase possibilities of! resolving evolutionary relationships
Orthotrichaceae: !common in! temperate and cold regions
Epiphytic environment: !considered hostile for! plant development
GoFlag 408 enrichment probe set: !used to generate! well-sampled phylogeny
Ulota-like morphology: !constitute independent lineage of! Orthotricheae
Atlantichella: !sister group of! Ulota bellii
Niche adaptation: !key evolutionary driver that! shaped diversification