Cold stress is one of the main abiotic stresses limiting cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) growth and production. C-repeat binding factor/Dehydration responsive element-binding 1 protein (CBF/DREB1), containing conserved APETALA2 (AP2) DNA binding domains and two characteristic sequences, are key signaling genes that can be rapidly induced and play vital roles in plant response to low temperature. However, the CBF family has not been systematically elucidated in cucumber, and the expression pattern of this family genes under cold stress remains unclear. In this study, three CsCBF family genes were identified in cucumber genome and their protein conserved domain, protein physicochemical properties, gene structure and phylogenetic analysis were further comprehensively analyzed. Subcellular localization showed that all three CsCBFs were localized in the nucleus. Cis-element analysis of the promoters indicated that CsCBFs might be involved in plant hormone response and abiotic stress response. Expression analysis showed that the three CsCBFs could be significantly induced by cold stress, salt and ABA. The overexpression of CsCBFs in cucumber seedlings enhanced the tolerance to cold stress, and importantly, the transcript levels of CsCOR genes were significantly upregulated in 35S:CsCBFs transgenic plants after cold stress treatment. Biochemical analyses ascertained that CsCBFs directly activated CsCOR genes expression by binding to its promoter, thereby enhancing plant resistance to cold stress. This study provided a foundation for further research on the function of CsCBF genes in cold stress resistance and elucidating its mechanism.

CBF/DREB1: !plays vital role in! plant response to low temperature
CsCBF family: !identified in! cucumber genome
CsCBFs: !localized in! nucleus
CsCBFs: !involved in! plant hormone response and abiotic stress response
CsCBFs: !induced by! cold stress, salt and ABA
35S:CsCBFs transgenic plants: !showed enhanced tolerance to! cold stress
CsCBFs: !activated CsCOR genes expression by! binding to its promoter