Chemical fertilisers are extensively used for crop production, which may cause soil deterioration and water pollution. Endophytic bacteria with plant-growth-promoting (PGP) activities may provide a solution to sustainably improve crop yields, including in-demand staples such as wheat. However, the diversity of the PGP endophytic bacteria in wheat across plant organs and growth stages has not been thoroughly characterised. Here, we report the isolation of endophytic bacteria from root, stem, leaf and seed of three winter wheat varieties at tillering, jointing, heading and seed-filling growth stages that were identified via 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis. Strains were screened for indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) production, potassium and phosphate solubilisation and the ability to grow on a nitrogen-free medium. Strain's capacity to stimulate various plant growth parameters, such as dry root weight, dry above-ground parts weight and plant height, was evaluated in pot trials. A total of 127 strains were randomly selected from 610 isolated endophytic bacterial cultures, representing ten genera and 22 taxa. Some taxa were organ-specific; others were growth-stage-specific. Bacillus aryabhattai, B. stratosphericus, Leclercia adecarboxylata and Pseudomonas oryzihabitans were detected as wheat endophytes for the first time. The IAA production, inorganic phosphorous solubilisation, organic phosphorus solubilisation, potassium solubilisation and growth on N-free medium were detected in 45%, 29%, 37%, 2.4% and 37.8% of the 127 strains, respectively. In pot trials, each strain showed variable effects on inoculated wheat plants regarding the evaluated growth parameters. Wheat endophytic bacteria showed organ- and growth-stage diversity, which may reflect their adaptations to different plant tissues and seasonal variations, and differed in their PGP abilities. Bacillus was the most predominant bacterial taxa isolated from winter wheat plants. Our study confirmed wheat root as the best reservoir for screening endophytic bacteria with potential as biofertilisers.

root: !harbors! endophytic bacteria 
endophytic bacteria: !isolated from! root, stem, leaf and seed 
endophytic bacteria: !identified via! 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis 
endophytic bacteria: !screened for! IAA production, potassium and phosphate solubilisation 
endophytic bacteria: !stimulate! plant growth parameters 
Bacillus: !predominant bacterial taxa! isolated from winter wheat plants