['35665549', 'For starch metabolism to take place correctly, various enzymes and proteins  acting on the starch granule surface are crucial. Recently, two non-catalytic  starch-binding proteins, pivotal for normal starch turnover in Arabidopsis  leaves, namely, EARLY STARVATION 1 (ESV1) and its homolog LIKE EARLY STARVATION 1  (LESV), have been identified. Both share nearly 38% sequence homology. As ESV1  has been found to influence glucan phosphorylation via two starch-related  dikinases, alpha-glucan, water dikinase (GWD) and phosphoglucan, water dikinase  (PWD), through modulating the surface glucan structures of the starch granules  and thus affecting starch degradation, we assess the impact of its homolog LESV  on starch metabolism. Thus, the 65-kDa recombinant protein LESV and the 50-kDa  ESV1 were analyzed regarding their influence on the action of GWD and PWD on the  surface of the starch granules. We included starches from various sources and  additionally assessed the effect of these non-enzymatic proteins on other  starch-related enzymes, such as starch synthases (SSI and SSIII), starch  phosphorylases (PHS1), isoamylase and beta-amylase. The data obtained indicate that  starch phosphorylation, hydrolyses and synthesis were affected by LESV and ESV1.  Furthermore, incubation with LESV and ESV1 together exerted an additive effect on  starch phosphorylation. In addition, a stable alteration of the glucan structures  at the starch granule surface following treatment with LESV and ESV1 was  observed. Here, we discuss all the observed changes that point to modifications  in the glucan structures at the surface of the native starch granules and present  a model to explain the existing processes.', '2022 Aug', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.15855', 'ORCID:']

ESV1: !influences! glucan phosphorylation 
LESV: !influences! starch metabolism 
ESV1: !modulates! surface glucan structures 
LESV: !affects! GWD and PWD 
ESV1/LESV: !affects! SSI, SSIII, PHS1, isoamylase, beta-amylase 
ESV1/LESV: !exerts! additive effect on starch phosphorylation 
ESV1/LESV: !alters! glucan structures at starch granule surface