Purple tea plant cultivars, enrich with flavonoids and anthocyanins, are valuable materials for manufacturing tea with unique color and flavor. Researchers found that 'Zijuan' leaves changed from purple to green mainly caused by the decreased flavonoids and anthocyanins concentrations. The mechanism of flavonoids and anthocyanin biosynthesis has been studied in many purple tea plant cultivars and the key genes which regulated the biosynthesis of flavonoid and anthocyanins in different purple tea plant cultivars were quite different. Also, the molecular regulation mechanism underlying the flavonoids and anthocyanins biosynthesis during leaves development and color changes is less-thoroughly understood. In this study, an integrative analysis of transcriptome and metabolome was performed on the purple leaves and green leaves of 'Zijuan' tea plant to reveal the regulatory networks correlated to flavonoid biosynthesis and to identify key regulatory genes. Our results indicated that the 'Zijuan' new shoots leaves were purple might be due to the copigmentation of quercetin and kaempferol derivatives. In 'Zijuan' tea plant cultivar, flavonoids metabolites concentrations in purple leaves and green leaves were significantly influenced by the genes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis, transcriptional regulation, transport, and hormone response. Transcription factors including NAC008, MYB23, and bHLH96 and transporters such as ABC transporter I might be responsible for the flavonoid and anthocyanins accumulation in purple leaves. This study provides a new insight into the metabolism and molecular mechanisms underlying flavonoid and anthocyanin biosynthesis in tea plant.

NAC008: !regulates! Flavonoid biosynthesis
MYB23: !regulates! Flavonoid biosynthesis
bHLH96: !regulates! Flavonoid biosynthesis
ABC transporter I: !transports! Flavonoids
Quercetin: !copigments with! Kaempferol derivatives
Flavonoids: !influenced by! Genes involved in biosynthesis, transcriptional regulation, transport, and hormone response