The paper and pulp industry (PPI) is one of the largest industries that contribute to the growing economy of the world. While wood remains the primary raw material of the PPIs, the demand for paper has also grown alongside the expanding global population, leading to deforestation and ecological imbalance. Wood-based paper production is associated with enormous utilization of water resources and the release of different wastes and untreated sludge that degrades the quality of the environment and makes it unsafe for living creatures. In line with this, the indigenous handmade paper making from the bark of <i>Daphne papyracea</i>, Wall. ex G. Don by the Monpa tribe of Arunachal Pradesh, India is considered as a potential alternative to non-wood fiber. This study discusses the species distribution modeling of <i>D. papyracea</i>, community-based production of the paper, and glycome profiling of the paper by plant cell wall glycan-directed monoclonal antibodies. The algorithms used for ecological and geographical modeling indicated the maximum predictive distribution of the plant toward the western parts of Arunachal Pradesh. It was also found that the suitable distribution of <i>D. papyracea</i> was largely affected by the precipitation and temperature variables. Plant cell walls are primarily made up of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, pectin, and glycoproteins. Non-cellulosic cell wall glycans contribute significantly to various physical properties such as density, crystallinity, and tensile strength of plant cell walls. Therefore, a detailed analysis of non-cellulosic cell wall glycan through glycome profiling and glycosyl residue composition analysis is important for the polymeric composition and commercial processing of <i>D. papyracea</i> paper. ELISA-based glycome profiling results demonstrated that major classes of cell wall glycans such as xylan, arabinogalactans, and rhamnogalacturonan-I were present on <i>D. papyracea</i> paper. The presence of these polymers in the Himalayan Buddhist handmade paper of Arunachal Pradesh is correlated with its high tensile strength. The results of this study imply that non-cellulosic cell wall glycans are required for the production of high-quality paper. To summarize, immediate action is required to strengthen the centuries-old practice of handmade paper, which can be achieved through education, workshops, technical know-how, and effective marketing aid to entrepreneurs.

Temperature: !affects! Distribution of D. papyracea
Precipitation: !affects! Distribution of D. papyracea
Cellulose: !composes! Plant Cell Walls
Hemicellulose: !composes! Plant Cell Walls
Lignin: !composes! Plant Cell Walls
Pectin: !composes! Plant Cell Walls
Glycoproteins: !composes! Plant Cell Walls
Xylan: !composes! Non-cellulosic Cell Wall Glycans
Arabinogalactans: !composes! Non-cellulosic Cell Wall Glycans
Rhamnogalacturonan-I: !composes! Non-cellulosic Cell Wall Glycans
Non-cellulosic Cell Wall Glycans: !contribute to! Physical Properties of Plant Cell Walls
Non-cellulosic Cell Wall Glycans: !required for! Production of High-Quality Paper