Temperature is a significant parameter in agriculture since it controls seed germination and plant growth. Global warming has resulted in an irregular rise in temperature posing a serious threat to the agricultural production around the world. A slight increase in temperature acts as stress and exert an overall negative impact on different developmental stages including plant phenology, development, cellular activities, gene expression, anatomical features, the functional and structural orientation of leaves, twigs, roots, and shoots. These impacts ultimately decrease the biomass, affect reproductive process, decrease flowering and fruiting and significant yield losses. Plants have inherent mechanisms to cope with different stressors including heat which may vary depending upon the type of plant species, duration and degree of the heat stress. Plants initially adapt avoidance and then tolerance strategies to combat heat stress. The tolerance pathway involves ion transporter, osmoprotectants, antioxidants, heat shock protein which help the plants to survive under heat stress. To develop heat-tolerant plants using above-mentioned strategies requires a lot of time, expertise, and resources. On contrary, plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPRs) is a cost-effective, time-saving, and user-friendly approach to support and enhance agricultural production under a range of environmental conditions including stresses. PGPR produce and regulate various phytohormones, enzymes, and metabolites that help plant to maintain growth under heat stress. They form biofilm, decrease abscisic acid, stimulate root development, enhance heat shock proteins, deamination of ACC enzyme, and nutrient availability especially nitrogen and phosphorous. Despite extensive work done on plant heat stress tolerance in general, very few comprehensive reviews are available on the subject especially the role of microbes for plant heat tolerance. This article reviews the current studies on the retaliation, adaptation, and tolerance to heat stress at the cellular, organellar, and whole plant levels, explains different approaches, and sheds light on how microbes can help to induce heat stress tolerance in plants.

Temperature: !affects! Plant Phenology
Heat Stress: !induces! Plant Adaptation
Heat Shock Protein: !enhances! Heat Tolerance
PGPR: !produces! Phytohormones
Biofilm: !decreases! Abscisic Acid
Deamination of ACC Enzyme: !stimulates! Root Development
Microbes: !help to induce! Heat Stress Tolerance