The V-myb myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (MYB) family of proteins is large, containing functionally diverse transcription factors. However, MYBs in Morus are still poorly annotated and a comprehensive functional analysis of these transcription factors is lacking. In the present study, a genome-wide identification of MYBs in Morus alba was performed. In total 166 MaMYBs were identified, including 103 R2R3-MYBs and four 3R-MaMYBs. Comprehensive analyses, including the phylogenetic analysis with putative functional annotation, motif and structure analysis, gene structure organization, promoter analysis, chromosomal localization, and syntenic relationships of R2R3-MaMYBs and 3R-MaMYBs, provided primary characterization for these MaMYBs. R2R3-MaMYBs covered the subgroups reported for R2R3-MYBs in Arabidopsis and Populus, and had two Morus-specific subgroups, indicating the high retention of MYBs in Morus. Motif analysis revealed high conservative residues at the start and end of each helix and residues consisting of the third helix in R2 and R3 repeats. Thirteen intron/exon patterns (a-m) were summarized, and the intron/exon pattern of two introns with phase numbers of 0 and 2 was the prevalent pattern for R2R3-MaMYBs. Various cis-elements in promoter regions were identified, and were mainly related to light response, development, phytohormone response, and abiotic and biotic stress response and secondary metabolite production. Expression patterns of R2R3-MaMYBs in different organs showed that MaMYBs involved in secondary cell wall components and stress responsiveness were preferentially expressed in roots or stems. R2R3-MaMYBs involved in flavonoid biosynthesis and anthocyanin accumulation were identified and characterized based on functional annotation and correlation of their expression levels with anthocyanin contents. Based on a comprehensive analysis, this work provided functional annotation for R2R3-MYBs and an informative reference for further functional dissection of MYBs in Morus.

MaMYBs: !identified in! Morus alba 
R2R3-MaMYBs: !covered! subgroups reported for R2R3-MYBs in Arabidopsis and Populus 
Motif analysis: !revealed! conservative residues 
Intron/exon patterns: !summarized! 13 patterns 
Promoter regions: !contained! cis-elements related to light response, development, phytohormone response, abiotic and biotic stress response and secondary metabolite production 
Expression patterns: !showed! MaMYBs involved in secondary cell wall components and stress responsiveness preferentially expressed in roots or stems 
Functional annotation: !provided! for R2R3-MYBs