The circadian clock is conserved at both the level of transcriptional networks as well as core genes in plants, ensuring that biological processes are phased to the correct time of day. In the model plant Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), the core circadian SHAQKYF-type-MYB (sMYB) genes CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1) and REVEILLE (RVE4) show genetic linkage with PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 9 (PRR9) and PRR7, respectively. Leveraging chromosome-resolved plant genomes and syntenic ortholog analysis enabled tracing this genetic linkage back to Amborella trichopoda, a sister lineage to the angiosperm, and identifying an additional evolutionarily conserved genetic linkage in light signaling genes. The LHY/CCA1-PRR5/9, RVE4/8-PRR3/7, and PIF3-PHYA genetic linkages emerged in the bryophyte lineage and progressively moved within several genes of each other across an array of angiosperm families representing distinct whole-genome duplication and fractionation events. Soybean (Glycine max) maintained all but two genetic linkages, and expression analysis revealed the PIF3-PHYA linkage overlapping with the E4 maturity group locus was the only pair to robustly cycle with an evening phase, in contrast to the sMYB-PRR morning and midday phase. While most monocots maintain the genetic linkages, they have been lost in the economically important grasses (Poaceae), such as maize (Zea mays), where the genes have been fractionated to separate chromosomes and presence/absence variation results in the segregation of PRR7 paralogs across heterotic groups. The environmental robustness model is put forward, suggesting that evolutionarily conserved genetic linkages ensure superior microhabitat pollinator synchrony, while wide-hybrids or unlinking the genes, as seen in the grasses, result in heterosis, adaptation, and colonization of new ecological niches.

CCA1: !genetically linked to! PRR9
RVE4: !genetically linked to! PRR7
LHY/CCA1-PRR5/9: !evolved in! bryophyte lineage
RVE4/8-PRR3/7: !evolved in! bryophyte lineage
PIF3: !genetically linked to! PHYA
PIF3-PHYA: !overlaps with! E4 maturity group locus
PRR7: !fractionated in! Poaceae