Heterosis is an important biological phenomenon in which the hybrids exceed the parents in many traits. However, the molecular mechanism underlying seedling heterosis remains unclear. In the present study, we analyzed the leaf transcriptomes of strong hybrids (AM, HM) and weak hybrids (CM, HW) and their parents (A, C, H, M, and W) at two periods. Phenotypically, hybrids had obvious biomass heterosis at the seedling stage, with statistically significant differences between the strong and weak hybrids. The transcriptomic analysis demonstrated that the number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between parents was the highest. Further analysis showed that most DEGs were biased toward parental expression. The biological processes of the two periods were significantly enriched in the plant hormone signal transduction and photosynthetic pathways. In the plant hormone signaling pathway, DEG expression was high in hybrids, with expression differences between strong and weak hybrids. In addition, DEGs related to cell size were identified. Similar changes were observed during photosynthesis. The enhanced leaf area of hybrids generated an increase in photosynthetic products, which was consistent with the phenotype of the biomass. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis of different hybrids and parents revealed that hub genes in vigorous hybrid were mainly enriched in the plant hormone signal transduction and regulation of plant hormones. Plant hormone signaling and photosynthesis pathways, as well as differential expression of plant cell size-related genes, jointly regulate the dynamic changes between strong and weak hybrids and the generation of seedling-stage heterosis. This study may elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying early biomass heterosis and help enhance canola yield.

Heterosis: !exceeds! Parents
DEGs: !biased toward! Parental expression
Plant hormone signal transduction: !enriched in! Hybrids
Photosynthetic pathways: !enriched in! Hybrids
Cell size-related genes: !differentially expressed in! Hybrids
Hub genes: !enriched in! Vigorous hybrids