Potyviruses comprise the largest and most important group of plant positive-strand RNA viruses. The potyviral cell-to-cell movement protein P3N-PIPO is expressed via transcriptional slippage at a conserved GAAAAAA sequence, leading to insertion of an extra 'A' in a proportion of viral transcripts. Transcriptional slippage is determined by the potyviral replicase, the conserved slippery site, and its flanking nucleotides. Here, we investigate the dynamics of transcriptional slippage at different slip-site sequences, infection stages, and environmental conditions. We detect a modest increase in the level of transcripts with insertion towards later timepoints. In addition, we investigate the fate of transcripts with insertion by separately looking at different RNA subpopulations: (+)RNA, (-)RNA, translated RNA, and virion RNA. We find differences in insertional slippage between (+)RNA and (-)RNA but not other subpopulations. Our results suggest that there can be selection against the use of (-)RNAs with insertions as templates for transcription or replication and demonstrate that insertional slippage can occur at high frequency also during (-)RNA synthesis. Since transcripts with insertions are potential targets for degradation, we investigate the connection to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). We find that these transcripts are targeted to NMD, but we only observe an impact on the level of transcripts with insertion when the insertional slippage rate is high. Together, these results further our understanding of the mechanism and elucidate the dynamics of potyviral transcriptional slippage. [Formula: see text] Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY 4.0 International license.

P3N-PIPO: !expressed via! transcriptional slippage
transcriptional slippage: !determined by! potyviral replicase
potyviral replicase: !influenced by! conserved slippery site
insertional slippage: !increases towards! later timepoints
(+)RNA: !differs from! (-)RNA
transcripts with insertion: !targeted to! NMD
NMD: !impacts! transcripts with insertion