Plants being sessile organisms are exposed to various biotic and abiotic factors, thus causing stress. The Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacterium is an opportunistic pathogen for animals, insects, and plants. Direct exposure of Arabidopsis thaliana to the P. aeruginosa PAO1 strain induces plant death by producing a wide variety of virulence factors, which are regulated mainly by quorum sensing systems. Besides virulence factors, P. aeruginosa PAO1 also produces cyclodipeptides (CDPs), which possess auxin-like activity and promote plant growth through activation of the target of the rapamycin (AtTOR) pathway. On the other hand, plant defense mechanisms are regulated through the production of phytohormones, such as salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA), which are induced in response to pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), activating defense genes associated with SA and JA such as PATHOGENESIS-RELATED-1 (PR-1) and LIPOXYGENASE2 (LOX2), respectively. PR proteins are suggested to play critical roles in coordinating the Systemic Acquired Resistance (SAR). In contrast, LOX proteins (LOX2, LOX3, and LOX4) have been associated with the production of JA by producing its precursors, oxylipins. The activation of defense mechanisms involves signaling cascades such as Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases (MAPKs) or the TOR pathway as a switch for re-directing energy towards defense or growth. In this work, we challenged A. thaliana (wild type, mpk6 or mpk3 mutants, and overexpressing TOR) seedlings with P. aeruginosa PAO1 strains to identify the role of bacterial CDPs in the plant immune response. Results showed that the pre-exposure of these Arabidopsis seedlings to CDPs significantly reduced plant infection of the pathogenic P. aeruginosa PAO1 strains, indicating that plants that over-express AtTOR or lack MPK3/MPK6 protein-kinases are more susceptible to the pathogenic effects. In addition, CDPs induced the GUS activity only in the LOX2::GUS plants, indicative of JA-signaling activation. Our findings indicate that the CDPs are molecules that trigger SA-independent and JA-dependent defense responses in A. thaliana; hence, bacterial CDPs may be considered elicitors of the Arabidopsis immune response to pathogens.

P. aeruginosa: !produces! cyclodipeptides 
cyclodipeptides: !activate! TOR pathway 
P. aeruginosa: !induces! plant death 
P. aeruginosa: !triggers! SA-independent and JA-dependent defense responses 
SA: !activates! PR-1 
JA: !activates! LOX2 
MAPKs: !regulate! defense mechanisms 
TOR: !redirects! energy towards defense or growth