Adapting to unfavorable environments is a necessary step in plant terrestrialization and radiation. The dehydration-responsive element-binding (DREB) protein subfamily plays a pivotal role in plant abiotic stress regulation. However, relationships between the origin and expansion of the DREB subfamily and adaptive evolution of land plants are still being elucidated. Here, we constructed the evolutionary history of the DREB subfamily by compiling APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element-binding protein superfamily genes from 169 representative species of green plants. Through extensive phylogenetic analyses and comparative genomic analysis, our results revealed that the DREB subfamily diverged from the ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) subfamily in the common ancestor of Zygnemophyceae and Embryophyta during the colonization of land by plants, followed by expansions to form three different ancient archetypal genes in Zygnemophyceae species, designated as groups archetype-I, archetype-II/III, and archetype-IV. Four large-scale expansions paralleling the evolution of land plants led to the nine-subgroup divergence of group archetype-II/III in angiosperms, and five whole-genome duplications during Brassicaceae and Poaceae radiation shaped the diversity of subgroup IIb-1. We identified a Poaceae-specific gene in subgroup IIb-1, ERF014, remaining in a Poaceae-specific microsynteny block and co-evolving with a small heat shock protein cluster. Expression analyses demonstrated that heat acclimation may have driven the neofunctionalization of ERF014s in Pooideae by engaging in the conserved heat-responsive module in Poaceae. This study provides insights into lineage-specific expansion and neofunctionalization in the DREB subfamily, together with evolutionary information valuable for future functional studies of plant stress biology.

DREB: !diverged from! ERF 
Zygnemophyceae/Embryophyta: !gave rise to! DREB 
archetype-I/II/III/IV: !expanded from! DREB 
angiosperms: !led to! nine-subgroup divergence 
Brassicaceae/Poaceae: !shaped! subgroup IIb-1 
ERF014: !localizes to! Poaceae 
ERF014: !co-evolves with! small heat shock protein cluster 
heat acclimation: !neofunctionalized! ERF014s