Histone methylation usually plays important roles in plant development through post-translational regulation and may provide a new visual field for heterosis. The histone methyltransferase gene family has been identified in various plants, but its members and functions in hybrid wheat related in heterosis is poorly studied. In this study, 175 histone methyltransferase (HMT) genes were identified in wheat, including 152 histone lysine methyltransferase (HKMT) genes and 23 protein arginine methyltransferase (PRMT) genes. Gene structure analysis, physicochemical properties and subcellular localization predictions of the proteins, exhibited the adequate complexity of this gene family. As an allohexaploid species, the number of the genes (seven HKMTs orthologous groups and four PRMTs orthologous groups) in wheat were about three times than those in diploids and showed certain degrees of conservation, while only a small number of subfamilies such as ASH-like and Su-(var) subfamilies have expanded their members. Transcriptome analysis showed that HMT genes were mainly expressed in the reproductive organs. Expression analysis showed that some TaHMT genes with different trends in various hybrid combinations may be regulated by lncRNAs with similar expression trends. Pearson correlation analysis of the expression of TaHMT genes and two yield traits indicated that four DEGs may participate in the yield heterosis of two-line hybrid wheat. ChIP-qPCR results showed that the histone modifications (H3K4me3, H3K36me3 and H3K9ac) enriched in promoter regions of three TaCCA1 genes which are homologous to Arabidopsis heterosis-related CCA1/LHY genes. The higher expression levels of TaCCA1 in F<sub>1</sub> than its parents are positive with these histone modifications. These results showed that histone modifications may play important roles in wheat heterosis. Our study identified characteristics of the histone methyltransferase gene family and enhances the understanding of the evolution and function of these members in allohexaploid wheat. The causes of heterosis of two-line hybrid wheat were partially explained from the perspective of histone modifications.

Histone methylation: !plays important roles in! plant development 
HKMT genes: !identified in! various plants 
HMT genes: !expressed in! reproductive organs 
TaHMT genes: !regulated by! lncRNAs 
TaHMT genes: !correlated with! yield traits 
TaCCA1 genes: !enriched with! histone modifications 
TaCCA1 genes: !higher expression in! F<sub>1</sub>