The simultaneous perception of endogenous and exogenous danger signals potentiates PAMP-triggered immunity in tomato and other downstream defence responses depending on the origin of the signal. Abstract Plant cells perceive a pathogen invasion by recognising endogenous or exogenous extracellular signals such as Damage-Associated Molecular Patterns (DAMPs) or Pathogen-Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs). In particular, DAMPs are intracellular molecules or cell wall fragments passive or actively released to the apoplast, whose extracellular recognition by intact cells triggers specific immune signalling, the so-called DAMP-triggered immunity. The extracellular recognition of DAMPs and PAMPs leads to a very similar intracellular signalling, and this similarity has generated a biological need to know why plants perceive molecules with such different origins and with overlapped innate immunity responses. Here, we report that the simultaneous perception of DAMPs and a PAMP strengthens early and late plant defence responses. To this aim, we studied classical PTI responses such as the generation of ROS and MAPK phosphorylation, but we also monitored the biosynthesis of phytocytokines and performed a non-targeted metabolomic analysis. We demonstrate that co-application of the bacterial peptide flagellin with the DAMPs cyclic AMP or cellobiose amplifies PAMP-triggered immunity responses. Both co-applications enhanced the synthesis of phytocytokines, but only simultaneous treatments with cAMP strengthened the flagellin-dependent metabolomic responses. In addition, cAMP and cellobiose treatments induced resistance against the hemibiotrophic bacteria Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000. Overall, these results indicate that the complex mixture of DAMPs and PAMPs carries specific information that potentiates plant defence responses. However, downstream responses seem more specific depending on the composition of the mixture.

DAMPs: !potentiate! PAMP-triggered immunity
DAMPs/PAMPs: !amplify! PTI responses
DAMPs/PAMPs: !enhance! synthesis of phytocytokines
DAMPs/PAMPs: !strengthen! metabolomic responses
DAMPs/PAMPs: !induce! resistance against bacteria