Even subtle modifications in growth conditions elicit acclimation responses affecting the molecular and elemental makeup of organisms, both in the laboratory and in natural habitats. We systematically explored the effect of temperature, pH, nutrient availability, culture density, and access to CO<sub>2</sub> and O<sub>2</sub> in laboratory-grown algal cultures on growth rate, the ionome, and the ability to accumulate Fe. We found algal cells accumulate Fe in alkaline conditions, even more so when excess Fe is present, coinciding with a reduced growth rate. Using a combination of Fe-specific dyes, X-ray fluorescence microscopy, and NanoSIMS, we show that the alkaline-accumulated Fe was intracellularly sequestered into acidocalcisomes, which are localized towards the periphery of the cells. At high photon flux densities, Zn and Ca specifically over-accumulate, while Zn alone accumulates at low temperatures. The impact of aeration was probed by reducing shaking speeds and changing vessel fill levels; the former increased the Cu quota of cultures, the latter resulted in a reduction in P, Ca, and Mn at low fill levels. Trace element quotas were also affected in the stationary phase, where specifically Fe, Cu, and Zn accumulate. Cu accumulation here depends inversely on the Fe concentration of the medium. Individual laboratory strains accumulate Ca, P, and Cu to different levels. All together, we identified a set of specific changes to growth rate, elemental composition, and the capacity to store Fe in response to subtle differences in culturing conditions of Chlamydomonas, affecting experimental reproducibility. Accordingly, we recommend that these variables be recorded and reported as associated metadata.

temperature: !affects! growth rate
pH: !affects! ionome
nutrient availability: !affects! ability to accumulate Fe
culture density: !affects! ability to accumulate Fe
CO<sub>2</sub>: !affects! ability to accumulate Fe
O<sub>2</sub>: !affects! ability to accumulate Fe
Fe-specific dyes: !localizes to! acidocalcisomes
X-ray fluorescence microscopy: !localizes to! acidocalcisomes
NanoSIMS: !localizes to! acidocalcisomes
high photon flux densities: !enhances! Zn and Ca accumulation
low temperatures: !enhances! Zn accumulation
reducing shaking speeds: !enhances! Cu quota
low fill levels: !represses! P, Ca, and Mn
stationary phase: !enhances! Fe, Cu, and Zn accumulation
Cu concentration: !inversely affects! Cu accumulation
laboratory strains: !accumulate! Ca, P, and Cu