Understanding the trait-environment relationships has been a core ecological research topic in the face of global climate change. However, the strength of trait-environment relationships at the local and regional scales in temperate forests remains poorly known. In this study, we investigated the local and regional scale forest plots of the natural broad-leaved temperate forest in northeastern China, to assess what extent community-level trait composition depends on environmental drivers across spatial scales. We measured five key functional traits (leaf area, specific leaf area, leaf carbon content, leaf nitrogen content, and wood density) of woody plant, and quantified functional compositions of communities by calculating the "specific" community-weighted mean (CWM) traits. The sum of squares decomposition method was used to quantify the relative contribution of intraspecific trait variation to total trait variation among communities. Multiple linear regression model was then used to explore the community-level trait-environment relationships. We found that (<i>i</i>) intraspecific trait variation contributed considerably to total trait variation and decreased with the spatial scale from local to regional; (<i>ii</i>) functional composition was mainly affected by soil and topography factors at the local scale and climate factor at the regional scale, while explaining that variance of environment factors were decreased with increasing spatial scale; and (<i>iii</i>) the main environment driver of functional composition was varied depending on the traits and spatial scale. This work is one of the few multi-scale analyses to investigate the environmental drivers of community functional compositions. The extent of intraspecific trait variation and the strength of trait-environment relationship showed consistent trends with increasing spatial scale. Our findings demonstrate the influence of environmental filtering on both local- and regional-scale temperate forest communities, and contribute to a comprehensive understanding of trait-environment relationships across spatial scales.

leaf area: !affected by! soil and topography 
specific leaf area: !affected by! soil and topography 
leaf carbon content: !affected by! soil and topography 
leaf nitrogen content: !affected by! soil and topography 
wood density: !affected by! soil and topography 
intraspecific trait variation: !decreases with! spatial scale 
functional composition: !affected by! environment factors 
environment driver: !varies depending on! traits and spatial scale