Studies have not fully explained the underlying mechanism of spermidine-mediated heat tolerance. This study investigated the possible role of spermidine (Spd) in regulating citrus heat tolerance. The results showed that exogenous Spd effectively alleviated the limitation of high temperature (HT) on photosynthesis. Exogenous Spd increased the chlorophyll content, net photosynthetic rate, intercellular carbon dioxide concentration, stomatal conductance, maximum and effective quantum yield of PSII photochemistry, nonphotochemical quenching coefficient, and electron transport rate in citrus seedlings under HT stress, but declined the stomatal limitation value. In addition, Spd treatment promoted the dynamic balance of the citrus enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants system. Spd application significantly increased the activity of superoxide dismutase, peroxidase, catalase, ascorbic acid, and glutathione and the expression level of corresponding genes at high temperature, while reducing the content of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and malondialdehyde. Therefore, our findings suggested exogenous Spd significantly ameliorated citrus physiological and photosynthetic adaptation under HT stress, thereby providing helpful guidance for citrus cultivation in HT events.

Spd: !alleviates! HT stress
Spd: !increases! chlorophyll content
Spd: !increases! net photosynthetic rate
Spd: !increases! intercellular carbon dioxide concentration
Spd: !increases! stomatal conductance
Spd: !increases! maximum and effective quantum yield of PSII photochemistry
Spd: !increases! nonphotochemical quenching coefficient
Spd: !increases! electron transport rate
Spd: !promotes! dynamic balance of citrus enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants system
Spd: !increases! activity of superoxide dismutase
Spd: !increases! activity of peroxidase
Spd: !increases! activity of catalase
Spd: !increases! activity of ascorbic acid
Spd: !increases! activity of glutathione
Spd: !increases! expression level of corresponding genes
Spd: !reduces! content of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>
Spd: !reduces! content of malondialdehyde