Sorbitol metabolism plays multiple roles in many plants, including energy and carbon enrichment, effective defence against various stresses and other emerging specific roles. The underlying mechanisms are, however, incompletely understood. This review provides the current state-of-the-art, highlights missing knowledge and poses several remaining questions. The basic properties of sugar alcohols are summarised and pathways of sorbitol metabolism, including biosynthesis, degradation and key enzymes are described. Sorbitol transport within the plant body is discussed and individual roles of sorbitol in different organs, specific cells or even cellular compartments, are elaborated, clarifying the critical importance of sorbitol allocation and distribution. In addition to plants that accumulate and transport significant quantities of sorbitol (usual producers), there are some that synthesize small amounts of sorbitol or only possess sorbitol metabolising enzymes (non-usual producers). Modern analytical methods have recently enabled large amounts of data to be acquired on this topic, although numerous uncertainties and questions remain. For a long time, it has been clear that enriching carbohydrate metabolism with a sorbitol branch improves plant fitness under stress. Nevertheless, this is probably valid only when appropriate growth and defence trade-offs are ensured. Information on the ectopic expression of sorbitol metabolism genes has contributed substantially to our understanding of the sorbitol roles and raises new questions regarding sorbitol signalling potential. We finally examine strategies in plants producing sorbitol compared with those producing mannitol. Providing an in-depth understanding of sugar alcohol metabolism is essential for the progress in plant physiology as well as in targeted, knowledge-based crop breeding.

Sorbitol metabolism: !plays multiple roles! in plants 
sorbitol: !transported within! plant body 
sorbitol: !allocation and distribution! critical 
sorbitol metabolism genes: !enables data acquisition! on topic 
sorbitol metabolism genes: !contributes to understanding! of sorbitol roles 
sorbitol metabolism: !improves plant fitness! under stress 
sorbitol metabolism: !essential for progress! in plant physiology