Heat shock proteins, ROS detoxifying enzymes, and ion homeostasis proteins, together with proteins in carbohydrate metabolism, cell structure, brassinosteroids, and carotenoid biosynthesis pathway were up-regulated in CSSLs under salinity stress. Rice is one of the most consumed staple foods worldwide. Salinity stress is a serious global problem affecting rice productivity. Many attempts have been made to select or produce salinity-tolerant rice varieties. Genetics and biochemical approaches were used to study the salinity-responsive pathway in rice to develop salinity tolerant strains. This study investigated the proteomic profiles of chromosome segment substitution lines (CSSLs) developed from KDML105 (Khao Dawk Mali 105, a Thai jasmine rice cultivar) under salinity stress. The CSSLs showed a clear resistant phenotype in response to 150 mM NaCl treatment compared to the salinity-sensitive line, IR29. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using the Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System coupled to a Hybrid Quadrupole Q-Tof Impact II™ equipped with a nano-captive spray ion source was applied for proteomic analysis. Based on our criteria, 178 proteins were identified as differentially expressed proteins under salinity stress. Protein functions in DNA replication and transcription, and stress and defense accounted for the highest proportions in response to salinity stress, followed by protein transport and trafficking, carbohydrate metabolic process, signal transduction, and cell structure. The protein interaction network among the 75 up-regulated proteins showed connections between proteins involved in cell wall synthesis, transcription, translation, and in defense responses.

Heat shock proteins: !up-regulated in! CSSLs 
ROS detoxifying enzymes: !up-regulated in! CSSLs 
Ion homeostasis proteins: !up-regulated in! CSSLs 
Proteins in carbohydrate metabolism: !up-regulated in! CSSLs 
Cell structure proteins: !up-regulated in! CSSLs 
Brassinosteroids: !up-regulated in! CSSLs 
Carotenoid biosynthesis pathway: !up-regulated in! CSSLs 
DNA replication: !involved in! Protein functions 
Transcription: !involved in! Protein functions 
Stress and defense: !accounted for! Highest proportions 
Protein transport and trafficking: !accounted for! Highest proportions 
Carbohydrate metabolic process: !accounted for! Highest proportions 
Signal transduction: !accounted for! Highest proportions 
Cell structure: !accounted for! Highest proportions 
Cell wall synthesis: !connected to! Proteins 
Transcription: !connected to! Proteins 
Translation: !connected to! Proteins 
Defense responses: !connected to! Proteins