Salt is one of the main factors limiting the use of mudflats. In this study, the yield, quality, and mineral content of rice seeds under salt stress were investigated. A pot experiment was conducted with Yangyugeng2, Xudao9, and Huageng5 under 0, 17.1, 25.6, and 34.2 mM NaCl of salt concentration treatments. The results showed that salt stress can significantly decrease panicle number, grain number per panicle, 1000-grain weight and yield of rice, and the panicle number was among other things the main cause of yield loss under saline conditions. When the salt concentration is less than 34.2 mM NaCl, the salt stress increases the brown rice rate and milled rice rate, thus significant increasing head milled rice rate of salt-sensitive varieties but decreasing in salt-tolerant varieties. In addition, the grain length is more sensitive than grain width to salt stress. This study also indicates that different varieties of rice exhibit different salt tolerance under salt stress, the three rice varieties in this study, in order of salt tolerance, are Xudao9, Huageng5, and Yangyugeng2. Salt stress will increase the appearance, viscosity, degree of balance, and taste value, and decrease the hardness of rice when salt concentration is less than 17.1 mM NaCl in Yangyugeng2 and Huageng5 or 25.6 mM NaCl in Xudao9. The differences in starch pasting properties among rice varieties in this study are larger than those caused by salt stress. The uptake capacity of K, Mg, P, S, and Cu ions in the seeds of different rice varieties significantly vary, and salt stress causes significant differences in the uptake capacity of K, Na, and Cu ions in rice seeds. Rice varieties with high salt tolerance can be selected for the development and utilization of mudflats, and low concentration of salt stress will increase the rice quality, all of which are meaningful to agricultural production.

Salt: !limits! Use of Mudflats
Yield: !decreases with! Salt Stress
Panicle Number: !main cause of! Yield Loss
Varieties: !differ in! Salt Tolerance
Salt Stress: !increases! Brown Rice Rate
Grain Length: !more sensitive than! Grain Width
Starch Pasting Properties: !vary among! Varieties
Uptake Capacity: !varies with! Varieties & Salt Stress