The genomes of an elite rice restorer line KMR3 (salinity-sensitive) and its salinity-tolerant introgression line IL50-13, a popular variety of coastal West Bengal, India, were sequenced. High-quality paired-end reads were obtained for KMR3 (147.6 million) and IL50-13 (131.4 million) with a sequencing coverage of 30X-39X. Scaffolds generated from the pre-assembled contigs of each sequenced genome were mapped separately onto the reference genome of <i>Oryza sativa</i> ssp. <i>japonica</i> cultivar Nipponbare to identify genomic variants in terms of SNPs and InDels. The SNPs and InDels identified for KMR3 and IL50-13 were then compared with each other to identify polymorphic SNPs and InDels unique and common to both the genomes. Functional enrichment analysis of the protein-coding genes with unique InDels identified GO terms involved in protein modification, ubiquitination, deubiquitination, peroxidase activity, and antioxidant activity in IL50-13. Linoleic acid metabolism, circadian rhythm, and alpha-linolenic acid metabolism pathways were enriched in IL50-13. These GO terms and pathways are involved in reducing oxidative damage, thus suggesting their role in stress responses. Sequence analysis of QTL markers or genes known to be associated with grain yield and salinity tolerance showed polymorphism in 20 genes, out of which nine were not previously reported. These candidate genes encoded Nucleotide-binding adaptor shared by APAF-1, R proteins, and CED-4 (NB-ARC) domain-containing protein, cyclase, receptor-like kinase, topoisomerase II-associated protein PAT1 domain-containing protein, ion channel regulatory protein, UNC-93 domain-containing protein, subunit A of the heteromeric ATP-citrate lyase, and three conserved hypothetical genes. Polymorphism was observed in the coding, intron, and untranslated regions of the genes on chromosomes 1, 2, 4, 7, 11, and 12. Genes showing polymorphism between the two genomes were considered as sequence-based new candidates derived from <i>Oryza rufipogon</i> for conferring high yield and salinity tolerance in IL50-13 for further functional studies.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !localizes to! Chromosome
Gene: !interacts with! Protein
Gene: !enhances! Oxidative Damage Reduction
Gene: !represses! Linoleic Acid Metabolism
Gene: !synthesizes! Nucleotide-binding Adaptor