Sediment is crucial for the unique marine angiosperm seagrass growth and successful restoration. Sediment modification induced by eutrophication also exacerbates seagrass decline and reduces plantation and transplantation survival rates. However, we lack information regarding the influence of sediment on seagrass photosynthesis and the metabolics, especially regarding the key secondary metabolic flavone. Meanwhile, sulfation of flavonoids in seagrass may mitigate sulfide intrusion, but limited evidence is available. We cultured the seagrass Thalassia hemprichii under controlled laboratory conditions in three sediment types by combining different ratios of in-situ eutrophic sediment and coarse beach sand. We examined the effects of beach sand mixed with natural eutrophic sediments on seagrass using photobiology, metabolomics and isotope labelling approaches. Seagrasses grown in eutrophic sediments mixed with beach sand exhibited significantly higher photosynthetic activity, with a larger relative maximum electron transport rate and minimum saturating irradiance. Simultaneously, considerably greater belowground amino acid and flavonoid concentrations were observed to counteract anoxic stress in eutrophic sediments without mixed beach sand. This led to more positive belowground stable sulfur isotope ratios in eutrophic sediments with a lower Eh. These results indicated that coarse beach sand indirectly enhanced photosynthesis in T. hemprichii by reducing sulfide intrusion with lower amino acid and flavonoid concentrations. This could explain why T. hemprichii often grows better on coarse sand substrates. Therefore, it is imperative to consider adding beach sand to sediments to improve the environmental conditions for seagrass and restore seagrass in eutrophic ecosystems.

Sediment: !modifies! Seagrass
Eutrophication: !exacerbates! Seagrass decline
Beach sand: !enhances! Photosynthesis
Beach sand: !reduces! Sulfide intrusion
Amino acid: !counteracts! Anoxic stress
Flavonoid: !counteracts! Anoxic stress