Gene conversion has an important effect on duplicate genes produced by polyploidization. Poplar (Populus trichocarpa) and willow (Salix brachista) are leading models and excellent green plants in the Salicaceae. Although much attention has been paid to the evolution of duplicated genes in poplar and willow, the role of conversion between duplicates generated from polyploidization remains poorly understood. Here, through genomic synteny analyses, we identified duplicate genes generated by the Salicaceae common tetraploidization (SCT) in the poplar and willow genomes. We estimated that at least 0.58% and 0.25% of poplar and willow duplicates were affected by whole-gene conversion after the poplar-willow divergence, with more (5.73% and 2.66%) affected by partial-gene conversion. Moreover, we found that the converted duplicated genes were unevenly distributed on each chromosome in the two genomes, and the well-preserved homoeologous chromosome regions may facilitate the conversion of duplicates. Notably, we found that conversion maintained the similarity of duplicates, likely contributing to the conservation of certain sequences, but is essentially accelerated the rate of evolution and increased species divergence. In addition, we found that converted duplicates tended to have more similar expression patterns than nonconverted duplicates. We found that genes associated with multigene families were preferentially converted. We also found that the genes encoding conserved structural domains associated with specific traits exhibited a high frequency of conversion. Extensive conversion between duplicate genes generated from the SCT contributes to the diversification of the family Salicaceae and has had long-lasting effects on those genes with important biological functions.

Gene: !affects! Duplicate genes
Gene: !converts! Poplar and willow genomes
Gene: !maintains! Similarity of duplicates
Gene: !accelerates! Rate of evolution
Gene: !increases! Species divergence
Gene: !preferentially converts! Multigene families
Gene: !associated with! Conserved structural domains