Sugar content is an important indicator of fruit quality. Except for a few wild tomato species that accumulate sucrose in the fruits, most cultivated tomato species accumulate hexose. Although several studies have focused on wild sucrose-accumulating tomato, the sucrose accumulation mechanism is still unclear. Here, two homozygous inbred cherry tomato lines ('TB0023' and 'TB0278', which accumulated sucrose and hexose, respectively) were selected to analyze the sugar accumulation mechanism. Carbohydrate analysis, cytological observation, gene expression and enzyme activity analysis and proteomics methods were used in this study. The results indicated that glucose and fructose were absolutely dominant in the soluble sugar content of hexose-accumulating cherry tomato fruit, while sucrose and a certain proportion of hexose were the main forms of soluble sugar in sucrose-accumulating cherry tomato fruit. The phloem unloading pathway of the hexose-accumulating cherry tomato fruit switched from symplastic to apoplastic during fruit development, and the sucrose-accumulating cherry tomato probably had a mixed unloading pathway involving the symplastic and apoplastic. High activity of acid invertase (AI), sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS), sucrose synthase (SS) and sugar transporters LeSUT1, SlSWEET2a and SlSWEET12c were important factors for hexose accumulation in the hexose-accumulating cherry tomato fruit, while LeSUT2, SPS, SS, SlSWEET1b, SlSWEET5b, SlSWEET11b, SlSWEET7a, SlSWEET14 were responsible for solute sugar accumulation in the sucrose-accumulating cherry tomato. This study provides detailed evidence for elucidation of the tomato sugar accumulation mechanism from the perspective of cell structure, physiology and molecular biology, providing a theoretical basis for the improvement of tomato quality and aiding the utilization of tomato genetic resources.

LeSUT1: !enhances! hexose accumulation 
LeSUT2: !enhances! sucrose accumulation 
AI: !enhances! hexose accumulation 
SPS: !enhances! hexose and sucrose accumulation 
SS: !enhances! hexose and sucrose accumulation 
SlSWEET2a: !enhances! hexose accumulation 
SlSWEET12c: !enhances! hexose accumulation 
SlSWEET1b: !enhances! sucrose accumulation 
SlSWEET5b: !enhances! sucrose accumulation 
SlSWEET11b: !enhances! sucrose accumulation 
SlSWEET7a: !enhances! sucrose accumulation 
SlSWEET14: !enhances! sucrose accumulation