The timing of flowering is a crucial factor for successful grain production at a wide range of latitudes. Domestication of rice (Oryza sativa) included selection for natural alleles of flowering-time genes that allow rice plants to adapt to broad geographic areas. Here, we describe the role of natural alleles of CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1 (OsCCA1) in cultivated rice based on analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms deposited in the International Rice Genebank Collection Information System database. Rice varieties harboring japonica-type OsCCA1 alleles (OsCCA1a haplotype) flowered earlier than those harboring indica-type OsCCA1 alleles (OsCCA1d haplotype). In the japonica cultivar "Dongjin", a T-DNA insertion in OsCCA1a resulted in late flowering under long-day and short-day conditions, indicating that OsCCA1 is a floral inducer. Reverse transcription quantitative PCR analysis showed that the loss of OsCCA1a function induces the expression of the floral repressors PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 37 (OsPRR37) and Days to Heading 8 (DTH8), followed by repression of the Early heading date 1 (Ehd1)-Heading date 3a (Hd3a)-RICE FLOWERING LOCUS T 1 (RFT1) pathway. Binding affinity assays indicated that OsCCA1 binds to the promoter regions of OsPRR37 and DTH8. Naturally occurring OsCCA1 alleles are evolutionarily conserved in cultivated rice (O. sativa). Oryza rufipogon-I (Or-I) and Or-III type accessions, representing the ancestors of O. sativa indica and japonica, harbored indica- and japonica-type OsCCA1 alleles, respectively. Taken together, our results demonstrate that OsCCA1 is a likely domestication locus that has contributed to the geographic adaptation and expansion of cultivated rice.

OsCCA1: !affects! flowering time
OsCCA1: !induces! floral repressors
OsCCA1: !binds to! promoter regions
OsPRR37/DTH8: !repress! Ehd1-Hd3a-RFT1 pathway
japonica-type OsCCA1: !earlier flowering than! indica-type OsCCA1
O. sativa: !harbors! naturally occurring OsCCA1 alleles
Or-I/Or-III: !represent! ancestors of O. sativa indica/japonica