Plants growing in temperate and boreal regions of the world have to face strikingly different environmental conditions during summer and winter. Being sessile organisms, plants have had to develop various strategies to adapt to these changes in light, temperature, and water availability, thereby optimizing their 'economy of growth'. While annual plants can endure unfavorable winter conditions in the form of a seed, or under a protective cover of thick snow, perennial plants such as trees adapt by going into a stage of deep sleep called winter dormancy. To enter dormancy, vegetative growth is stopped in the late summer or early autumn and the shoots are converted into buds, where the shoot apical meristems are protected by tightly closed and hardened bud scales (Figures 1 and 2). At the same time, cold hardiness develops and the need for water and nutrient uptake is drastically reduced. Deciduous trees also go through leaf senescence whereby the leaves develop their autumn colors and are shed (Figure 1A). The trees then spend the beginning of the winter in a state of deep sleep in which they are completely unreceptive to any environmental signals telling them to wake up. However, as winter progresses, the trees are gradually released from this slumber and will eventually flush their buds in the spring. Vegetative growth then resumes with the formation of new leaves and shoots during summer until the trees again go into growth cessation and the cycle is closed (Figures 1 and 2). This cycle of growth and dormancy is central for the ability of trees to adapt to growth at different latitudes and elevations. The further north, or the higher the elevation at which the trees grow, the earlier in the season the trees enter growth cessation and the later they flush their buds in the spring. This is because meteorological winter arrives earlier in the season and lasts longer into the spring. The trees therefore have to stop growth earlier in the season to ensure that they have enough time to complete bud formation and to develop cold hardiness and dormancy. They also have to be sure that winter is really over before flushing their buds. Winter dormancy is therefore a clear case of a trade-off between the length of the growing season and the protection against winter damage - a nice example of 'economy in biology', the theme of this special issue. This primer will briefly summarize what we know about the environmental signals that influence the annual growth cycle in trees, as well as our current understanding of the genetic pathways and molecular mechanisms regulated by these signals.

environment: !influences! growth cycle
signals: !regulate! genetic pathways
signals: !activate! molecular mechanisms
growth: !stops! late summer/early autumn
dormancy: !develops! cold hardiness
senescence: !causes! leaf shedding
buds: !protect! shoot apical meristems
spring: !triggers! bud flushing