Field crops are generally planted in rows to improve planting efficiency and facilitate field management. Therefore, automatic detection of crop planting rows is of great significance for achieving autonomous navigation and precise spraying in intelligent agricultural machinery and is an important part of smart agricultural management. To study the visual navigation line extraction technology of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in farmland environments and realize real-time precise farmland UAV operations, we propose an improved ENet semantic segmentation network model to perform row segmentation of farmland images. Considering the lightweight and low complexity requirements of the network for crop row detection, the traditional network is compressed and replaced by convolution. Based on the residual network, we designed a network structure of the shunting process, in which low-dimensional boundary information in the feature extraction process is passed backward using the residual stream, allowing efficient extraction of low-dimensional information and significantly improving the accuracy of boundary locations and row-to-row segmentation of farmland crops. According to the characteristics of the segmented image, an improved random sampling consensus algorithm is proposed to extract the navigation line, define a new model-scoring index, find the best point set, and use the least-squares method to fit the navigation line. The experimental results showed that the proposed algorithm allows accurate and efficient extraction of farmland navigation lines, and it has the technical advantages of strong robustness and high applicability. The algorithm can provide technical support for the subsequent quasi-flight of agricultural UAVs in farmland operations.

ENet: !improves! Row segmentation
UAVs: !detect! Crop planting rows
Network: !compresses! Traditional network
Algorithm: !extracts! Navigation line
Random sampling consensus algorithm: !finds! Best point set
Least-squares method: !fits! Navigation line