Leaf osmotic adjustment by the active accrual of compatible organic solutes (e.g. sucrose) contributes to drought tolerance throughout the plant kingdom. In Populus tremula x alba, PtaSUT4 encodes a tonoplast sucrose-proton symporter, whose downregulation by chronic mild drought or transgenic manipulation is known to increase leaf sucrose and turgor. While this may constitute a single drought tolerance mechanism, we now report that other adjustments which can occur during a worsening water deficit are damped when PtaSUT4 is constitutively downregulated. Specifically, we report that starch use and leaf relative water content (RWC) dynamics were compromised when plants with constitutively downregulated PtaSUT4 were subjected to a water deficit. Leaf RWC decreased more in wild-type and vector control lines than in transgenic PtaSUT4-RNAi (RNA-interference) or CRISPR (clustered regularly interspersed short palindromic repeats) knockout (KO) lines. The control line RWC decrease was accompanied by increased PtaSUT4 transcript levels and a mobilization of sucrose from the mesophyll-enriched leaf lamina into the midvein. The findings suggest that changes in SUT4 expression can increase turgor or decrease RWC as different tolerance mechanisms to reduced water availability. Evidence is presented that PtaSUT4-mediated sucrose partitioning between the vacuole and the cytosol is important not only for overall sucrose abundance and turgor, but also for reactive oxygen species (ROS) and antioxidant dynamics. Interestingly, the reduced capacity for accelerated starch breakdown under worsening water-deficit conditions was correlated with reduced ROS in the RNAi and KO lines. A role for PtaSUT4 in the orchestration of ROS, antioxidant, starch utilization and RWC dynamics during water stress and its importance in trees especially, with their high hydraulic resistances, is considered.

PtaSUT4: !downregulates! Leaf osmotic adjustment
PtaSUT4: !increases! Turgor
PtaSUT4: !decreases! RWC
PtaSUT4: !mobilizes! Sucrose
PtaSUT4: !reduces! Starch breakdown
PtaSUT4: !correlates with! Reduced ROS