The traditional Chinese large-flowered chrysanthemum is one of the cultivar groups of chrysanthemum (<i>Chrysanthemum</i> × <i>morifolium</i> Ramat.) with great morphological variation based on many cultivars. Some experts have established several large-flowered chrysanthemum classification systems by using the method of comparative morphology. However, for many cultivars, accurate recognition and classification are still a problem. Combined with the comparative morphological traits of selected samples, we proposed a multi-information model based on deep learning to recognize and classify large-flowered chrysanthemum. In this study, we collected the images of 213 large-flowered chrysanthemum cultivars in two consecutive years, 2018 and 2019. Based on the 2018 dataset, we constructed a multi-information classification model using non-pre-trained ResNet18 as the backbone network. The model achieves 70.62% top-5 test accuracy for the 2019 dataset. We explored the ability of image features to represent the characteristics of large-flowered chrysanthemum. The affinity propagation (AP) clustering shows that the features are sufficient to discriminate flower colors. The principal component analysis (PCA) shows the petal type has a better interpretation than the flower type. The training sample processing, model training scheme, and learning rate adjustment method affected the convergence and generalization of the model. The non-pre-trained model overcomes the problem of focusing on texture by ignoring colors with the ImageNet pre-trained model. These results lay a foundation for the automated recognition and classification of large-flowered chrysanthemum cultivars based on image classification.

model: !achieves! 70.62% top-5 test accuracy
affinity propagation: !shows! features sufficient to discriminate flower colors
principal component analysis: !shows! petal type better interpretation than flower type
training sample processing: !affects! convergence and generalization of model
non-pre-trained model: !overcomes! problem of focusing on texture