Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase is one of the most widely studied enzymes in the plant kingdom. It is a crucial pathway from primary metabolism to significant secondary phenylpropanoid metabolism in plants, and plays an essential role in plant growth, development, and stress defense. Although PAL has been studied in many actual plants, only one report has been reported on potato, one of the five primary staple foods in the world. In this study, 14 StPAL genes were identified in potato for the first time using a genome-wide bioinformatics analysis, and the expression patterns of these genes were further investigated using qRT-PCR. The results showed that the expressions of StPAL1, StPAL6, StPAL8, StPAL12, and StPAL13 were significantly up-regulated under drought and high temperature stress, indicating that they may be involved in the stress defense of potato against high temperature and drought. The expressions of StPAL1, StPAL2, and StPAL6 were significantly up-regulated after MeJa hormone treatment, indicating that these genes are involved in potato chemical defense mechanisms. These three stresses significantly inhibited the expression of StPAL7, StPAL10, and StPAL11, again proving that PAL is a multifunctional gene family, which may give plants resistance to multiple and different stresses. In the future, people may improve critical agronomic traits of crops by introducing other PAL genes. This study aims to deepen the understanding of the versatility of the PAL gene family and provide a valuable reference for further genetic improvement of the potato.

StPAL1: !up-regulated under! drought and high temperature stress
StPAL6: !up-regulated under! drought and high temperature stress
StPAL8: !up-regulated under! drought and high temperature stress
StPAL12: !up-regulated under! drought and high temperature stress
StPAL13: !up-regulated under! drought and high temperature stress
StPAL1: !up-regulated after! MeJa hormone treatment
StPAL2: !up-regulated after! MeJa hormone treatment
StPAL6: !up-regulated after! MeJa hormone treatment
StPAL7: !inhibited by! three stresses
StPAL10: !inhibited by! three stresses
StPAL11: !inhibited by! three stresses