Development of Pantana phyllostachysae, a moso bamboo pest, is affected by its diet. Understanding the mechanism underlying the different insect-resistant capacities of on- and off-year moso bamboo fed by P. phyllostachysae is crucial for managing pest outbreaks. As microbes were proven to influence plant immunity, we compared gut microbial communities of P. phyllostachysae with different diets by metabarcoding sequencing. By using sterilization assay, microbes were removed from leaf surfaces, and thus we confirmed that microbes inhabiting moso bamboo leaves impact the weight of P. phyllostachysae larva. Furthermore, the gut microbial communities of P. phyllostachysae fed on on- and off-year bamboo leaves were compared, to identify the functional microbial communities that impact the interaction between bamboo leaves and P. phyllostachysae. We found that species from orders Lactobacillales and Rickettsiales are most effective within functional microbiota. Functional prediction revealed that gut microbes of larva fed on on-year leaves were related to naphthalene degradation, while those fed on off-year leaves were related to biosynthesis of ansamycins, polyketide sugar unit biosynthesis, metabolism of xenobiotics, and tetracycline biosynthesis. Most functional microbes are beneficial to the development of larva that feed on on-year bamboo leaves, but damage the balance of intestinal microenvironment and immune systems of those larva that feed on off-year leaves. This work developed an efficient strategy for microbiome research of Lepidopteran insects and provided insights into microbiota related to the interaction between host plants and P. phyllostachysae. We provided microbial candidates for the ecological control of P. phyllostachysae according to the function of effective microbiota.

Diet: !affects! Development of P. phyllostachysae
Microbes: !inhabit! Moso bamboo leaves
Microbes: !impact! Weight of P. phyllostachysae larva
On-year leaves: !harbor! Functional microbiota related to naphthalene degradation
Off-year leaves: !harbor! Functional microbiota related to biosynthesis of ansamycins, polyketide sugar unit biosynthesis, metabolism of xenobiotics, and tetracycline biosynthesis
Functional microbes: !benefit! Larva fed on on-year leaves
Functional microbes: !damage! Larva fed on off-year leaves