Identification of infection process and defense response during M. oryzae infecting Acuce. Magnaporthe oryzae is a destructive rice pathogen. Recent studies have focused on the initial infectious stage, with a few studies conducted to elucidate the characteristics of the late infectious stages. This study aims to decipher the characteristics at different stages (biotrophic, biotrophy-necrotrophy switch (BNS), and necrotrophic) between the interaction of two M. oryzae-rice combinations and investigate the resistance mechanisms of rice to M. oryzae using cytological and molecular methods. The biotrophic phase of M. oryzae-LTH compatible interaction was found to be longer than that of M. oryzae-Acuce incompatible interaction. We also found that jasmonic acid (JA) signaling plays an important role in defense by regulating antimicrobial compound accumulation in infected Acuce via a synergistic interaction of JA-salicylic acid (SA) and JA-ethylene (ET). In infected LTH, JA-ET/JA-SA showed antagonistic interaction. Ibuprofen (IBU) is a JA inhibitor. Despite the above findings, we found that exogenous JA-Ile and IBU significantly alleviated blast symptoms in infected LTH at 36 hpi (biotrophic) and 72 hpi (BNS), indicating these two-time points may be critical for managing blast disease in the compatible interaction. Conversely, IBU significantly increased blast symptoms on the infected Acuce at 36 hpi, confirming that the JA signal plays a central role in the defense response in infected Acuce. According to transcriptional analysis, the number of genes enriched in the plant hormone signal pathway was significantly higher than in other pathways. Our findings suggested that JA-mediated defense mechanism is essential in regulating Acuce resistance, particularly during the biotrophic and BNS phases.

M. oryzae: !infects! Rice
JA-SA/JA-ET: !interacts synergistically/antagonistically! LTH/Acuce
IBU: !inhibits! JA
JA-Ile/IBU: !alleviates/increases! Blast symptoms in LTH/Acuce
Plant hormone signal pathway: !enriched in! Genes