Ring rot caused by <i>Botryosphaeria dothidea</i> and anthracnose caused by <i>Colletotrichum gloeosporioides</i> are two important apple fruit diseases. It is critical to conduct timely and accurate distinction and diagnosis of the two diseases for apple disease management and apple quality control. The automatic distinction between the two diseases was investigated based on image processing technology in this study. The acquired disease images were preprocessed via image scaling, color image contrast stretching, and morphological opening and closing reconstruction. Then, two lesion segmentation methods based on circle fitting were proposed and used to conduct lesion segmentation. After comparison with the manual segmentation results obtained via the software Adobe Photoshop CC, Lesion segmentation method 1 was chosen for further disease image processing. The gray images on the nine components in the RGB, HSI, and L*a*b* color spaces of the segmented lesion images were filtered by using multi-scale block local binary pattern operators with the sizes of pixel blocks of 1 × 1, 2 × 2, and 3 × 3, respectively, and the corresponding local binary pattern (LBP) histogram vectors were calculated as the features of the lesion images. Subsequently, support vector machine (SVM) models and random forest models were built based on individual LBP histogram features or different LBP histogram feature combinations for distinguishing the diseases. The optimal SVM model with the distinction accuracies of the training and testing sets equal to 100 and 95.12% and the optimal random forest model with the distinction accuracies of the training and testing sets equal to 100 and 90.24% were achieved. The results indicated that the distinction between the two diseases could be implemented with high accuracy by using the proposed method. In this study, a method based on image processing technology was provided for the distinction of ring rot and anthracnose on apple fruits.

Image processing: !distinguishes! Ring rot 
Image processing: !distinguishes! Anthracnose 
Multi-scale block local binary pattern operators: !filters! Gray images 
Local binary pattern (LBP) histogram vectors: !calculates! Features of lesion images 
Support vector machine (SVM) models: !built based on! LBP histogram features 
Random forest models: !built based on! LBP histogram feature combinations