The abundance and structural composition of nitrogen (N) transformation-related microbial communities under certain environmental conditions provide sufficient information about N cycle under different soil conditions. This study aims to explore the major challenge of low N use efficiency (NUE) and N dynamics in aerobic rice systems and reveal the agronomic-adjustive measures to increase NUE through insights into the ecophysiology of ammonia oxidizers. Water-saving practices, like alternate wetting and drying (AWD), dry direct seeded rice (DDSR), wet direct seeding, and saturated soil culture (SSC), have been evaluated in lowland rice; however, only few studies have been conducted on N dynamics in aerobic rice systems. Biological ammonia oxidation is majorly conducted by two types of microorganisms, ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) and ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB). This review focuses on how diversified are ammonia oxidizers (AOA and AOB), whose factors affect their activities and abundance under different soil conditions. It summarizes findings on pathways of N cycle, rationalize recent research on ammonia oxidizers in N-cycle, and thereby suggests adjustive agronomic measures to reduce N losses. This review also suggests that variations in soil properties significantly impact the structural composition and abundance of ammonia oxidizers. Nitrification inhibitors (NIs) especially nitrapyrin, reduce the nitrification rate and inhibit the abundance of bacterial <i>amoA</i> without impacting archaeal <i>amoA</i>. In contrast, some NIs confine the hydrolysis of synthetic N and, therefore, keep low NH<sub>4</sub> <sup>+</sup>-N concentrations that exhibit no or very slight impact on ammonia oxidizers. Variations in soil properties are more influential in the community structure and abundance of ammonia oxidizers than application of synthetic N fertilizers and NIs. Biological nitrification inhibitors (BNIs) are natural bioactive compounds released from roots of certain plant species, such as sorghum, and could be commercialized to suppress the capacity of nitrifying soil microbes. Mixed application of synthetic and organic N fertilizers enhances NUE and plant N-uptake by reducing ammonia N losses. High salt concentration promotes community abundance while limiting the diversity of AOB and vice versa for AOA, whereas AOA have lower rate for potential nitrification than AOB, and denitrification accounts for higher N<sub>2</sub> production. Archaeal abundance, diversity, and structural composition change along an elevation gradient and mainly depend on various soil factors, such as soil saturation, availability of NH<sub>4</sub> <sup>+</sup>, and organic matter contents. Microbial abundance and structural analyses revealed that the structural composition of AOA was not highly responsive to changes in soil conditions or N amendment. Further studies are suggested to cultivate AOA and AOB in controlled-environment experiments to understand the mechanisms of AOA and AOB under different conditions. Together, this evaluation will better facilitate the projections and interpretations of ammonia oxidizer community structural composition with provision of a strong basis to establish robust testable hypotheses on the competitiveness between AOB and AOA. Moreover, after this evaluation, managing soils agronomically for potential utilization of metabolic functions of ammonia oxidizers would be easier.

AOA: !influenced by! soil properties 
AOB: !influenced by! soil properties 
NIs: !inhibit! bacterial amoA 
BNIs: !released from! roots of certain plant species 
synthetic N fertilizers: !mixed with! organic N fertilizers 
high salt concentration: !promotes! community abundance 
AOA: !lower rate for! potential nitrification 
denitrification: !accounts for! higher N2 production 
AOA: !change along! elevation gradient 
AOA: !not highly responsive to! changes in soil conditions 
AOB: !cultivated in! controlled-environment experiments