['35763091', 'Based on the phenotypic, physiological and transcriptomic analysis, receptor-like  kinase HAESA-like 1 was demonstrated to positively affect seed longevity in  Arabidopsis. Seed longevity is very important for both genetic resource  conservation and crop production. Receptor-like kinases (RLKs) are widely  involved in plant growth, development and stress responses. However, the role of  most RLKs, especially in seed longevity, is largely unknown. In this study, we  report that Arabidopsis HAESA-like 1 (AtHSL1) positively regulated seed  longevity. Disruption of HSL1 significantly decreased the germination rate to 50%  at 7 days after cold stratification (DAC), compared with that of the wild type  (93.5% at 7 DAC), after accelerated aging treatment. Expression of the HSL1 gene  in hsl1 basically restored the defective phenotype (86.3%), while  HSL1-overexpressing lines (98.3%) displayed slower accelerated aging than WT  (93.5%). GUS staining revealed HSL1 was highly expressed universally, especially  in young seedlings, mature seeds and embryos of imbibed seeds, and its expression  could be induced by accelerated aging. No difference in the dyeing color and area  of mucilage were identified between WT and hsl1. The soluble pectin content also  was not different, while the adherent pectin content was significantly increased  in hsl1. Global transcriptomics revealed that disruption of HSL1 mainly  downregulated genes involved in trehalose synthesis, nucleotide sugar metabolism  and protection and repair mechanisms. Therefore, an increase in adherent pectin  content and downregulation of genes involved in trehalose synthesis may be the  main reasons for decreasing seed longevity owing to disruption of HSL1 in  Arabidopsis. Our work provides valuable information for understanding the  function and mechanism of a receptor-like kinase, AtHSL1, in seed longevity.', '2022 Jun 28', 'Planta', '10.1007/s00425-022-03942-y', 'ORCID:']

HSL1: !affects! Seed longevity 
HSL1: !localizes to! Young seedlings, mature seeds and embryos of imbibed seeds 
HSL1: !enhances! Germination rate 
HSL1: !increases! Adherent pectin content 
HSL1: !downregulates! Genes involved in trehalose synthesis