The tradeoff between negative and positive interactions of facilitated species and facilitators may depend on the degree of resource availability in agroecosystems. However, the rhizospheric mechanisms driving trade-offs that occur along phosphorus (P) and water availability gradients have not yet been systematically clarified. We established three types of root isolation conditions (no barrier, nylon barrier and solid barrier) at different P and water addition levels to address the above issue in a maize-grass pea intercropping system. The total yield and biomass net effect (NE) and the relative interaction index (RII) were significantly higher than 0 under all environmental conditions, demonstrating that plant-plant interactions generated positive effects in the intercropping system. The maize yield and biomass RII were 0.029-0.095 and 0.018-0.066, respectively, which indicated that maize growth was constantly facilitated. However, the RII for grass pea yield and biomass exhibited a different trend in comparison with maize. It was higher than 0 (as the facilitated species) under low soil P and moisture conditions and transitioned to values lower than 0 (facilitator species) under high P and moisture conditions, which showed that the type and intensity of plant-plant interactions steadily shifted with the applied stressors. Direct interactions decreased the maize rhizospheric soil pH by 1.5% and 1.9% under Low-P conditions. Notably, the rhizospheric soil acid and alkaline phosphatase secretions of maize and grass pea increased by 17.4-27.4% and 15.3-27.7%, respectively, in P-deficient soils. These results show that plant-plant interactions can effectively relieve P stress by mineralizing organophosphorus in P-deficient soils. Furthermore, the above tendency became more pronounced under drought-stressed conditions. The nylon barrier partially restricted the exchange and utilization of available nutrients and decreased the total yield and biomass by 1.8-7.8% and 1.1-7.8%, respectively. The presence of a solid barrier completely restricted interspecific rhizospheric interactions and decreased the total yield and biomass by 2.1-13.8% and 1.6-15.7%, respectively. Phytate and KH<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> addition intensified asymmetric interspecific competition, and grass pea was consistently subjected to competitive pressures. Briefly, the tradeoff between facilitation and competition was driven by rhizospheric interactions, and the transition in the intensity and type of interaction was highly dependent on resource availability in a biologically diverse system.

Maize: !facilitates! Grass Pea
Grass Pea: !facilitates! Maize
Maize: !decreases! Rhizospheric Soil pH
Maize: !increases! Acid Phosphatase Secretion
Grass Pea: !increases! Alkaline Phosphatase Secretion
Nylon Barrier: !restricts! Exchange of Nutrients
Solid Barrier: !restricts! Interspecific Rhizospheric Interactions
Phytate/KH<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub>: !intensifies! Asymmetric Competition