Our industrial-scale crop monocultures, which are necessary to provide grain for large-scale food and feed production, are highly vulnerable to biotic and abiotic stresses. Crop wild relatives have adapted to harsh environmental conditions over millennia; thus, they are an important source of genetic variation and crop diversification. Despite several examples where significant yield increases have been achieved through the introgression of genomic regions from wild relatives, more detailed understanding of the differences between wild and cultivated species for favorable and unfavorable traits is still required to harness these valuable resources. Recently, as an alternative to the introgression of beneficial alleles from the wild into domesticated species, a radical suggestion is to domesticate wild relatives to generate new crops. A first and critical step for the domestication of cereal wild relatives would be to prevent grain disarticulation from the inflorescence at maturity. Discovering the molecular mechanisms and understanding the network of interactions behind grain retention/disarticulation would enable the implementation of approaches to select for this character in targeted species. Brittle rachis 1 and Brittle rachis 2 are major genes responsible for grain disarticulation in the wild progenitors of wheat and barley that were the target of mutations during domestication. These two genes are only found in the Triticeae tribe and are hypothesized to have evolved by a duplication followed by neo-functionalization. Current knowledge gaps include the molecular mechanisms controlling grain retention in cereals and the genomic consequences of strong selection for this essential character.

Brittle rachis 1: !controls! grain disarticulation 
Brittle rachis 2: !controls! grain disarticulation 
grain disarticulation: !prevented by! Brittle rachis 1 
grain disarticulation: !prevented by! Brittle rachis 2 
wild relatives: !source of! genetic variation 
domesticated species: !target of! introgression 
molecular mechanisms: !understood to! control grain retention 
strong selection: !leads to! genomic consequences