Candidate resistance genes encoding malectin-like and LRR domains mapped to halo blight resistance loci throughout the common bean genome are co-expressed to fight a range of Pph races. Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is an important crop both as a source of protein and other nutrients for human nutrition and as a nitrogen fixer that benefits sustainable agriculture. This crop is affected by halo blight disease, caused by the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae pv. phaseolicola (Pph), which can lead to 45% yield losses. Common bean resistance to Pph is conferred by six loci (Pse-1 to Pse-6) and minor-effect quantitative trait loci (QTLs); however, information is lacking on the molecular mechanisms implicated in this resistance. Here, we describe an in-depth RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of the tolerant G2333 bean line in response to the Pph strain NPS3121. We identified 275 upregulated and 357 downregulated common bean genes in response to Pph infection. These differentially expressed genes were mapped to all 11 chromosomes of P. vulgaris. The upregulated genes were primarily components of plant immune responses and negative regulation of photosynthesis, with enrichment for leucine-rich repeat (LRRs) and/or malectin-like carbohydrate-binding domains. Interestingly, LRRs and malectin genes mapped to the same location as previously identified Pph resistance loci or QTLs. For instance, the major loci Pse-6/HB4.2 involved in broad-resistance to many Pph races co-located with induced LRR-encoding genes on Pv04. These findings indicate a coordinated modulation of genes involved in pathogen perception and signal transduction. In addition, the results further support these LRR/malectin loci as resistance genes in response to halo blight. Thus, these genes are potential targets for future genetic manipulation, enabling the introduction of resistance to Pph into elite cultivars of common bean.

Candidate resistance genes: !map to! halo blight resistance loci.
LRRs and malectin genes: !co-locate with! Pph resistance loci/QTLs.
LRRs and malectin domains: !enrich! plant immune responses.
LRRs and malectin genes: !indicate! coordinated modulation of pathogen perception.
LRRs and malectin loci: !potential targets for! genetic manipulation.