This study focused on enhancing resilience of soybean crops to drought and salinity stresses by overexpression of GmFAD3A gene, which plays an important role in modulating membrane fluidity and ultimately influence plants response to various abiotic stresses. Fatty acid desaturases (FADs) are a class of enzymes that mediate desaturation of fatty acids by introducing double bonds. They play an important role in modulating membrane fluidity in response to various abiotic stresses. However, a comprehensive analysis of GmFAD3 in drought and salinity stress tolerance in soybean is lacking. We used bean pod mottle virus (BPMV)-based vector for achieving rapid and efficient overexpression as well as silencing of Omega-3 Fatty Acid Desaturase gene from Glycine max (GmFAD3) to assess the functional role of GmFAD3 in abiotic stress responses in soybean. Higher levels of recombinant BPMV-GmFAD3A transcripts were detected in overexpressing soybean plants. Overexpression of GmFAD3A in soybean resulted in increased levels of jasmonic acid and higher expression of GmWRKY54 as compared to mock-inoculated, vector-infected and FAD3-silenced soybean plants under drought and salinity stress conditions. The GmFAD3A-overexpressing plants showed higher levels of chlorophyll content, efficient photosystem-II, relative water content, transpiration rate, stomatal conductance, proline content and also cooler canopy under drought and salinity stress conditions as compared to mock-inoculated, vector-infected and FAD3-silenced soybean plants. Results from the current study revealed that GmFAD3A-overexpressing soybean plants exhibited tolerance to drought and salinity stresses. However, soybean plants silenced for GmFAD3 were vulnerable to drought and salinity stresses.

GmFAD3A: !enhances! drought and salinity stress tolerance
GmFAD3A: !modulates! membrane fluidity
GmWRKY54: !enhanced by! GmFAD3A overexpression
jasmonic acid: !increased by! GmFAD3A overexpression
chlorophyll content: !increased by! GmFAD3A overexpression
photosystem-II: !enhanced by! GmFAD3A overexpression
relative water content: !increased by! GmFAD3A overexpression
transpiration rate: !increased by! GmFAD3A overexpression
stomatal conductance: !increased by! GmFAD3A overexpression
proline content: !increased by! GmFAD3A overexpression
canopy temperature: !lowered by! GmFAD3A overexpression
GmFAD3A: !repressed by! silencing