Sugarcane yellow leaf disease severely affects sugarcane production. As a viral disease, the pathogen sugarcane yellow leaf virus can only be transmitted by aphid vectors rather than mechanical means. To understand the sugarcane responses to ScYLV infection, the corresponding transcriptomic profile of ScYLV-infected and ScYLV-free plants were analyzed with RNA-Seq technology. In this study, <i>Melanaphis sacchari</i> was used as the vector to transmit ScYLV to the susceptible sugarcane cultivar CP72-1210 and transcriptome was sequenced as well as differentially expressed genes between disease-infected and non-infected sugarcane plants were investigated. A total of 1,22,593 genes were assembled, of which 1,630 genes were differentially expressed. Among DEGs, 1,622 were upregulated and eight were downregulated that were further annotated with GO, KEGG, KOG, PFAM, SwissProt, and Nr databases. The expression levels of DEGs in the three KEGG pathways, namely endocytosis, PEX protein synthesis, and endoplasmic reticulum stress response to viral protein synthesis were observed. Interestingly, it was found that the yellow leaf virus could induce the formation of autophagosomes by LC3, promoted by ER stress, and may be related to the replication of viral RNA. We tested 63 DEGs in this research. The qRT-PCR results showed that two were downregulated and 45 were upregulated in response to the ScYLV infection. This study will not only offer an overall comprehension of sugarcane responses to ScYLV infection at the gene expression level but also increase the chances to block the transmission of ScYLV for use in further molecular biology techniques and will aid in increasing the resistance of plants against ScYLV.

ScYLV: !transmitted by! aphid vectors 
ScYLV-infected plants: !express! 1,630 genes 
DEGs: !annotated with! GO, KEGG, KOG, PFAM, SwissProt, and Nr databases 
ScYLV: !induces formation of! autophagosomes 
ER stress: !promotes! replication of viral RNA 
qRT-PCR: !shows! two downregulated and 45 upregulated DEGs