['35776059', 'Magnesium (Mg(2+) ) serves as a cofactor for a number of photosynthetic enzymes  in the chloroplast, and is the central atom of the Chl molecule. However, little  is known about the molecular mechanism of Mg(2+) transport across the chloroplast  envelope. Here, we report the functional characterization of two transport  proteins in Arabidopsis: Magnesium Release 8 (MGR8) and MGR9, of the ACDP/CNNM  family, which is evolutionarily conserved across all lineages of living  organisms. Both MGR8 and MGR9 genes were expressed ubiquitously, and their  encoded proteins were localized in the inner envelope of chloroplasts. Mutations  of MGR8 and MGR9 together, but neither of them alone, resulted in albino ovules  and chlorotic seedlings. Further analysis revealed severe defects in thylakoid  biogenesis and assembly of photosynthetic complexes in the double mutant. Both  MGR8 and MGR9 functionally complemented the growth of the Salmonella typhimurium  mutant strain MM281, which lacks Mg(2+) uptake capacity. The embryonic and early  seedling defects of the mgr8/mgr9 double mutant were rescued by the expression of  MGR9 under the embryo-specific ABI3 promoter. The partially rescued mutant plants  were hypersensitive to Mg(2+) deficient conditions and contained less Mg(2+) in  their chloroplasts than wild-type plants. Taken together, we conclude that MGR8  and MGR9 serve as Mg(2+) transporters and are responsible for chloroplast Mg(2+)  uptake.', '2022 Oct', 'New Phytol', '10.1111/nph.18349', 'ORCID:']

MGR8: !transports! Mg(2+) 
MGR9: !transports! Mg(2+) 
MGR8: !localizes to! inner envelope of chloroplasts 
MGR9: !localizes to! inner envelope of chloroplasts 
MGR8/MGR9: !affects! thylakoid biogenesis 
MGR8/MGR9: !affects! assembly of photosynthetic complexes 
MGR8/MGR9: !complements! growth of Salmonella typhimurium mutant strain MM281 
ABI3 promoter: !rescues! embryonic and early seedling defects of mgr8/mgr9 double mutant 
mgr8/mgr9 double mutant: !hypersensitive to! Mg(2+) deficient conditions