Tea plant breeding or cultivation mainly involves propagation via cuttings, which not only ensures the inheritance of the excellent characteristics of the mother plant but also facilitates mechanized management. The formation of adventitious root (AR) determines the success of cutting-based propagation, and auxin is an essential factor involved in this process. To understand the molecular mechanism underlying AR formation in nodal tea cuttings, transcriptome and endogenous hormone analysis was performed on the stem bases of red (mature)- and green (immature)-stem cuttings of 'Echa 1 hao' tea plant as affected by a pulse treatment with naphthalene acetic acid (NAA). In this study, NAA significantly promoted AR formation in both red- and green-stem cuttings but slightly reduced callus formation. External application of NAA reduced the levels of endogenous indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) and cytokinin (TZR, trans-zeatin riboside). The number of DEGs (NAA vs. CK) identified in the green-stem cuttings was significantly higher than that in the red-stem cuttings, which corresponded to a higher rooting rate of green-stem cuttings under the NAA treatment. A total of 82 common DEGs were identified as being hormone-related and involved in the auxin, cytokinin, abscisic acid, ethylene, salicylic acid, brassinosteroid, and jasmonic acid pathways. The negative regulation of NAA-induced IAA and GH3 genes may explain the decrease of endogenous IAA. NAA reduced endogenous cytokinin levels and further downregulated the expression of cytokinin signalling-related genes. By the use of weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), several hub genes, including three [cellulose synthase (CSLD2), SHAVEN3-like 1 (SVL1), SMALL AUXIN UP RNA (SAUR21)] that are highly related to root development in other crops, were identified that might play important roles in AR formation in tea cuttings. NAA promotes the formation of AR of tea cuttings in coordination with endogenous hormones. The most important endogenous AR inductor, IAA, was reduced in response to NAA. DEGs potentially involved in NAA-mediated AR formation of tea plant stem cuttings were identified via comparative transcriptome analysis. Several hub genes, such as CSLD2, SVL1 and SAUR21, were identified that might play important roles in AR formation in tea cuttings.

NAA: !promotes! AR formation 
NAA: !reduces! IAA levels 
NAA: !downregulates! cytokinin signalling-related genes 
CSLD2: !related to! root development 
SVL1: !related to! root development 
SAUR21: !related to! root development