Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) are a family of NAD(P)<sup>+</sup> dependent enzymes that detoxify aldehydes by promoting their oxidation to respective carboxylic acids. The role of ALDH enzymes in various plant species has been extensively studied, revealing their critical role in salinity, drought, heat, and heavy metal stress tolerance. Despite their physiological significance, ALDH genes in Sorghum bicolor have yet to be studied thoroughly. In this study, a total of 19 ALDH genes have been identified that have been grouped into ten families based on the criteria of the ALDH gene nomenclature committee. Segmental duplication assisted more in the enhancement of SbALDH gene family members than tandem duplication. All the identified SbALDH members made a cluster with monocot rice and maize in the phylogenetic tree rather than dicot species, suggesting the pre-eudicot-monocot separation of the ALDH superfamily members. The gene structure and protein domain were found to be mostly conserved in separate phylogenetic classes, indicating that each family played an important role in evolution. Expression analysis revealed that several SbALDHs were expressed in various tissues, developmental stages, and in response to abiotic stresses, indicating that they can play roles in plant growth, development, or stress adaptation. Interestingly, the majority of the SbALDH genes were found to be highly responsive to drought stress, and the SbALDH18B1 transcript showed maximum enhancement in all the stress conditions. The presence of cis-acting elements (mainly ABRE and MBS) in the promoter region of these genes might have a significant role in drought tolerance. Our findings add to the current understanding, evolutionary history, and contribution of SbALDHs in stress tolerance, and smooth the path of further functional validation of these genes.

Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs): !promote! oxidation of aldehydes
Segmental duplication: !enhances! SbALDH gene family members
SbALDH members: !cluster with! monocot rice and maize
Gene structure/protein domain: !conserved in! separate phylogenetic classes
Expression analysis: !reveals! roles in plant growth, development, or stress adaptation
SbALDH genes: !highly responsive to! drought stress
Cis-acting elements: !have role in! drought tolerance