['35783976', 'The late embryogenesis abundant (LEA)5 protein is predominantly expressed in  Arabidopsis leaves in the dark, the levels of LEA5 transcripts decreasing rapidly  upon illumination. LEA5 is important in plant responses to environmental stresses  but the mechanisms involved have not been elucidated. We therefore explored LEA5  functions in Arabidopsis mutants (lea5) and transgenic Arabidopsis plants  constitutively expressing LEA5 (OEX 2-5), as well as in transgenic barley lines  expressing the Arabidopsis LEA5 gene. The OEX 2-5 plants grew better than  controls and lea5 mutants in the presence of the prooxidants methyl viologen and  menadione. Confocal microscopy of Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts expressing a  LEA5-YFP fusion protein demonstrated that LEA5 could be localized to chloroplasts  as well as mitochondria in Arabidopsis protoplasts. Tandem affinity purification  (TAP) analysis revealed LEA5 interacts with the chloroplast DEAD-box  ATP-dependent RNA helicase 22 (RH22) in Arabidopsis cells. Split YFP analysis  confirmed the interaction between RH22 and LEA5 in chloroplasts. The abundance of  translated protein products in chloroplasts was decreased in transgenic  Arabidopsis plants and increased in lea5 knockout mutants. Conversely, the  abundance of translated mitochondrial protein products was increased in OEX 2-5  plants and decreased in lea5 mutants. Mitochondrial electron transport rates were  higher in the OEX 2-5 plants than the wild type. The transformed barley lines  expressing the Arabidopsis LEA5 had increased seed yields, but they showed a  greater drought-induced inhibition of photosynthesis than controls. Taken  together, these data demonstrate that LEA5 regulates organellar translation, in  order to enhance respiration relative to photosynthesis in response to stress.', '2022', 'Front Plant Sci', '10.3389/fpls.2022.875799', 'Foyer']

LEA5: !localizes to! chloroplasts & mitochondria 
LEA5: !interacts with! RH22 
LEA5: !enhances! respiration 
LEA5: !represses! photosynthesis 
LEA5: !synthesizes! protein products