['35786359', 'Macroautophagy/autophagy, a major catabolic pathway in eukaryotes, participates  in plant sexual reproduction including the processes of male gametogenesis and  the self-incompatibility response. Rapid pollen tube growth is another essential  reproductive process that is metabolically highly demanding to drive the vigorous  cell growth for delivery of male gametes for fertilization in angiosperms.  Whether and how autophagy operates to maintain the homeostasis of pollen tubes  remains unknown. Here, we provide evidence that autophagy is elevated in growing  pollen tubes and critically required during pollen tube growth and male fertility  in Arabidopsis. We demonstrate that SH3P2, a critical non-ATG regulator of plant  autophagy, colocalizes with representative ATG proteins during autophagosome  biogenesis in growing pollen tubes. Downregulation of SH3P2 expression  significantly disrupts Arabidopsis pollen germination and pollen tube growth.  Further analysis of organelle dynamics reveals crosstalk between autophagosomes  and prevacuolar compartments following the inhibition of phosphatidylinositol  3-kinase. In addition, time-lapse imaging and tracking of ATG8e-labeled  autophagosomes and depolarized mitochondria demonstrate that they interact  specifically via the ATG8-family interacting motif (AIM)-docking site to mediate  mitophagy. Ultrastructural identification of mitophagosomes and two additional  forms of autophagosomes imply that multiple types of autophagy are likely to  function simultaneously within pollen tubes. Altogether, our results suggest that  autophagy is functionally crucial for mediating mitochondrial quality control and  canonical cytoplasm recycling during pollen tube growth.Abbreviations: AIM:  ATG8-family interacting motif; ATG8: autophagy related 8; ATG5: autophagy related  5; ATG7: autophagy related 7; BTH: acibenzolar-S-methyl; DEX: dexamethasone; DNP:  2,4-dinitrophenol; GFP: green fluorescent protein; YFP: yellow fluorescent  protein; PtdIns3K: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PtdIns3P:  phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate; PVC: prevacuolar compartment; SH3P2: SH3  domain-containing protein 2.', '2023 Mar', 'Autophagy', '10.1080/15548627.2022.2095838', 'ORCID:']

SH3P2: !localizes to! ATG proteins 
SH3P2: !represses! pollen germination and tube growth 
ATG8e: !interacts with! depolarized mitochondria 
ATG8-family: !docks at! AIM 
autophagy: !enhances! mitochondrial quality control 
autophagy: !recycles! cytoplasm