OscWRKY1 from Ocimum sanctum positively regulates phenylpropanoid pathway genes and rosmarinic acid content. OscWRKY1 overexpression promotes resistance against bacterial pathogen in Arabidopsis. WRKY transcription factor (TF) family regulates various developmental and physiological functions in plants. PAL genes encode enzymes which are involved in plant defense responses, but the direct regulation of PAL genes and phenylpropanoid pathway through WRKY TF's is not well characterized. In the present study, we have characterized an OscWRKY1 gene from Ocimum sanctum which shows induced expression by methyl jasmonate (MeJA), salicylic acid (SA), and wounding. The recombinant OscWRKY1 protein binds to the DIG-labeled (Digoxigenin) W-box cis-element TTGAC[C/T] and activates the LacZ reporter gene in yeast. Overexpression of OscWRKY1 enhances Arabidopsis resistance towards Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato Pst DC3000. Upstream activator sequences of PAL and C4H have been identified to contain the conserved W-box cis-element (TTGACC) in both O. sanctum and Arabidopsis. OscWRKY1 was found to interact with W-box cis-element present in the PAL and C4H promoters. Silencing of OscWRKY1 using VIGS resulted in reduced expression of PAL, C4H, COMT, F5H and 4CL transcripts. OscWRKY1 silenced plants exhibit reduced PAL activity, whereas, the overexpression lines of OscWRKY1 in Arabidopsis exhibit increased PAL activity. Furthermore, the metabolite analysis of OscWRKY1 silenced plants showed reduced rosmarinic acid content. These results revealed that OscWRKY1 positively regulates the phenylpropanoid pathway genes leading to the alteration of rosmarinic acid content and enhances the resistance against bacterial pathogen in Arabidopsis.

OscWRKY1: !positively regulates! phenylpropanoid pathway genes
OscWRKY1: !promotes! resistance against bacterial pathogen
WRKY TF family: !regulates! developmental and physiological functions
PAL genes: !encode! enzymes involved in plant defense responses
OscWRKY1: !binds to! W-box cis-element
OscWRKY1: !activates! LacZ reporter gene
OscWRKY1: !overexpression enhances! Arabidopsis resistance
OscWRKY1: !interacts with! W-box cis-element present in PAL and C4H promoters
OscWRKY1: !silencing reduces! expression of PAL, C4H, COMT, F5H and 4CL transcripts
OscWRKY1: !silencing reduces! PAL activity
OscWRKY1: !overexpression increases! PAL activity
OscWRKY1: !silencing reduces! rosmarinic acid content