Aiming at the problem that it is difficult to identify two types of weeds, grass weeds and broadleaf weeds, in complex field environments, this paper proposes a semantic segmentation method with an improved UNet structure and an embedded channel attention mechanism SE module. First, to eliminate the semantic gap between low-dimensional semantic features and high-dimensional semantic features, the UNet model structure is modified according to the characteristics of different types of weeds, and the feature maps after the first five down sampling tasks are restored to the same original image through the deconvolution layer. Hence, the final feature map used for prediction is obtained by the fusion of the upsampling feature map and the feature maps containing more low-dimensional semantic information in the first five layers. In addition, ResNet34 is used as the backbone network, and the channel attention mechanism SE module is embedded to improve useful features. The channel weight is determined, noise is suppressed, soybean and grass weeds are identified, and broadleaf weeds are extracted through digital image morphological processing, and segmented images of soybean plants, grass weeds and broadleaf weeds are generated. Moreover, compared with the standard semantic segmentation models, FCN, UNet, and SegNet, the experimental results show that the overall performance of the model in this paper is the best. The average intersection ratio and average pixel recognition rate in a complex field environment are 0.9282 and 96.11%, respectively. On the basis of weed classification, the identified weeds are further refined into two types of weeds to provide technical support for intelligent precision variable weed spraying.

UNet: !modified according to! weed characteristics 
ResNet34: !used as! backbone network 
SE module: !embedded to! improve features 
morphological processing: !used to! identify weeds 
model: !provides technical support for! intelligent precision variable weed spraying