Pre-harvest sprouting (PHS) is a serious limiting factor for wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) grain yield and end-use quality. Identification of reliable molecular markers and PHS-resistant germplasms is vital to improve PHS resistance by molecular marker-assisted selection (MAS), but the effects of allelic variation and haplotypes in genes conferring PHS resistance in winter wheat cultivars are less understood. Resistance to PHS was tested in 326 commercial winter wheat cultivars for three consecutive growing seasons from 2018-2020. The effects of alleles and haplotypes of 10 genes associated with PHS resistance were determined for all cultivars and were validated by introgressing the PHS-resistance allele and haplotype into a susceptible wheat cultivar. High level of phenotypic variation in PHS resistance was observed in this set of cultivars and 8 of them were highly resistant to PHS with stable germination index (GI) of less than 25% in each individual year. Allelic effects of nine genes and TaMFT haplotype analysis demonstrated that the haplotype Hap1 with low-GI alleles at five positions had the best PHS resistance. This haplotype has the priority to use in improving PHS resistance because of its high effectiveness and rare present in the current commercial cultivars. Among 14 main allelic combinations (ACs) identified, the AC1 carrying the haplotype Hap1 and the TaSdr-B1a allele had better PHS resistance than the other classes. The introgression of Hap1 and TaSdr-B1a is able to significantly improve the PHS resistance in the susceptible cultivar Lunxuan 13. The effectiveness of alleles conferring PHS resistance in winter wheat cultivars was determined and the useful alleles and haplotypes were identified, providing valuable information for parental selection and MAS aiming at improving PHS-resistance in winter wheat. The identification of the PHS-resistant cultivars without known resistance alleles offers an opportunity to explore new PHS-resistant genes.

Gene: !affects! PHS resistance
Gene: !localizes to! TaMFT haplotype
Gene: !interacts with! TaSdr-B1a allele
Gene: !enhances! Hap1 haplotype
Gene: !represses! GI alleles
Gene: !synthesizes! AC1 combination