Adaptation to new environments is a key evolutionary process which presumably involves complex genomic changes. Mangroves, a collection of approximately 80 woody plants that have independently invaded intertidal zones >20 times, are ideal for studying this process. We assembled near-chromosome-scale genomes of three Xylocarpus species as well as an outgroup species using single-molecule real-time sequencing. Phylogenomic analysis reveals two separate lineages, one with the mangrove Xylocarpus granatum and the other comprising a mangrove Xylocarpus moluccensis and a terrestrial Xylocarpus rumphii. In conjunction with previous studies, we identified several genomic features associated with mangroves: (i) signals of positive selection in genes related to salt tolerance and root development; (ii) genome-wide elevated ratios of non-synonymous to synonymous substitution relative to terrestrial relatives; and (iii) active elimination of long terminal repeats. These features are found in the terrestrial X. rumphii in addition to the two mangroves. These genomic features, not being strictly mangrove-specific, are hence considered pre-adaptive. We infer that the coastal but non-intertidal habitat of X. rumphii may have predisposed the common ancestor to invasion of true mangrove habitats. Other features including the preferential retention of duplicated genes and intolerance to pseudogenization are not found in X. rumphii and are likely true adaptive features in mangroves. In conclusion, by studying adaptive shift and partial shifts among closely related species, we set up a framework to study genomic features that are acquired at different stages of the pre-adaptation and adaptation to new environments.

Xylocarpus granatum: !has signals of! Positive selection 
Xylocarpus moluccensis: !has signals of! Positive selection 
Xylocarpus rumphii: !has signals of! Positive selection 
Xylocarpus rumphii: !predisposed ancestor to! Invasion of true mangrove habitats 
Duplicated genes: !preferentially retained in! Mangroves 
Pseudogenization: !intolerant to! Mangroves