Transcriptomics of manually dissected leaf layers from Medicago truncatula identifies genes with preferential expression in upper and/or lower epidermis. The promoters of these genes confer epidermal-specific expression of transgenes. Improving the quality and quantity of proanthocyanidins (PAs) in forage legumes has potential to improve the nitrogen nutrition of ruminant animals and protect them from the risk of pasture bloat, as well as parasites. However, ectopic constitutive accumulation of PAs in plants by genetic engineering can significantly inhibit growth. We selected the leaf epidermis as a candidate tissue for targeted engineering of PAs or other pathways. To identify gene promoters selectively expressed in epidermal tissues, we performed comparative transcriptomic analyses in the model legume Medicago truncatula, using five tissue samples representing upper epidermis, lower epidermis, whole leaf without upper epidermis, whole leaf without lower epidermis, and whole leaf. We identified 52 transcripts preferentially expressed in upper epidermis, most of which encode genes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis, and 53 transcripts from lower epidermis, with the most enriched category being anatomical structure formation. Promoters of the preferentially expressed genes were cloned from the M. truncatula genome and shown to direct tissue-selective promoter activities in transient assays. Expression of the PA pathway transcription factor TaMYB14 under control of several of the promoters in transgenic alfalfa resulted in only modest MYB14 transcript accumulation and low levels of PA production. Activity of a subset of promoters was confirmed by transcript analysis in field-grown alfalfa plants throughout the growing season, and revealed variable but consistent expression, which was generally highest 3-4 weeks after cutting. We conclude that, although the selected promoters show acceptable tissue-specificity, they may not drive high enough transcription factor expression to activate the PA pathway.

Transcriptomics: !identifies! genes with preferential expression in upper and/or lower epidermis
Promoters: !confer! epidermal-specific expression of transgenes
Flavonoid biosynthesis: !enriched in! upper epidermis
Anatomical structure formation: !enriched in! lower epidermis
Promoters: !cloned from! M. truncatula genome
TaMYB14: !expressed under control of! promoters
Transgenic alfalfa: !resulted in! low levels of PA production
Promoters: !confirmed by transcript analysis in! field-grown alfalfa plants