Spectral quality, intensity and period of light modify many regulatory and stress signaling pathways in plants. Both nitrate and sulfate assimilations must be synchronized with photosynthesis, which ensures energy and reductants for these pathways. However, photosynthesis is also a source of reactive oxygen species, whose levels are controlled by glutathione and other antioxidants. In this study, we investigated the effect of supplemental far-red (735 nm) and blue (450 nm) lights on the diurnal expression of the genes related to photoreceptors, the circadian clock, nitrate reduction, glutathione metabolism and various antioxidants in barley. The maximum expression of the investigated four photoreceptor and three clock-associated genes during the light period was followed by the peaking of the transcripts of the three redox-responsive transcription factors during the dark phase, while most of the nitrate and sulfate reduction, glutathione metabolism and antioxidant-enzyme-related genes exhibited high expression during light exposure in plants grown in light/dark cycles for two days. These oscillations changed or disappeared in constant white light during the subsequent two days. Supplemental far-red light induced the activation of most of the studied genes, while supplemental blue light did not affect or inhibited them during light/dark cycles. However, in constant light, several genes exhibited greater expression in blue light than in white and far-red lights. Based on a correlation analysis of the gene expression data, we propose a major role of far-red light in the coordinated transcriptional adjustment of nitrate reduction, glutathione metabolism and antioxidant enzymes to changes of the light spectrum.

photoreceptor gene: !modifies! regulatory and stress signaling pathways
nitrate/sulfate assimilations: !synchronized with! photosynthesis
glutathione/antioxidants: !control! reactive oxygen species levels
far-red light: !induces activation of! most studied genes
blue light: !inhibits or does not affect! most studied genes
correlation analysis: !proposes role of! far-red light in coordinated transcriptional adjustment