Reproductive-stage heat stress (RSHS) poses a major constraint to cereal crop production by damaging main plant reproductive structures and hampering reproductive processes, including pollen and stigma viability, pollination, fertilization, grain setting and grain filling. Despite this well-recognized fact, research on crop heat stress (HS) is relatively recent compared to other abiotic stresses, such as drought and salinity, and in particular, RSHS studies in cereals are considerably few in comparison with seedling-stage and vegetative-stage-centered studies. Meanwhile, climate change-exacerbated HS, independently or synergistically with drought, will have huge implications on crop performance and future global food security. Fortunately, due to their sedentary nature, crop plants have evolved complex and diverse transient and long-term mechanisms to perceive, transduce, respond and adapt to HS at the molecular, cell, physiological and whole plant levels. Therefore, uncovering the molecular and physiological mechanisms governing plant response and tolerance to RSHS facilitates the designing of effective strategies to improve HS tolerance in cereal crops. In this review, we update our understanding of several aspects of RSHS in cereals, particularly impacts on physiological processes and yield; HS signal perception and transduction; and transcriptional regulation by heat shock factors and heat stress-responsive genes. We also discuss the epigenetic, post-translational modification and HS memory mechanisms modulating plant HS tolerance. Moreover, we offer a critical set of strategies (encompassing genomics and plant breeding, transgenesis, omics and agronomy) that could accelerate the development of RSHS-resilient cereal crop cultivars. We underline that a judicious combination of all of these strategies offers the best foot forward in RSHS tolerance improvement in cereals. Further, we highlight critical shortcomings to RSHS tolerance investigations in cereals and propositions for their circumvention, as well as some knowledge gaps, which should guide future research priorities. Overall, our review furthers our understanding of HS tolerance in plants and supports the rational designing of RSHS-tolerant cereal crop cultivars for the warming climate.

RSHS: !damages! reproductive structures 
RSHS: !hampers! reproductive processes 
HS signal: !perceived by! plants 
HS signal: !transduced by! plants 
HS signal: !responded to by! plants 
HS signal: !adapted to by! plants 
Heat shock factors: !regulate! transcriptional regulation 
Heat stress-responsive genes: !regulate! transcriptional regulation 
Epigenetic mechanisms: !modulate! HS tolerance 
Post-translational modification: !modulate! HS tolerance 
HS memory mechanisms: !modulate! HS tolerance 
Genomics/plant breeding: !accelerate! development of RSHS-resilient cultivars 
Transgenesis: !accelerate! development of RSHS-resilient cultivars 
Omics: !accelerate! development of RSHS-resilient cultivars 
Agronomy: !accelerate! development of RSHS-resilient cultivars