The plant membrane-trafficking system plays a crucial role in maintaining proper cellular functions and responding to various developmental and environmental cues. Thus far, our knowledge of the maize membrane-trafficking system is still limited. In this study, we systematically identified 479 membrane-trafficking genes from the maize genome using orthology search and studied their functions by integrating transcriptome and evolution analyses. These genes encode the components of coated vesicles, AP complexes, autophagy, ESCRTs, retromers, Rab GTPases, tethering factors, and SNAREs. The maize genes exhibited diverse but coordinated expression patterns, with 249 genes showing elevated expression in reproductive tissues. Further WGCNA analysis revealed that five COPII components and four Rab GTPases had high connectivity with protein biosynthesis during endosperm development and that eight components of autophagy, ESCRT, Rab, and SNARE were strongly co-upregulated with defense-related genes and/or with secondary metabolic processes to confer basal resistance to <i>Fusarium graminearum</i>. In addition, we identified 39 membrane-trafficking genes with strong selection signals during maize domestication and/or improvement. Among them, <i>ZmSec23a</i> and <i>ZmVPS37A</i> were selected for kernel oil production during improvement and pathogen resistance during domestication, respectively. In summary, these findings will provide important hints for future appreciation of the functions of membrane-trafficking genes in maize.

Coated vesicles: !encode components of! maize genes
AP complexes: !encode components of! maize genes
Autophagy: !encode components of! maize genes
ESCRTs: !encode components of! maize genes
Retromers: !encode components of! maize genes
Rab GTPases: !encode components of! maize genes
Tethering factors: !encode components of! maize genes
SNAREs: !encode components of! maize genes
249 genes: !show elevated expression in! reproductive tissues
COPII components: !have high connectivity with! protein biosynthesis
Rab GTPases: !strongly co-upregulated with! defense-related genes
Autophagy, ESCRT, Rab, SNARE: !strongly co-upregulated with! secondary metabolic processes
ZmSec23a: !selected for! kernel oil production
ZmVPS37A: !selected for! pathogen resistance