Soybean continuous cropping (SC) leads to continuous cropping obstacles, and soil-borne fungal diseases occur frequently. Rotation can alleviate continuous cropping obstacles. However, the long-term effects of continuous cropping and rotation on the structure and function of the fungal community in soil are not clear. In this study, five cropping systems, SC, fallow (CK), fallow-soybean (FS), corn-soybean (CS), and wheat-soybean (WS), were implemented in the long-term continuous cropping area of soybean. After 13 years of planting, high-throughput sequencing was used to evaluate the structure and diversity of soil fungal communities and to study the relationship between fungal communities and soil environmental factors. The results showed that the abundance and diversity of fungal flora in SC soil were the highest. There were significant differences in the formation of soil fungal communities between soybean continuous cropping and the other treatments. There were 355 species of endemic fungi in SC soil. There were 231 and 120 endemic species in WS and CS, respectively. The relative abundance of the potential pathogens <i>Lectera</i>, <i>Gibberella</i>, and <i>Fusarium</i> in the SC treatment soil was significantly high, and the abundance of all potential pathogens in CK was significantly the lowest. The abundance of <i>Lectera</i> and <i>Fusarium</i> in CS was significantly the lowest. There was a positive correlation between potential pathogens in the soil. The relative abundance of potential pathogens in the soil was significantly positively correlated with the relative abundance of Ascomycetes and negatively correlated with the relative abundance of Basidiomycetes. Potential pathogenic genera had a significant negative correlation with soil OM, available Mn, K and soil pH and a significant positive correlation with the contents of soil available Cu, Fe, and Zn. In general, the fungal communities of SC, FS, WS, and CS were divided into one group, which was significantly different from CK. WS and CS were more similar in fungal community structure. The CK and CS treatments reduced the relative abundance of soil fungi and potential pathogens. Our study shows that SC and FS lead to selective stress on fungi and pathogenic fungi and lead to the development of fungal community abundance and diversity, while CK and CS can reduce this development, which is conducive to plant health.

SC: !leads to! selective stress on fungi
Fallow: !reduces! relative abundance of soil fungi
Fallow-soybean: !leads to! development of fungal community abundance and diversity
Corn-soybean: !reduces! development of fungal community abundance and diversity
Wheat-soybean: !similar to! CS in fungal community structure
Potential pathogens: !correlated with! Ascomycetes
Potential pathogens: !correlated with! available Cu, Fe, Zn
Potential pathogens: !correlated with! soil OM, available Mn, K, pH