Based on transcriptomic analysis of wild-type and mutant tomato plants, ARPC1 was found to be important for trichome formation and development and it plays a key role in terpene synthesis. Trichomes are protruding epidermal cells in plant species. They function as the first defense layer against biotic and abiotic stresses. Despite the essential role of tomato trichomes in defense against herbivores, the understanding of their development is still incomplete. Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify genes involved in trichome formation and morphology and terpene synthesis, using transcriptomic techniques. To achieve this, we examined leaf morphology and compared the expression levels of some putative genes involved in trichome formation between wild-type (WT) and hairless-3 (hl-3) tomato mutant. The hl-3 plants displayed swollen and distorted trichomes and reduced trichome density (type I and IV) and terpene synthesis compared with that of the WT plants. Gene expression analysis showed that Actin-Related Protein Component1 (ARPC1) was expressed more highly in the WT than in the hl-3 mutant, indicating its critical role in trichome morphology and density. Additionally, the expression of MYC1 and several terpene synthase genes (TPS9, 12, 20), which are involved in type VI trichome initiation and terpene synthesis, was lower in the hl-3 mutant than in the WT plants. Moreover, transformation of the hl-3 mutant with WT ARPC1 restored normal trichome structure and density, and terpene synthesis. Structural and amino acid sequence analysis showed that there was a missplicing mutation in the hl-3 mutant, which was responsible for the abnormal trichome structure and density, and impaired terpene synthesis. Overall, the findings of this study demonstrated that ARPC1 is involved in regulating trichome structure and terpene synthesis in tomato.

ARPC1: !affects! Trichome formation
ARPC1: !enhances! Terpene synthesis
Trichomes: !function as! Defense layer
hl-3 mutant: !displays! Swollen trichomes
WT plants: !express! ARPC1 more highly
MYC1: !expressed! Lower in hl-3 mutant
TPS9, 12, 20: !expressed! Lower in hl-3 mutant
hl-3 mutant: !transformed with! WT ARPC1
Missplicing mutation: !responsible for! Abnormal trichome structure