This study suggests that stomatal and leaf structures are highly correlated, and mesophyll cell size is an important anatomical trait determining the coordination between stomatal size and mesophyll porosity. A comprehensive study of the correlations between the structural traits and on their relationships with gas exchange parameters may provide some useful information into leaf development and improvement in efficiencies of photosynthetic CO<sub>2</sub> fixation and transpirational water loss. In the present study, nine plant materials from eight crop species were pot grown in a growth chamber. Leaf structural traits, gas exchange, and leaf nitrogen content were measured. We found that stomatal size, mesophyll cell size (MCS), and mesophyll porosity were positively correlated and that the surface areas of mesophyll cells and chloroplasts facing intercellular air spaces were positively correlated with both stomatal density and stomatal area per leaf area (SA). These results suggested that the developments of stomata and mesophyll cells are highly correlated among different crop species. Additionally, MCS was positively correlated with leaf thickness and negatively correlated with leaf density and leaf mass per area, which indicated that MCS might play an important role in leaf structural investments and physiological functions among species. In summary, this study illustrates the correlations between stomatal and mesophyll structures, and it highlights the importance of considering the covariations among leaf traits with the intent of improving photosynthesis and iWUE.

stomatal size: !correlated with! mesophyll cell size
mesophyll cell size: !correlated with! leaf thickness
stomatal density: !positively correlated with! surface area of mesophyll cells and chloroplasts
stomatal area per leaf area: !positively correlated with! surface area of mesophyll cells and chloroplasts
leaf density: !negatively correlated with! mesophyll cell size
leaf mass per area: !negatively correlated with! mesophyll cell size