Cluster bean (<i>Cyamopsis tetragonoloba</i> L.) is one of the multipurpose underexplored crops grown as green vegetable and for gum production in dryland areas. Cluster bean is known as relatively tolerant to drought and salinity stress. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in the drought tolerance of cluster bean cultivar RGC-1025, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of the drought-stressed and control samples was performed. <i>De novo</i> assembly of the reads resulted in 66,838 transcripts involving 203 pathways. Among these transcripts, differentially expressed gene (DEG) analysis resulted in some of the drought-responsive genes expressing <i>alpha dioxygenase</i> 2, low temperature-induced 65 kDa protein (LDI65), putative vacuolar amino acid transporter, and late embryogenesis abundant protein (LEA 3). The analysis also reported drought-responsive transcription factors (TFs), such as NAC, WRKY, GRAS, and MYB families. The relative expression of genes by qRT-PCR revealed consistency with the DEG analysis. Key genes involved in the wax biosynthesis pathway were mapped using the DEG data analysis. These results were positively correlated with epicuticular wax content and the wax depositions on the leaf surfaces, as evidenced by scanning electron microscope (SEM) image analysis. Further, these findings support the fact that enhanced wax deposits on the leaf surface had played a crucial role in combating the drought stress in cluster beans under drought stress conditions. In addition, this study provided a set of unknown genes and TFs that could be a source of engineering tolerance against drought stress in cluster beans.

alpha dioxygenase 2: !enhances! wax biosynthesis
low temperature-induced 65 kDa protein (LDI65): !enhances! wax biosynthesis
putative vacuolar amino acid transporter: !enhances! wax biosynthesis
late embryogenesis abundant protein (LEA 3): !enhances! wax biosynthesis
NAC: !enhances! drought tolerance
WRKY: !enhances! drought tolerance
GRAS: !enhances! drought tolerance
MYB: !enhances! drought tolerance