The topographic gradients of the Tropical Andes may have triggered species divergence by different mechanisms. Topography separates species' geographical ranges and offers climatic heterogeneity, which could potentially foster local adaptation to specific climatic conditions and result in narrowly distributed endemic species. Such a pattern is found in the Andean centered palm genus <i>Aiphanes</i>. To test the extent to which geographic barriers and climatic heterogeneity can explain distribution patterns in <i>Aiphanes</i>, we sampled 34 out of 36 currently recognized species in that genus and sequenced them by Sanger sequencing and/or sequence target capture sequencing. We generated Bayesian, likelihood, and species-tree phylogenies, with which we explored climatic trait evolution from current climatic occupation. We also estimated species distribution models to test the relative roles of geographical and climatic divergence in their evolution. We found that <i>Aiphanes</i> originated in the Miocene in Andean environments and possibly in mid-elevation habitats. Diversification is related to the occupation of the adjacent high and low elevation habitats tracking high annual precipitation and low precipitation seasonality (moist habitats). Different species in different clades repeatedly occupy all the different temperatures offered by the elevation gradient from 0 to 3,000 m in different geographically isolated areas. A pattern of conserved adaptation to moist environments is consistent among the clades. Our results stress the evolutionary roles of niche truncation of wide thermal tolerance by physical range fragmentation, coupled with water-related niche conservatism, to colonize the topographic gradient.

Topography: !separates! species' geographical ranges 
Climatic heterogeneity: !fosters! local adaptation 
Miocene: !origin of! Aiphanes 
Diversification: !related to! occupation of adjacent high and low elevation habitats 
Niche truncation: !coupled with! water-related niche conservatism