An ample quantity of water and sufficient nutrients are required for economical rice production to meet the challenges of ever-increasing food demand. Currently, slow-release nitrogenous fertilizers for efficient inputs utilization and maximum economic yield of field crops are in the limelight for researchers and farmers. In this study, we evaluated the comparative efficacy of conventional urea and coated urea (zinc and neem) on rice grown under aerobic and anaerobic regimes in greenhouse conditions. For the aerobic regime, field capacity was maintained at 80-100% to keep the soil aerated. On the other hand, for the anaerobic regime, pots were covered with a polythene sheet throughout the experimentation to create flooded conditions. All forms of urea, conventional and coated (zinc and neem), improved plant growth, gas exchange, yield, yield contributing parameters, and quality characteristics of rice crop. However, better performance in all attributes was found in the case of zinc-coated urea. Gas exchange attributes (photosynthetic rate, 30%, and stomatal conductance 24%), yield parameters like plant height (29%), tillers per plant (38%), spikelets per spike (31%), grains per panicle (42%), total biomass (53%), and grain yield (45%) were recorded to be maximum in rice plants treated with zinc-coated urea. The highest grain and straw nitrogen contents, grain protein contents, and grain water absorption ratio were also found in plants with zinc-coated urea applications. In irrigation practices, the anaerobic regime was found to be more responsive compared to the aerobic regime regarding rice growth, productivity, and quality traits. Thus, to enhance the productivity and quality of rice grown in anaerobic conditions, zinc-coated urea is best suited as it is more responsive when compared to other forms of urea.

Urea: !improves! Plant Growth
Coated Urea (zinc and neem): !improves! Plant Growth
Aerobic Regime: !maintains! Field Capacity
Anaerobic Regime: !creates! Flooded Conditions
Zinc-coated Urea: !maximizes! Gas Exchange Attributes
Zinc-coated Urea: !maximizes! Yield Parameters
Zinc-coated Urea: !maximizes! Grain & Straw Nitrogen Contents
Zinc-coated Urea: !maximizes! Grain Protein Contents
Zinc-coated Urea: !maximizes! Grain Water Absorption Ratio
Anaerobic Regime: !more responsive than! Aerobic Regime
Zinc-coated Urea: !best suited for! Anaerobic Conditions