This review highlights the economic importance of sweet potato and discusses new varieties, agronomic and cultivation practices, pest and disease control efforts, plant tissue culture protocols, and unexplored research areas involving this plant. Abstract Sweet potato is widely consumed in many countries around the world, including India, South Africa and China. Due to its valuable nutritional composition and highly beneficial bioactive compounds, sweet potato is considered a major tuber crop in India. Based on the volume of production, this plant ranks seventh in the world among all food crops. Sweet potato is considered a "Superfood" by the 'Centre for Science in the Public Interest' (CSPI), USA. This plant is mostly propagated through vegetative propagation using vine cuttings or tubers. However, this process is costly, labour-intensive, and comparatively slow. Conventional propagation methods are not able to supply sufficient disease-free planting materials to farmers to sustain steady tuber production. Therefore, there is an urgent need to use various biotechnological approaches, such as cell, tissue, and organ culture, for the large-scale production of healthy and disease-free planting material for commercial purposes throughout the year. In the last five decades, a number of tissue culture protocols have been developed for the production of in vitro plants through meristem culture, direct adventitious organogenesis, callus culture and somatic embryogenesis. Moreover, little research has been done on synthetic seed technology for the in vitro conservation and propagation of sweet potato. The current review comprehensively describes the biology, i.e., plant phenotypic description, vegetative growth, agronomy and cultivation, pests and diseases, varieties, and conventional methods of propagation, as well as biotechnological implementation, of this tuber crop. Furthermore, the explored and unexplored areas of research in sweet potato using biotechnological approaches have been reviewed.

Sweet potato: !consumed in! many countries 
Sweet potato: !propagated through! vegetative propagation 
Sweet potato: !biotechnological approaches used for! large-scale production of healthy and disease-free planting material 
Meristem culture: !used for! in vitro plants 
Callus culture: !used for! somatic embryogenesis 
Synthetic seed technology: !used for! in vitro conservation and propagation of sweet potato