In contrast to most land plant species, sorbitol, instead of sucrose, is the major photosynthetic product in many Rosaceae species. It has been well illustrated that three key functional genes encoding sorbitol-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (S6PDH), sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH), and sorbitol transporter (SOT), are mainly responsible for the synthesis, degradation and transportation of sorbitol. In this study, the genome-wide identification of S6PDH, SDH and SOT genes was conducted in four Rosaceae species, peach, mei, apple and pear, and showed the sorbitol bio-pathway to be dominant (named sorbitol present group, SPG); another three related species, including tomato, poplar and Arabidopsis, showed a non-sorbitol bio-pathway (named sorbitol absent group, SAG). To understand the evolutionary differences of the three important gene families between SAG and SPG, their corresponding gene duplication, evolutionary rate, codon bias and positive selection patterns have been analyzed and compared. The sorbitol pathway genes in SPG were found to be expanded through dispersed and tandem gene duplications. Branch-specific model analyses revealed SDH and S6PDH clade A were under stronger purifying selection in SPG. A higher frequency of optimal codons was found in S6PDH and SDH than that of SOT in SPG, confirming the purifying selection effect on them. In addition, branch-site model analyses revealed SOT genes were under positive selection in SPG. Expression analyses showed diverse expression patterns of sorbitol-related genes. Overall, these findings provide new insights in the evolutionary characteristics for the three key sorbitol metabolism-related gene families in Rosaceae and other non-sorbitol dominant pathway species.

S6PDH: !synthesizes! Sorbitol
SDH: !degrades! Sorbitol
SOT: !transports! Sorbitol
SPG: !contains! S6PDH, SDH, SOT
SAG: !lacks! S6PDH, SDH, SOT
S6PDH, SDH: !undergo! Purifying Selection
S6PDH, SDH: !have! Higher Frequency of Optimal Codons
SOT: !undergo! Positive Selection