The rapid development of high-throughput phenotypic detection techniques makes it possible to obtain a large number of crop phenotypic information quickly, efficiently, and accurately. Among them, image-based phenotypic acquisition method has been widely used in crop phenotypic identification and characteristic research due to its characteristics of automation, non-invasive, non-destructive and high throughput. In this study, we proposed a method to define and analyze the traits related to leaf sheaths including morphology-related, color-related and biomass-related traits at V6 stage. Next, we analyzed the phenotypic variation of leaf sheaths of 418 maize inbred lines based on 87 leaf sheath-related phenotypic traits. In order to further analyze the mechanism of leaf sheath phenotype formation, 25 key traits (2 biomass-related, 19 morphology-related and 4 color-related traits) with heritability greater than 0.3 were analyzed by genome-wide association studies (GWAS). And 1816 candidate genes of 17 whole plant leaf sheath traits and 1,297 candidate genes of 8 sixth leaf sheath traits were obtained, respectively. Among them, 46 genes with clear functional descriptions were annotated by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) that both Top1 and multi-method validated. Functional enrichment analysis results showed that candidate genes of leaf sheath traits were enriched into multiple pathways related to cellular component assembly and organization, cell proliferation and epidermal cell differentiation, and response to hunger, nutrition and extracellular stimulation. The results presented here are helpful to further understand phenotypic traits of maize leaf sheath and provide a reference for revealing the genetic mechanism of maize leaf sheath phenotype formation.

Gene: !affects! Process
Process: !involves! Phenotypic Variation
Phenotypic Variation: !analyzed by! GWAS
GWAS: !identifies! Candidate Genes
Candidate Genes: !annotated by! SNPs
SNPs: !enriched in! Pathways
Pathways: !related to! Cellular Component Assembly