Water shortages and nitrogen (N) fertilizer overuse limit japonica rice production in Northeastern China. The interactions between water-saving irrigation and nitrogen management on rice root and shoot growth is still our research focus. Here, japonica rice (DN425) was subjected to the irrigation methods W1 (flooding irrigation), W2 [mild alternate wetting and drying irrigation (AWD); -10 kPa], W3 (severe AWD; -30 kPa), and different N fertilizer ratios were applied in different growth stages, namely, N1 (6:3:1:0), N2 (5:3:1:1), and N3 (4:3:2:1). From jointing to full heading stages, the highest photosynthate production capacity and root activity were obtained under W1N2. AWD markedly affected the root system and resulted in root senescence at later growth stages. Grain yield and N utilization efficiency were closely and positively correlated with the relative water content, crop growth rate (CGR), leaf area duration (LAD), the increase rate of root length density, root surface area density, and root volume density (RVD) from the jointing to full heading stages. This positive correlation was also observed in the increased rate of root bleeding sap (RBS) under W1N2 and CGR under W2N3. From full heading to maturity stages, N2 could promote root growth, LAD, and CGR under AWD to a greater extent than those under the other treatments. Water use efficiency (WUE) and N uptake efficiency (NUpE) were both negatively associated with the decreased rate of RVD, root dry weight (RDW), and RBS. They were closely and positively correlated with the increased rate of RDW and CGR. Our results suggested that W2N2 treatment delayed root senescence, maintained leaf photosynthesis, optimized the crop growth rate from full heading to maturity stages, and improved grain yield. The optimal grain yield, WUE, and NUpE were achieved at the irrigation water amount and topdressing fertilizer ratio of 41.40-50.34 × 10<sup>2</sup> and 31.20-34.83 kg ha<sup>-1</sup>, respectively.

W1N2: !enhances! Photosynthate production
W2N3: !enhances! CGR
W2N2: !delays! Root senescence
WUE: !negatively associated with! Decreased RVD, RDW, RBS
NUpE: !negatively associated with! Decreased RVD, RDW, RBS
WUE: !positively correlated with! Increased RDW, CGR
NUpE: !positively correlated with! Increased RDW, CGR