The flowering characteristics of adzuki bean are influenced by several environmental factors. Light is an important ecological factor that induces flowering in adzuki bean, but to date, there have been few reports on the transcriptomic features of photoperiodic regulation of adzuki bean flowering. This study is based on RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) techniques to elucidate the expression of light-related regulatory genes under short-day photoperiod inducement of adzuki bean flowering, providing an important theoretical basis for its accelerated breeding. Short-day photoperiod inducement of 10 h was conducted for 5 day, 10 day, and 15 day periods on "Tang shan hong xiao dou" varieties, which are more sensitive to short-day photoperiod conditions than the other varieties. Plants grown under natural light (14.5 h) for 5 days, 10 days, and 15 days were used as controls to compare the progress of flower bud differentiation and flowering characteristics. The topmost unfolded functional leaves were selected for transcriptome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. The short-day photoperiod inducement promoted flower bud differentiation and advanced flowering time in adzuki bean. Transcriptomic analysis revealed 5,608 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for the combination of CK-5d vs. SD-5d, CK-10d vs. SD-10d, and CK-15d vs. SD-15d. The three groups of the DEGs were analyzed using the Gene Ontology (GO) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genomes and Genomes (KEGG) databases; the DEGs were associated with flowering, photosystem, and the circadian rhythm and were mainly concentrated in the hormone signaling and metabolism, circadian rhythm, and antenna protein pathways; So, 13 light-related genes across the three pathways were screened for differential and expression characteristics. Through the functional annotations of orthologs, these genes were related to flowering, which were supposed to be good candidate genes in adzuki bean. The findings provide a deep understanding of the molecular mechanisms of adzuki bean flowering in response to short-day photoperiod inducement, which laid a foundation for the functional verification of genes in the next step, and provide an important reference for the molecular breeding of adzuki bean.

Light: !induces! Flowering in adzuki bean
RNA-seq: !reveals! Differentially expressed genes
Differentially expressed genes: !associated with! Flowering, photosystem, circadian rhythm
Differentially expressed genes: !concentrated in! Hormone signaling and metabolism, circadian rhythm, antenna protein pathways
13 light-related genes: !screened for! Differential and expression characteristics
Orthologs: !related to! Flowering