Loss of CALS7 appears to confer increased susceptibility to phytoplasma infection in Arabidopsis, altering expression of genes involved in sugar metabolism and membrane transport. Callose deposition around sieve pores, under control of callose synthase 7 (CALS7), has been interpreted as a mechanical response to limit pathogen spread in phytoplasma-infected plants. Wild-type and Atcals7ko mutants were, therefore, employed to unveil the mode of involvement of CALS7 in the plant's response to phytoplasma infection. The fresh weights of healthy and CY-(Chrysanthemum Yellows) phytoplasma-infected Arabidopsis wild type and mutant plants indicated two superimposed effects of the absence of CALS7: a partial impairment of photo-assimilate transport and a stimulated phytoplasma proliferation as illustrated by a significantly increased phytoplasma titre in Atcal7ko mutants. Further studies solely dealt with the effects of CALS7 absence on phytoplasma growth. Phytoplasma infection affected sieve-element substructure to a larger extent in mutants than in wild-type plants, which was also true for the levels of some free carbohydrates. Moreover, infection induced a similar upregulation of gene expression of enzymes involved in sucrose cleavage (AtSUS5, AtSUS6) and transmembrane transport (AtSWEET11) in mutants and wild-type plants, but an increased gene expression of carbohydrate transmembrane transporters (AtSWEET12, AtSTP13, AtSUC3) in infected mutants only. It remains still unclear how the absence of AtCALS7 leads to gene upregulation and how an increased intercellular mobility of carbohydrates and possibly effectors contributes to a higher susceptibility. It is also unclear if modified sieve-pore structures in mutants allow a better spread of phytoplasmas giving rise to higher titre.

CALS7: !affects! Susceptibility to phytoplasma infection 
AtSUS5, AtSUS6: !upregulated by! Phytoplasma infection 
AtSWEET11: !upregulated by! Phytoplasma infection 
AtSWEET12, AtSTP13, AtSUC3: !upregulated by! Phytoplasma infection in mutants only 
AtCALS7: !absence of! Leads to gene upregulation