As one of the most important crops, Asian cultivated rice has evolved into a complex group including several subgroups adapting various eco-climate-systems around the globe. Here, we pictured a comprehensive view of its original domestication, divergences, and the origin of different subgroups by integrating agriculture, archeology, genetics, nuclear, and cytoplasm genome results. Then, it was highlighted that interspecific hybridization-introgression has played important role in improving the genetic diversity and adaptation of <i>Oryza sativa</i> during its evolution process. Natural hybridization-introgression led to the origin of <i>indica, aus</i>, and <i>basmatic</i> subgroups, which adapted to changing cultivated environments, and produced feral weedy rice coexisting and competing with cultivars under production management. Artificial interspecific hybridization-introgression gained several breakthroughs in rice breeding, such as developing three-line hybrid rice, new rice for Africa (NERICA), and some important pest and disease resistance genes in rice genetic improvement, contributing to the stable increase of rice production to meet the expanding human population. We proposed a series to exploit the virtues of hybridization-introgression in the genetic improvement of Asian cultivated rice. But some key issues such as reproductive barriers especially hybrid sterility should be investigated further, which are conducive to gene exchange between cultivated rice and its relatives, and even is beneficial to exploiting interspecific hybrid vigor. New technologies help introduce favorable genes from distant wild species to Asian cultivated rice, such as transgenic and genome editing systems. Rising introgression lines in a wider range with multi-donor benefits allele mining, understanding genetic network of rice growth and development, yield formation, and environmental adaptation. Then, integration of new tools and interspecific hybridization can be a future direction to develop more usable breeding populations which can make Asian cultivated rice more resilient to the changing climate and world.

Hybridization-introgression: !leads to! Origin of subgroups 
Hybridization-introgression: !produces! Feral weedy rice 
Hybridization-introgression: !gains! Breeding breakthroughs 
Hybridization-introgression: !exploits! Virtues in genetic improvement 
Hybridization-introgression: !investigates! Reproductive barriers 
Hybridization-introgression: !introduces! Favorable genes from wild species 
Hybridization-introgression: !develops! Usable breeding populations