Orobanchaceae is the largest family of parasitic plants, containing autotrophic and parasitic plants with all degrees of parasitism. This makes it by far the best family for studying the origin and evolution of plant parasitism. Here we provide three high-quality genomes of orobanchaceous plants, the autotrophic Lindenbergia luchunensis and the holoparasitic plants Phelipanche aegyptiaca and Orobanche cumana. Phylogenomic analysis of these three genomes together with those previously published and the transcriptomes of other orobanchaceous species created a robust phylogenetic framework for Orobanchaceae. We found that an ancient whole-genome duplication (WGD; about 73.48 million years ago), which occurred earlier than the origin of Orobanchaceae, might have contributed to the emergence of parasitism. However, no WGD events occurred in any lineage of orobanchaceous parasites except for Striga after divergence from their autotrophic common ancestor, suggesting that, in contrast with previous speculations, WGD is not associated with the emergence of holoparasitism. We detected evident convergent gene loss in all parasites within Orobanchaceae and between Orobanchaceae and dodder Cuscuta australis. The gene families in the orobanchaceous parasites showed a clear pattern of recent gains and expansions. The expanded gene families are enriched in functions related to the development of the haustorium, suggesting that recent gene family expansions may have facilitated the adaptation of orobanchaceous parasites to different hosts. This study illustrates a stepwise pattern in the evolution of parasitism in the orobanchaceous parasites and will facilitate future studies on parasitism and the control of parasitic plants in agriculture.

Orobanchaceae: !contains! autotrophic and parasitic plants
WGD: !occurred before! origin of Orobanchaceae
Striga: !exception to! WGD in orobanchaceous parasites
Gene families: !expanded in! orobanchaceous parasites
Gene families: !enriched in! haustorium development functions
WGD: !not associated with! emergence of holoparasitism