Auxin response factor 2 acts as a positive regulator to fine-tune the spatial and temporal accumulation of flavonoid compounds, mainly flavonols and proanthocyanidins in Arabidopsis. Auxin response factor (ARF) proteins are reported to involve in auxin-mediated regulation of flavonoid biosynthesis. However, the detailed regulation mechanism of ARF remains still unknown. Here, we provide genetic and molecular evidence that one of the twenty-three ARF members-ARF2-positively regulates flavonoid biosynthesis at multi-level in tissue-specific manner in Arabidopsis thaliana. Loss-of-function mutation of ARF2 led to significant reduction in flavonoid content (e.g., flavonols and proanthocyanidins) in the seedlings and seeds of the Arabidopsis arf2 mutants. Over-expression of ARF2 increased flavonols and proanthocyanidins content in Arabidopsis. Additionally, the changes of flavonoid content correlate well with the transcript abundance of several regulatory genes (e.g., MYB11, MYB12, MYB111, TT2, and GL3), and key biosynthetic genes (e.g., CHS, F3'H, FLS, ANS, ANR, TT12, TT19, and TT15), in the arf2 mutant and ARF2 over-expression lines. Transient transactivation assays with site-directed mutagenesis confirmed that ARF2 directly regulates the expression of MYB12 and FLS genes in the flavonol pathway and ANR in the proanthocyanidin pathway, and indirectly regulates MYB11 and MYB111 genes in the flavonol pathway, and ANS, TT12, TT19 and TT15 genes in the proanthocyanidin pathway. Further genetic results indicated that ARF2 acts upstream of MYB12 to regulate flavonol accumulation, and of TT2 to regulate proanthocyanidins accumulation. In particular, yeast two-hybrid assays revealed that ARF2 physically interacts with TT2, a master regulator of proanthocyanidins biosynthesis. Combined together, these results indicated that ARF2 functions as a positive regulator for the fine-tuned spatial and temporal regulation of flavonoids (mainly flavonols and proanthocyanidins) accumulation in Arabidopsis.

ARF2: !positively regulates! flavonoid biosynthesis
ARF2: !directly regulates! MYB12 and FLS genes
ARF2: !indirectly regulates! MYB11 and MYB111 genes
ARF2: !acts upstream of! MYB12
ARF2: !physically interacts with! TT2
TT2: !regulates! proanthocyanidins accumulation