Vernalization, influenced by environmental factors, is an essential process associated with the productivity of temperate crops, during which epigenetic regulation of gene expression plays an important role. Although DNA methylation is one of the major epigenetic mechanisms associated with the control of gene expression, global changes in DNA methylation in the regulation of gene expression during vernalization-induced flowering of temperate plants remain largely undetermined. To characterize vernalization-associated DNA methylation dynamics, we performed whole-genome bisulfite-treated sequencing and transcriptome sequencing in orchardgrass (Dactylis glomerata) during vernalization. The results revealed that increased levels of genome DNA methylation during the early vernalization of orchardgrass were associated with transcriptional changes in DNA methyltransferase and demethylase genes. Upregulated expression of vernalization-related genes during early vernalization was attributable to an increase in mCHH in the promoter regions of these genes. Application of an exogenous DNA methylation accelerator or overexpression of orchardgrass NUCLEAR POLY(A) POLYMERASE (DgPAPS4) promoted earlier flowering, indicating that DNA hypermethylation plays an important role in vernalization-induced flowering. Collectively, our findings revealed that vernalization-induced hypermethylation is responsible for floral primordium initiation and development. These observations provide a theoretical foundation for further studies on the molecular mechanisms underlying the control of vernalization in temperate grasses.

Vernalization: !influenced by! environmental factors 
DNA methylation: !associated with! control of gene expression 
Whole-genome bisulfite-treated sequencing: !revealed! increased levels of genome DNA methylation 
DNA methyltransferase and demethylase genes: !upregulated expression of! vernalization-related genes 
mCHH: !increased in! promoter regions of these genes 
Exogenous DNA methylation accelerator: !promoted earlier flowering of! orchardgrass 
Overexpression of DgPAPS4: !promoted earlier flowering of! orchardgrass 
DNA hypermethylation: !plays important role in! vernalization-induced flowering 
Vernalization-induced hypermethylation: !responsible for! floral primordium initiation and development