In recent years, the convolution neural network has been the most widely used deep learning algorithm in the field of plant disease diagnosis and has performed well in classification. However, in practice, there are still some specific issues that have not been paid adequate attention to. For instance, the same pathogen may cause similar or different symptoms when infecting plant leaves, while the same pathogen may cause similar or disparate symptoms on different parts of the plant. Therefore, questions come up naturally: should the images showing different symptoms of the same disease be in one class or two separate classes in the image database? Also, how will the different classification methods affect the results of image recognition? In this study, taking rice leaf blast and neck blast caused by <i>Magnaporthe oryzae</i>, and rice sheath blight caused by <i>Rhizoctonia solani</i> as examples, three experiments were designed to explore how database configuration affects recognition accuracy in recognizing different symptoms of the same disease on the same plant part, similar symptoms of the same disease on different parts, and different symptoms on different parts. The results suggested that when the symptoms of the same disease were the same or similar, no matter whether they were on the same plant part or not, training combined classes of these images can get better performance than training them separately. When the difference between symptoms was obvious, the classification was relatively easy, and both separate training and combined training could achieve relatively high recognition accuracy. The results also, to a certain extent, indicated that the greater the number of images in the training data set, the higher the average classification accuracy.

Database configuration: !affects! Recognition accuracy
Similar symptoms: !combined training of! Better performance
Different symptoms: !separate training of! High recognition accuracy
Number of images: !increases! Average classification accuracy