['35861422', 'Thymidylates are generated by several partially overlapping metabolic pathways in  different subcellular locations. This interconnectedness complicates an  understanding of how thymidylates are formed in vivo. Analyzing a comprehensive  collection of mutants and double mutants on the phenotypic and metabolic level,  we report the effect of de novo thymidylate synthesis, salvage of thymidine, and  conversion of cytidylates to thymidylates on thymidylate homeostasis during seed  germination and seedling establishment in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana).  During germination, the salvage of thymidine in organelles contributes  predominantly to the thymidylate pools and a mutant lacking organellar  (mitochondrial and plastidic) thymidine kinase has severely altered  deoxyribonucleotide levels, less chloroplast DNA, and chlorotic cotyledons. This  phenotype is aggravated when mitochondrial thymidylate de novo synthesis is  additionally compromised. We also discovered an organellar  deoxyuridine-triphosphate pyrophosphatase and show that its main function is not  thymidylate synthesis but probably the removal of noncanonical nucleotide  triphosphates. Interestingly, cytosolic thymidylate synthesis can only compensate  defective organellar thymidine salvage in seedlings but not during germination.  This study provides a comprehensive insight into the nucleotide metabolome of  germinating seeds and demonstrates the unique role of enzymes that seem redundant  at first glance.', '2022 Sep 27', 'Plant Cell', '10.1093/plcell/koac207', 'ORCID:']

Thymidylates: !generated by! metabolic pathways 
metabolic pathways: !localized to! subcellular locations 
mutants: !analyzed on! phenotypic and metabolic level 
de novo thymidylate synthesis: !affects! thymidylate homeostasis 
salvage of thymidine: !contributes to! thymidylate pools 
conversion of cytidylates: !converts to! thymidylates 
mutant lacking organellar thymidine kinase: !alters! deoxyribonucleotide levels 
mitochondrial thymidylate de novo synthesis: !compromised! phenotype 
organellar deoxyuridine-triphosphate pyrophosphatase: !removes! noncanonical nucleotide triphosphates 
cytosolic thymidylate synthesis: !compensates for! defective organellar thymidine salvage