Seed dormancy is a very complex trait controlled by interactions between genetic and environmental factors. Nitrate is inversely correlated with seed dormancy in Arabidopsis. This is explained by the fact that seed dry storage (after-ripening) reduces the need for nitrogen for germination. When nitrate is absorbed by plants, it is first reduced to nitrite and then to ammonium for incorporation into amino acids, nucleic acids and chlorophyll. Previously, we showed that ALLANTOATE AMIDOHYDROLASE (AtAAH) transcripts are up-regulated in imbibed dormant seeds compared with after-ripened seeds. AAH is an enzyme in the uric acid catabolic pathway which catalyzes the hydrolysis of allantoate to yield CO2, NH3 and S-ureidoglycine. This pathway is the final stage of purine catabolism, and functions in plants and some bacteria to provide nitrogen, particularly when other nitrogen sources are depleted. Ataah mutant seeds are more dormant and accumulate high levels of allantoate, allantoin and urea, whereas energy-related metabolites and several amino acids are lower upon seed imbibition in comparison with Columbia-0. AtAAH expression could be detected during the early stages of seed development, with a transient increase around 8 d after pollination. AtAAH expression is the highest in mature pollen. The application of exogenous potassium nitrate can partly complement the higher dormancy phenotype of the Ataah mutant seeds, whereas other nitrogen sources cannot. Our results indicate that potassium nitrate does not specifically overcome the alleviated dormancy levels in Ataah mutant seeds, but promotes germination in general. Possible pathways by which AtAAH affects seed germination are discussed.

Nitrate: !inversely correlated with! Seed dormancy 
AtAAH: !up-regulated in! Imbibed dormant seeds 
AtAAH: !catalyzes! Hydrolysis of allantoate 
AtAAH: !provides! Nitrogen 
AtAAH: !detected during! Early stages of seed development 
Potassium nitrate: !partly complements! Higher dormancy phenotype of Ataah mutant seeds