Plants have evolved diverse strategies for foraging, e.g., mycorrhizae, modification of root system architecture, and secretion of phosphatase. Despite extensive molecular/physiological studies on individual strategies under laboratory/greenhouse conditions, there is little information about how plants orchestrate these strategies in the field. We hypothesized that individual strategies are independently driven by corresponding genetic modules in response to deficiency/unbalance in nutrients. Roots colonized by mycorrhizal fungi, leaves, and root-zone soils were collected from 251 maize plants grown across the United States Corn Belt and Japan, which provided a large gradient of soil characteristics/agricultural practice and thus gene expression for foraging. RNA was extracted from the roots, sequenced, and subjected to gene coexpression network analysis. Nineteen genetic modules were defined and functionally characterized, from which three genetic modules, mycorrhiza formation, phosphate starvation response (PSR), and root development, were selected as those directly involved in foraging. The mycorrhizal module consists of genes responsible for mycorrhiza formation and was upregulated by both phosphorus and nitrogen deficiencies. The PSR module that consists of genes encoding phosphate transporter, secreted acid phosphatase, and enzymes involved in internal-phosphate recycling was regulated independent of the mycorrhizal module and strongly upregulated by phosphorus deficiency relative to nitrogen. The root development module that consists of regulatory genes for root development and cellulose biogenesis was upregulated by phosphorus and nitrogen enrichment. The expression of this module was negatively correlated with that of the mycorrhizal module, suggesting that root development is intrinsically an opposite strategy of mycorrhizae. Our approach provides new insights into understanding plant foraging strategies in complex environments at the molecular level.

Mycorrhizal module: !consists of! genes responsible for mycorrhiza formation 
Mycorrhizal module: !upregulated by! phosphorus and nitrogen deficiencies 
PSR module: !consists of! genes encoding phosphate transporter, secreted acid phosphatase, and enzymes involved in internal-phosphate recycling 
PSR module: !upregulated by! phosphorus deficiency relative to nitrogen 
Root development module: !consists of! regulatory genes for root development and cellulose biogenesis 
Root development module: !upregulated by! phosphorus and nitrogen enrichment 
Root development module: !negatively correlated with! mycorrhizal module