The identification of drought stress regulatory genes is crucial for the genetic improvement of maize (Zea mays L.) yield. Nuclear factors Y (NF-Ys) are important transcription factors, but their roles in the drought stress tolerance of plants and underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. In this work, we used yeast two-hybrid screening to identify potential interactors of ZmNF-YB16 and confirmed the interaction between ZmNF-YA1 and ZmNF-YB16-YC17 and between ZmNF-YA7 and ZmNF-YB16-YC17. ZmNF-YB16 interacted with ZmNF-YC17 via its histone fold domain to form a heterodimer in the cytoplasm and then entered the nucleus to form a heterotrimer with ZmNF-YA1 or ZmNF-YA7 under osmotic stress. Overexpression of ZmNF-YA1 improved drought and salt stress tolerance and root development of maize, whereas zmnf-ya1 mutants exhibited drought and salt stress sensitivity. ZmNF-YA1-mediated transcriptional regulation, especially in JA signaling, histone modification, and chromatin remodeling, could underlie the altered stress tolerance of zmnf-ya1 mutant plants. ZmNF-YA1 bound to promoter CCAAT motifs and directly regulated the expression of multiple genes that play important roles in stress responses and plant development. Comparison of ZmNF-YB16- and ZmNF-YA1-regulated genes showed that ZmNF-YA1 and ZmNF-YB16 have similar biological functions in stress responses but varied functions in other biological processes. Taken together, ZmNF-YA1 is a positive regulator of plant drought and salt stress responses and is involved in the root development of maize, and ZmNF-Y complexes with different subunits may have discrepant functions.

ZmNF-YB16: !interacts with! ZmNF-YC17
ZmNF-YA1: !interacts with! ZmNF-YB16-YC17
ZmNF-YA7: !interacts with! ZmNF-YB16-YC17
ZmNF-YA1: !enhances! drought and salt stress tolerance
ZmNF-YA1: !represses! JA signaling
ZmNF-YA1: !binds to! CCAAT motifs
ZmNF-YA1: !regulates! multiple genes
ZmNF-YA1: !has similar functions! in stress responses
ZmNF-YA1: !has varied functions! in other biological processes