Studying the regulatory mechanisms that drive nitrogen-use efficiency (NUE) in crops is important for sustainable agriculture and environmental protection. In this study, we generated a high-quality genome assembly for the high-NUE wheat cultivar Kenong 9204 and systematically analyzed genes related to nitrogen uptake and metabolism. By comparative analyses, we found that the high-affinity nitrate transporter gene family had expanded in Triticeae. Further studies showed that subsequent functional differentiation endowed the expanded family members with saline inducibility, providing a genetic basis for improving the adaptability of wheat to nitrogen deficiency in various habitats. To explore the genetic and molecular mechanisms of high NUE, we compared genomic and transcriptomic data from the high-NUE cultivar Kenong 9204 (KN9204) and the low-NUE cultivar Jing 411 and quantified their nitrogen accumulation under high- and low-nitrogen conditions. Compared with Jing 411, KN9204 absorbed significantly more nitrogen at the reproductive stage after shooting and accumulated it in the shoots and seeds. Transcriptome data analysis revealed that nitrogen deficiency clearly suppressed the expression of genes related to cell division in the young spike of Jing 411, whereas this suppression of gene expression was much lower in KN9204. In addition, KN9204 maintained relatively high expression of NPF genes for a longer time than Jing 411 during seed maturity. Physiological and transcriptome data revealed that KN9204 was more tolerant of nitrogen deficiency than Jing 411, especially at the reproductive stage. The high NUE of KN9204 is an integrated effect controlled at different levels. Taken together, our data provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms of NUE and important gene resources for improving wheat cultivars with a higher NUE trait.

Gene: !expands! Family
Gene: !inducible by! Salinity
Gene: !accumulates! Nitrogen
Gene: !suppresses! Cell Division
Gene: !maintains! NPF Expression
Gene: !improves! NUE Trait