To unveil the evolution of mitochondrial RNA editing in gymnosperms, we characterized mitochondrial genomes (mitogenomes), plastid genomes, RNA editing sites, and pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins from 10 key taxa representing four of the five extant gymnosperm clades. The assembled mitogenomes vary in gene content due to massive gene losses in Gnetum and Conifer II clades. Mitochondrial gene expression levels also vary according to protein function, with the most highly expressed genes involved in the respiratory complex. We identified 9132 mitochondrial C-to-U editing sites, as well as 2846 P-class and 8530 PLS-class PPR proteins. Regains of editing sites were demonstrated in Conifer II rps3 transcripts whose corresponding mitogenomic sequences lack introns due to retroprocessing. Our analyses reveal that non-synonymous editing is efficient and results in more codons encoding hydrophobic amino acids. In contrast, synonymous editing, although performed with variable efficiency, can increase the number of U-ending codons that are preferentially utilized in gymnosperm mitochondria. The inferred loss-to-gain ratio of mitochondrial editing sites in gymnosperms is 2.1:1, of which losses of non-synonymous editing are mainly due to genomic C-to-T substitutions. However, such substitutions only explain a small fraction of synonymous editing site losses, indicating distinct evolutionary mechanisms. We show that gymnosperms have experienced multiple lineage-specific duplications in PLS-class PPR proteins. These duplications likely contribute to accumulated RNA editing sites, as a mechanistic correlation between RNA editing and PLS-class PPR proteins is statistically supported.

Gene: !affects! Expression level
Gene: !encodes! Hydrophobic amino acid
Gene: !synthesizes! Mitochondrial C-to-U editing sites
Gene: !localizes to! Respiratory complex
Gene: !interacts with! PPR proteins
Gene: !enhances! Non-synonymous editing
Gene: !represses! Synonymous editing
Gene: !duplicates! PLS-class PPR proteins