Allelopathy is expressed through the release of plant chemicals and is considered a natural alternative for sustainable weed management. Artemisia argyi (A. argyi) is widely distributed throughout Asia, and often dominates fields due to its strong allelopathy. However, the mechanism of A. argyi allelopathy is largely unknown and need to be elucidated at the physiological and molecular levels. In this study, we used electron microscopy, ionomics analysis, phytohormone profiling, and transcriptome analysis to investigate the physiological and molecular mechanisms of A. argyi allelopathy using the model plant rice (Oryza sativa) as receptor plants. A. argyi water extract (AAWE)-treated rice plants grow poorly and display root morphological anomalies and leaf yellowing. We found that AAWE significantly inhibits rice growth by destroying the root and leaf system in multiple ways, including the integrity of ultrastructure, reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis, and the accumulation of soluble sugar and chlorophyll synthesis. Further detection of the hormone contents suggests that AAWE leads to indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) accumulation in roots. Moreover, ionomics analysis shows that AAWE inhibits the absorption and transportation of photosynthesis-essential mineral elements, especially Mg, Fe, and Mn. In addition, the results of transcriptome analysis revealed that AAWE affects a series of crucial primary metabolic processes comprising photosynthesis in rice plants. This study indicates that A. argyi realizes its strongly allelopathy through comprehensive effects on recipient plants including large-scale IAA synthesis and accumulation, ROS explosion, damaging the membrane system and organelles, and obstructing ion absorption and transport, photosynthesis and other pivotal primary metabolic processes of plants. Therefore, AAWE could potentially be developed as an environmentally friendly botanical herbicide due to its strong allelopathic effects.

AAWE: !destroys! root and leaf system 
AAWE: !inhibits! rice growth 
AAWE: !leads to! IAA accumulation 
AAWE: !inhibits! absorption and transportation of photosynthesis-essential mineral elements 
AAWE: !affects! primary metabolic processes 
AAWE: !explodes! ROS 
AAWE: !damages! membrane system and organelles