The highly esteemed Chinese herb, <i>Dendrobium huoshanense</i>, whose major metabolites are polysaccharides and alkaloids, is on the verge of extinction. The stone planting under the forest (SPUF) and greenhouse planting (GP) of <i>D. huoshanense</i> are two different cultivation methods of pharmaceutical Dendrobium with significantly differences in morphology, metabolites content and composition, and medication efficacy. Here, we conducted proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses to reveal differences in molecular mechanisms between SPUF and GP. We identified 237 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between the two proteomes, and 291 modification sites belonging to 215 phosphoproteins with a phosphorylation level significantly changed (PLSC) were observed. GO, KEGG pathway, protein domain, and cluster analyses revealed that these DEPs were mainly localized in the chloroplast; involved in processes such as posttranslational modification, carbohydrate transport and metabolism, and secondary metabolite biosynthesis; and enriched in pathways mainly including linoleic acid metabolism, plant-pathogen interactions, and phenylpropanoid, cutin, suberin, and wax biosynthesis. PLSC phosphoproteins were mainly located in the chloroplast, and highly enriched in responses to different stresses and signal transduction mechanisms through protein kinase and phosphotransferase activities. Significant differences between SPUF and GP were observed by mapping the DEPs and phosphorylated proteins to photosynthesis and polysaccharide and alkaloid biosynthesis pathways. Phosphorylation characteristics and kinase categories in <i>D. huoshanense</i> were also clarified in this study. We analyzed different molecular mechanisms between SPUF and GP at proteomic and phosphoproteomic levels, providing valuable information for the development and utilization of <i>D. huoshanense</i>.

Gene: !localizes to! chloroplast 
Gene: !enhances! posttranslational modification 
Gene: !enhances! carbohydrate transport and metabolism 
Gene: !enhances! secondary metabolite biosynthesis 
Gene: !enhances! linoleic acid metabolism 
Gene: !enhances! plant-pathogen interactions 
Gene: !enhances! phenylpropanoid, cutin, suberin, and wax biosynthesis 
Gene: !enhances! responses to different stresses 
Gene: !enhances! signal transduction mechanisms 
Gene: !interacts with! protein kinase 
Gene: !interacts with! phosphotransferase activities 
Gene: !enhances! photosynthesis 
Gene: !enhances! polysaccharide and alkaloid biosynthesis