Through the process of domestication, selection is targeted on a limited number of plant traits that are typically associated with yield. As an unintended consequence, domesticated plants often perform poorly compared to their wild progenitors for a multitude of traits that were not under selection during domestication, including abiotic and biotic stress tolerance. Over the past decade, advances in sequencing technology have allowed for the rigorous characterization of host-associated microbial communities, termed the microbiome. It is now clear that nearly every conceivable plant interaction with the environment is mediated by interactions with the microbiome. For this reason, plant-microbiome interactions are an area of great promise for plant breeding and crop improvement. Here, we review the literature to assess the potential impact that domestication has had on plant-microbiome interactions and the current understanding of the genetic basis of microbiome variation to inform plant breeding efforts. Overall, we find limited evidence that domestication impacts the diversity of microbiomes, but domestication is often associated with shifts in the abundance and composition of microbial communities, including taxa of known functional significance. Moreover, genome-wide association studies and mutant analysis have not revealed a consistent set of core candidate genes or genetic pathways that confer variation in microbiomes across systems. However, such studies do implicate a consistent role for plant immunity, root traits, root and leaf exudates and cell wall integrity as key traits that control microbiome colonization and assembly. Therefore, selection on these key traits may pose the most immediate promise for enhancing plant-microbiome interactions through breeding.

Domestication: !affects! Microbiome
Selection: !targets! Plant traits
Plant-Microbiome Interactions: !mediate! Environment interactions
Domestication: !associated with! Shifts in microbial abundance/composition
Genome-wide Association Studies: !implicate! Plant immunity, root traits, exudates, cell wall integrity
Selection: !poses promise for! Enhancing plant-microbiome interactions