A novel gene belonging to the aldo-keto reductase 13 family is involved in isoliquiritigenin biosynthesis in dahlia. The yellow pigments of dahlia flowers are derived from 6'-deoxychalcones, which are synthesized via a two-step process, involving the conversion of 3-malonyl-CoA and 4-coumaloyl-CoA into isoliquiritigenin in the first step, and the subsequent generation of butein from isoliquiritigenin. The first step reaction is catalyzed by chalcone synthase (CHS) and aldo-keto reductase (AKR). AKR has been implicated in the isoflavone biosynthesis in legumes, however, isolation of butein biosynthesis related AKR members are yet to be reported. A comparative RNA-seq analysis between two dahlia cultivars, 'Shukuhai' and its butein-deficient lateral mutant 'Rinka', was used in this study to identify a novel AKR gene involved in 6'-deoxychalcone biosynthesis. DvAKR1 encoded a AKR 13 sub-family protein with significant differential expression levels, and was phylogenetically distinct from the chalcone reductases, which belongs to the AKR 4A sub-family in legumes. DNA sequence variation and expression profiles of DvAKR1 gene were correlated with 6'-deoxychalcone accumulation in the tested dahlia cultivars. A single over-expression analysis of DvAKR1 was not sufficient to initiate the accumulation of isoliquiritigenin in tobacco, in contrast, its co-overexpression with a chalcone 4'-O-glucosyltransferase (Am4'CGT) from Antirrhinum majus and a MYB transcription factor, CaMYBA from Capsicum annuum successfully induced isoliquiritigenin accumulation. In addition, DvAKR1 homologous gene expression was detected in Coreopsideae species accumulating 6'-deoxychalcone, but not in Asteraceae species lacking 6'-deoxychalcone production. These results not only demonstrate the involvement of DvAKR1 in the biosynthesis of 6'-deoxychalcone in dahlia, but also show that 6'-deoxychalcone occurrence in Coreopsideae species developed evolutionarily independent from legume species.

DvAKR1: !synthesizes! isoliquiritigenin 
DvAKR1: !co-overexpresses with! Am4'CGT, CaMYBA 
DvAKR1: !correlates with! 6'-deoxychalcone accumulation 
DvAKR1: !distinct from! chalcone reductases 
DvAKR1: !expressed in! Coreopsideae species 
DvAKR1: !not expressed in! Asteraceae species