As compared with the traditional visual discrimination methods, deep learning and image processing methods have the ability to detect plants efficiently and non-invasively. This is of great significance in the diagnosis and breeding of plant disease resistance phenotypes. Currently, the studies on plant diseases and pest stresses mainly focus on a leaf scale. There are only a few works regarding the stress detection at a complex canopy scale. In this work, three tea plant stresses with similar symptoms that cause a severe threat to the yield and quality of tea gardens, including the tea green leafhopper [<i>Empoasca (Matsumurasca) onukii</i> Matsuda], anthracnose (<i>Gloeosporium theae-sinensis</i> Miyake), and sunburn (disease-like stress), are evaluated. In this work, a stress detection and segmentation method by fusing deep learning and image processing techniques at a canopy scale is proposed. First, a specified Faster RCNN algorithm is proposed for stress detection of tea plants at a canopy scale. After obtaining the stress detection boxes, a new feature, i.e., RGReLU, is proposed for the segmentation of tea plant stress scabs. Finally, the detection model at the canopy scale is transferred to a field scale by using unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) images. The results show that the proposed method effectively achieves canopy-scale stress adaptive segmentation and outputs the scab type and corresponding damage ratio. The mean average precision (mAP) of the object detection reaches 76.07%, and the overall accuracy of the scab segmentation reaches 88.85%. In addition, the results also show that the proposed method has a strong generalization ability, and the model can be migrated and deployed to UAV scenarios. By fusing deep learning and image processing technology, the fine and quantitative results of canopy-scale stress monitoring can provide support for a wide range of scouting of tea garden.

Faster RCNN algorithm: !detects! Tea plant stresses 
RGReLU feature: !segments! Tea plant stress scabs 
Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) images: !transfer! Detection model to field scale 
Deep learning and image processing technology: !fuse! For canopy-scale stress monitoring