Wheat stripe rust and powdery mildew are important worldwide diseases of wheat (Triticum aestivum). The wheat cultivar Xingmin318 (XM318) is resistant to both wheat stripe rust and powdery mildew, which are caused by Puccinia striiformis f. sp. tritici (Pst) and Blumeria graminis f. sp. tritici (Bgt), respectively. To explore the difference between wheat defense response against Pst and Bgt, quantitative proteomic analyses of XM318 inoculated with either Pst or Bgt were performed using tandem mass tags technology. A total of 741 proteins were identified as differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs). Bioinformatics analyses indicated that some functional categories, including antioxidant activity and immune system process, exhibited obvious differences between Pst and Bgt infections. Intriguingly, only 42 DAPs responded to both Pst and Bgt infections. Twelve DAPs were randomly selected for reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) analysis, and the mRNA expression levels of 11 were consistent with their protein expression. Furthermore, gene silencing using the virus-induced gene silencing system indicated that glutathione S-transferase (TaGSTU6) has an important role in resistance to Bgt but not to Pst. TaGSTU6 interacted with the cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) domain-containing protein (TaCBSX3) in both Pst and Bgt infections. Knockdown of TaCBSX3 expression only reduced wheat resistance to Bgt infection. Overexpression of TaGSTU6 and TaCBSX3 in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) promoted plant resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. Tomato DC3000. Our results indicate that TaGSTU6 interaction with TaCBSX3 only confers wheat resistance to Bgt, suggesting that wheat has different response mechanisms to Pst and Bgt stress.

Wheat cultivar XM318: !resistant to! wheat stripe rust and powdery mildew
Quantitative proteomic analyses: !identifies! 741 proteins
Antioxidant activity and immune system process: !differ between! Pst and Bgt infections
42 DAPs: !respond to! both Pst and Bgt infections
TaGSTU6: !important role in! resistance to Bgt
TaGSTU6: !interacts with! TaCBSX3 in both Pst and Bgt infections
Knockdown of TaCBSX3 expression: !reduces! wheat resistance to Bgt infection
Overexpression of TaGSTU6 and TaCBSX3 in Arabidopsis: !promotes! plant resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. Tomato DC3000
TaGSTU6 interaction with TaCBSX3: !confers! wheat resistance to Bgt