The non-destructive detection of soluble solids content (SSC) in fruit by near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy has a good application prospect. At present, the application of portable devices is more common. The construction of an accurate and stable prediction model is the key for the successful application of the device. In this study, the visible and near-infrared (Vis/NIR) spectra of Korla fragrant pears were collected by a commercial portable measurement device. Different pretreatment methods were used to preprocess the raw spectra, and the partial least squares (PLS) model was constructed to predict the SSC of pears for the determination of the appropriate pretreatment method. Subsequently, PLS and least squares support vector machine (LS-SVM) models were constructed based on the preprocessed full spectra. A new combination (BOSS-SPA) of bootstrapping soft shrinkage (BOSS) and successive projections algorithm (SPA) was used for variable selection. For comparison, single BOSS and SPA were also used for variable selection. Finally, three types of models, namely, PLS, LS-SVM, and multiple linear regression (MLR), were constructed based on different input variables. Comparing the prediction performance of all models, it showed that the BOSS-SPA-PLS model based on 17 variables obtained the best SSC assessment ability with <i>r</i> <sub>p</sub> of 0.94 and <i>RMSEP</i> of 0.27 °Brix. The overall result indicated that portable measurement with Vis/NIR spectroscopy can be used for the detection of SSC in Korla fragrant pears.

NIR spectroscopy: !detects! SSC 
Portable device: !applies! NIR spectroscopy 
PLS model: !predicts! SSC 
Pretreatment method: !determines! Appropriate PLS model 
Full spectra: !used for! PLS and LS-SVM models 
BOSS-SPA: !combines! Bootstrapping soft shrinkage and successive projections algorithm 
Variable selection: !performed by! BOSS-SPA, BOSS, and SPA 
PLS, LS-SVM, and MLR models: !constructed based on! Different input variables 
BOSS-SPA-PLS model: !obtains best! SSC assessment ability