Infectious alleles of endogenous banana streak viruses (eBSVs) are present in the genome of all banana interspecific cultivars, including plantains and cooking types. Activation of these infectious eBSV alleles by biotic and abiotic stresses leads to spontaneous infections by cognate viruses and raises concerns about their ability to promote outbreaks of banana streak viruses under field cultivation conditions. We undertook a comprehensive risk assessment study of infectious eBSV alleles of species BSOLV, BSGFV and BSIMV in banana interspecific cultivars in Guadeloupe, a tropical island of the Caribbean where bananas are grown for export and local markets. We carried out a prevalence survey of BSOLV, BSGFV and BSIMV species in a range of cultivars grown in Guadeloupe. Our results suggest that BSOLV and BSGFV infections arise from the activation of infectious eBSVs rather than vector-borne transmission and point to a correlation between altitude and infection rates in interspecific hybrids with AAB genotypes. We studied the dynamics of activation of infectious eBSOLV and eBSGFV alleles by tissue culture and field cultivation in a range of cultivars. We showed that tissue culture and field cultivation trigger distinct activation pathways, resulting in distinct activation patterns. We also showed that activation decreased over time during cell culture and field cultivation and that BSV infections arising from the activation of infectious eBSV alleles cause symptomless infections in the most cultivated plantain in Guadeloupe, French Clair. Overall, our study shows that the risk of BSV outbreaks resulting from the activation of infectious eBSVs in plantain originating from vegetative multiplication is negligible in Guadeloupe.

eBSV: !activates! Infectious alleles 
Biotic/Abiotic stresses: !activate! eBSV 
Altitude: !correlates with! Infection rates 
Tissue culture: !triggers! Activation pathways 
Field cultivation: !triggers! Activation pathways 
Activation: !decreases over time! Cell culture/Field cultivation 
Infectious eBSV: !causes! Symptomless infections 
Risk of BSV outbreaks: !negligible! Plantain from vegetative multiplication