Rice is one of the most important food crops for human beings. Its total production ranks third in the grain crop output. Bacterial Leaf Blight (BLB), as one of the three major diseases of rice, occurs every year, posing a huge threat to rice production and safety. There is an asymptomatic period between the infection and the onset periods, and BLB will spread rapidly and widely under suitable conditions. Therefore, accurate detection of early asymptomatic BLB is very necessary. The purpose of this study was to test the feasibility of detecting early asymptomatic infection of the rice BLB disease based on hyperspectral imaging and Spectral Dilated Convolution 3-Dimensional Convolutional Neural Network (SDC-3DCNN). First, hyperspectral images were obtained from rice leaves infected with the BLB disease at the tillering stage. The spectrum was smoothed by the Savitzky-Golay (SG) method, and the wavelength between 450 and 950 nm was intercepted for analysis. Then Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Random Forest (RF) were used to extract the feature information from the original spectra as inputs. The overall performance of the SDC-3DCNN model with different numbers of input features and different spectral dilated ratios was evaluated. Lastly, the saliency map visualization was used to explain the sensitivity of individual wavelengths. The results showed that the performance of the SDC-3DCNN model reached an accuracy of 95.4427% when the number of inputs is 50 characteristic wavelengths (extracted by RF) and the dilated ratio is set at 5. The saliency-sensitive wavelengths were identified in the range from 530 to 570 nm, which overlaps with the important wavelengths extracted by RF. According to our findings, combining hyperspectral imaging and deep learning can be a reliable approach for identifying early asymptomatic infection of the rice BLB disease, providing sufficient support for early warning and rice disease prevention.

SG Method: !smoothes! Spectrum 
PCA: !extracts! Feature Information 
RF: !extracts! Feature Information 
SDC-3DCNN Model: !evaluates! Performance 
Saliency Map Visualization: !explains! Sensitivity 
Hyperspectral Imaging: !combines with! Deep Learning