Flagellin perception is a keystone of pattern-triggered immunity in plants. The recognition of this protein by a plasma membrane (PM) receptor complex is the beginning of a signaling cascade that includes protein phosphorylation and the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In both Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings and suspension cells, we found that treatment with flg22, a peptide corresponding to the most conserved domain of bacterial flagellin, caused a rapid and transient decrease in the level of phosphatidylinositol (PI) 4,5-bisphosphate along with a parallel increase in phosphatidic acid (PA). In suspension cells, inhibitors of either phosphoinositide-dependent phospholipases C (PLC) or diacylglycerol kinases (DGKs) inhibited flg22-triggered PA production and the oxidative burst. In response to flg22, receptor-like kinase-deficient fls2, bak1, and bik1 mutants (FLAGELLIN SENSITIVE 2, BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1-associated kinase 1, and BOTRYTIS-INDUCED KINASE 1, respectively) produced less PA than wild-type (WT) plants, whereas this response did not differ in NADPH oxidase-deficient rbohD (RESPIRATORY BURST OXIDASE HOMOLOG D) plants. Among the DGK-deficient lines tested, the dgk5.1 mutant produced less PA and less ROS after flg22 treatment compared with WT seedlings. In response to flg22, dgk5.1 plants showed lower callose accumulation and impaired resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 hrcC-. Transcriptomics revealed that the basal expression of defense-related genes was altered in dgk5.1 seedlings compared with the WT. A GFP-DGK5 fusion protein localized to the PM, where RBOHD and PLC2 (proteins involved in plant immunity) are also located. The role of DGK5 and its enzymatic activity in flagellin signaling and fine-tuning of early immune responses in plant-microbe interactions is discussed.

Flagellin: !triggers! Signaling cascade
Signaling cascade: !includes! Protein phosphorylation, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) production
Flg22: !causes! Decrease in Phosphatidylinositol (PI) 4,5-bisphosphate, Increase in Phosphatidic Acid (PA)
Inhibitors of PLC/DGKs: !inhibit! Flg22-triggered PA production, Oxidative burst
Receptor-like Kinase-deficient mutants: !produce less! PA than wild-type plants
NADPH oxidase-deficient rbohD plants: !no difference! In response to flg22
DGK-deficient dgk5.1 mutant: !produces less! PA, ROS, Callose accumulation
GFP-DGK5 fusion protein: !localizes to! Plasma membrane