Alhagi maurorum Medik. (camelthorn) is a dominant desert plant indigenous in various habitats, including the Western Desert of Egypt. The plant is especially prevalent in and around economic iron ore deposits. Nutrient and heavy metal levels in A. maurorum tissues and soil samples were assessed to identify associations between heavy metal levels in plants and soil. The objective was to evaluate this species as an indicator of heavy metal pollution. Photosynthetic pigments, protein, proline, alkaloids, flavonoids, 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazylscavenging, reduced glutathione, malondialdehyde, antioxidant enzymes, and stress-related gene expression were assessed to determine their functional roles in metal stress adaptation in ultra- and molecular structure. Additionally, the molecular genetic variation in A. maurorum samples was assessed using co-dominant sequence-related amplified polymorphism (SRAP) and inter simple sequence repeats (ISSR). A substantial difference in enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants of A. maurorum was observed in samples collected from three sites. A. maurorum is suited to the climate in mineralized regions. Morphologically, the stem shows spines, narrow leaves, and a reduced shoot system. Anatomically, modifications included a cuticle coating on leaves and stems, sunken stomata, a compact epidermis, and a thick cortex. Significant anatomical-physiological differences were observed with varying heavy metal soil content, antioxidative enzyme activities increased as a tolerance strategy, and glutathione levels decreased in response to heavy metal toxicity. Heavy metal accumulation also affected the expression of stress-related genes. The highest levels of expression of GST, G6PDH, 6PGD, nitrate reductase 1, and sulfate transporter genes were found in plants collected from site A1. However, auxin-induced protein exhibited its highest expression in plants collected from A2. Six SRAP combinations yielded 25 scoreable markers with a polymorphism rate of 64%, and 5 ISSR markers produced 11 bands with a polymorphism rate of 36.36% for three A. maurorum genotypes. The ME1xEM7 primer combinations provided the most polymorphic information content and resolving power, making it the most useful primer for differentiating A. maurorum genotypes. SRAP markers exhibited a higher diversity index (0.24) than ISSR markers (0.16). A. maurorum displayed adaptive characteristics for heavy metal sequestration from mining site soils and is proposed as a strong candidate for phytoremediation.

Heavy metal: !affects! Antioxidant enzymes
Heavy metal: !affects! Glutathione levels
Heavy metal: !affects! Stress-related gene expression
Photosynthetic pigments: !assessed to! Determine functional roles in metal stress adaptation
SRAP: !yields! 25 scoreable markers
ISSR: !produces! 11 bands
SRAP: !exhibits! Higher diversity index
A. maurorum: !proposed as! Strong candidate for phytoremediation