Pennycress is a potentially lucrative biofuel crop due to its high content of long-chain unsaturated fatty acids, and because it uses non-conventional pathways to achieve efficient oil production. However, metabolic engineering is required to improve pennycress oilseed content and make it an economically viable source of aviation fuel. Research is warranted to determine if further upregulation of these non-conventional pathways could improve oil production within the species even more, which would indicate these processes serve as promising metabolic engineering targets and could provide the improvement necessary for economic feasibility of this crop. To test this hypothesis, we performed a comparative biomass, metabolomic, and transcriptomic analyses between a high oil accession (HO) and low oil accession (LO) of pennycress to assess potential factors required to optimize oil content. An evident reduction in glycolysis intermediates, improved oxidative pentose phosphate pathway activity, malate accumulation in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and an anaplerotic pathway upregulation were noted in the HO genotype. Additionally, higher levels of threonine aldolase transcripts imply a pyruvate bypass mechanism for acetyl-CoA production. Nucleotide sugar and ascorbate accumulation also were evident in HO, suggesting differential fate of associated carbon between the two genotypes. An altered transcriptome related to lipid droplet (LD) biosynthesis and stability suggests a contribution to a more tightly-packed LD arrangement in HO cotyledons. In addition to the importance of central carbon metabolism augmentation, alternative routes of carbon entry into fatty acid synthesis and modification, as well as transcriptionally modified changes in LD regulation, are key aspects of metabolism and storage associated with economically favorable phenotypes of the species.

HO: !improves! Oxidative Pentose Phosphate Pathway
HO: !accumulates! Malate
HO: !upregulates! Anaplerotic Pathway
HO: !produces! Acetyl-CoA
HO: !accumulates! Nucleotide Sugar
HO: !accumulates! Ascorbate
HO: !modifies! Lipid Droplet Biosynthesis