Bambara groundnut, an underutilized crop has been proved to be an indigenous crop in Africa with the potential for food security. The rhizosphere of Bambara groundnut contains Rhizobacteria, with the ability to grow, adapt, and colonize their surroundings even in unfavorable conditions and have not been explored for their plant growth-promoting properties. The aim of this research was to determine the potential of rhizobacteria from Bambara groundnut soil samples as either biofertilizers or biocontrol agents or both to help provide sustainable agriculture in Africa and globally. Bambara groundnut rhizospheric soil samples were collected and analyzed for their chemical composition. Rhizobacteria isolates were cultured from the soil samples. Plant growth-promoting, antifungal activities and phylogenetic analysis using 16S rRNA were carried out on the isolates to identify the rhizobacteria. A 2-year field study planting was carried out to determine the effect of these rhizobacteria as biofertilizers for Bambara groundnut (<i>Vigna subterranean</i>). The study was carried out in a complete randomized block experimental design with three replications. All the isolates were able to produce ammonia and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate, while 4.65, 12.28, and 27.91% produced hydrogen cyanide, indole acetic acid, and solubilized phosphate, respectively, making them important targets as biocontrol and biofertilizer agents. The field results revealed that treatment with rhizobacteria had significant results compared with the control. Characterization of selected isolates reveals their identity as <i>B. amyloliquefaciens, B. thuringiensis</i>, and <i>Bacillus</i> sp. These Bacillus isolates have proved to be plant growth-promoting agents that can be used as biofertilizers to enhance the growth of crops and consequent improved yield. This is the first time the rhizobacteria from the Bambara groundnut rhizosphere are applied as biofertilizer.

Rhizobacteria: !isolated from! Bambara groundnut soil samples 
Rhizobacteria: !produce! ammonia 
Rhizobacteria: !produce! 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate 
Rhizobacteria: !produce! hydrogen cyanide 
Rhizobacteria: !produce! indole acetic acid 
Rhizobacteria: !produce! solubilized phosphate 
Rhizobacteria: !identified as! B. amyloliquefaciens 
Rhizobacteria: !identified as! B. thuringiensis 
Rhizobacteria: !identified as! Bacillus sp. 
Rhizobacteria: !enhance! growth of crops 
Rhizobacteria: !improve! yield