Oxidation of methionine leads to the formation of methionine S-sulfoxide and methionine R-sulfoxide, which can be reverted by two types of methionine sulfoxide reductase (MSR): MSRA and MSRB. Though the role of MSR enzymes has been elucidated in various physiological processes, the regulation and role of MSR in seeds remains poorly understood. In this study, through molecular, biochemical, and genetic studies using seed-specific overexpression and RNAi lines of OsMSRB5 in Oryza sativa, we demonstrate the role of OsMSRB5 in maintaining seed vigor and longevity. We show that an age-induced reduction in the vigor and viability of seeds is correlated with reduced MSR activity and increased methionine sulfoxide (MetSO) formation. OsMSRB5 expression increases during seed maturation and is predominantly localized to the embryo. Further analyses on transgenic lines reveal the role of OsMSRB5 in modulating reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis to preserve seed vigor and longevity. We show that ascorbate peroxidase and PROTEIN l-ISOASPARTYL METHYLTRANSFERASE undergo MetSO modification in seeds that affects their functional competence. OsMSRB5 physically interacts with these proteins and reverts this modification to facilitate their functions and preserve seed vigor and longevity. Our results thus illustrate the role of OsMSRB5 in preserving seed vigor and longevity by modulating ROS homeostasis in seeds.

Oxidation of methionine: !leads to! Methionine S-sulfoxide and R-sulfoxide
Methionine sulfoxide reductase (MSR): !reverts! Methionine S-sulfoxide and R-sulfoxide
OsMSRB5: !maintains! Seed vigor and longevity
Age-induced reduction in vigor and viability: !correlated with! Reduced MSR activity and increased methionine sulfoxide (MetSO) formation
OsMSRB5: !localized to! Embryo
OsMSRB5: !modulates! Reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis
Ascorbate peroxidase and PROTEIN l-ISOASPARTYL METHYLTRANSFERASE: !undergo! MetSO modification
OsMSRB5: !interacts with! Ascorbate peroxidase and PROTEIN l-ISOASPARTYL METHYLTRANSFERASE
OsMSRB5: !reverts! MetSO modification