In Dracaena draco trunks, the primary and secondary xylem conduits co-function. Both are resistant to embolism; however, secondary conduits are mainly involved in mechanical support. Monocotyledonous dragon trees (Dracaena spp., Asparagaceae) possess in their trunks both primary and secondary xylem elements, organized into vascular bundles, that for dozens of years co-function and enable the plant to transport water efficiently as well as provide mechanical support. Here, based on the modified Hagen-Poiseuille's formula, we examined the functional anatomical xylem traits of the trunk in two young D. draco individuals to compare their function in both primary and secondary growth. We provided analyses of the: (i) conduits surface sculpture and their cell walls thickness, (ii) conduit diameter and frequency, (iii) hydraulically weighted diameter, (iv) theoretical hydraulic conductivity, (v) area-weighted mean conduit diameter, as well as (vi) vulnerability index. The conduits in primary growth, located in the central part of the trunk, were loosely arranged, had thinner cell walls, larger mean hydraulically weighted diameter, and significantly larger value of the theoretical hydraulic conductivity than conduits in secondary growth, which form a rigid cylinder near the trunk surface. Based on the vulnerability index, both primary and secondary conduits are resistant to embolism. Taking into account the distribution within a trunk, the secondary growth conduits seems to be mainly involved in mechanical support as they are twisted, form structures similar to sailing ropes and have thick cell walls, and a peripheral localization. D. draco has been adapted to an environment with water deficit by distinctive, spatial separation of the xylem elements fulfilling supportive and conductive functions.

Primary xylem conduits: !resistant to! embolism
Secondary xylem conduits: !resistant to! embolism
Secondary xylem conduits: !mainly involved in! mechanical support
Primary xylem conduits: !loosely arranged!
Primary xylem conduits: !thinner cell walls!
Primary xylem conduits: !larger mean hydraulically weighted diameter!
Secondary xylem conduits: !twisted!
Secondary xylem conduits: !form structures similar to sailing ropes!
Secondary xylem conduits: !thick cell walls!
Secondary xylem conduits: !peripheral localization!