Apple (Malus domestica Borkh.) is an important economic crop. The pathological effects of Fusarium solani, a species complex of soilborne pathogens, on the root systems of apple plants was unknown. It was unclear how mycorrhizal apple seedlings resist infection by F. solani. The transcriptional profiles of mycorrhizal and non-mycorrhizal plants infected by F. solani were compared using RNA-Seq. Infection with F. solani significantly reduced the dry weight of apple roots, and the roots of mycorrhizal apple plants were less damaged when the plants were infected with F. solani. They also had enhanced activity of antioxidant enzymes and a reduction in the oxidation of membrane lipids. A total of 1839 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were obtained after mycorrhizal and non-mycorrhizal apple plants were infected with F. solani. A gene ontogeny (GO) analysis showed that most of the DEGs were involved in the binding of ADP and calcium ions. In addition, based on a MapMan analysis, a large number of DEGs were found to be involved in the response of mycorrhizal plants to stress. Among them, the overexpressed transcription factor MdWRKY40 significantly improved the resistance of the apple 'Orin' callus to F. solani and the expression of the resistance gene MdGLU by binding the promoter of MdGLU. This paper outlines how the inoculation of apple seedlings roots by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi responded to infection with F. solani at the transcriptional level. In addition, MdWRKY40 played an important role in the resistance of mycorrhizal apple seedlings to infection with F. solani.

F. solani: !reduces! Dry weight of apple roots
Mycorrhizal apple plants: !less damaged by! F. solani
Mycorrhizal apple plants: !enhanced activity of! Antioxidant enzymes
1839 DEGs: !involved in! Binding of ADP and calcium ions
MdWRKY40: !improves! Resistance of apple 'Orin' callus to F. solani
MdWRKY40: !binds! Promoter of MdGLU
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi: !responds to! Infection with F. solani
MdWRKY40: !plays important role in! Resistance of mycorrhizal apple seedlings to infection with F. solani