Exotic plant invaders pose a serious threat to native plants. However, despite showing inferior competitive ability and decreased performance, native species often subsist in invaded communities. The decline of native populations is hypothesized to be halted and eventually reversed if adaptive evolutionary changes can keep up with the environmental stress induced by invaders, that is, when population extinction is prevented by evolutionary rescue (ER). Nevertheless, evidence for the role of ER in postinvasion persistence of native flora remains scarce. Here, I explored the population density of a native forb, <i>Veronica chamaedrys</i>, and evaluated the changes in the shade-responsive traits of its populations distributed along the invasion chronosequence of an exotic transformer, <i>Heracleum mantegazzianum</i>, which was replicated in five areas. I found a U-shaped population trajectory that paralleled the evolution of plasticity to shade. Whereas <i>V. chamaedrys</i> genotypes from intact, more open sites exhibited a shade-tolerance strategy (pronounced leaf area/mass ratio), reduced light availability at the invaded sites selected for a shade-avoidance strategy (greater internode elongation). Field experiments subsequently confirmed that the shifts in shade-response strategies were adaptive and secured postinvasion population persistence, as indicated by further modeling. Alternative ecological mechanisms (habitat improvement or arrival of immigrants) were less likely explanations than ER for the observed population rebound, although the contribution of maternal effects cannot be dismissed. These results suggest that <i>V. chamaedrys</i> survived because of adaptive evolutionary changes operating on the same timescale as the invasion-induced stress, but the generality of ER for postinvasion persistence of native plants remains unknown.

Veronica chamaedrys: !exhibits! shade-tolerance strategy
Veronica chamaedrys: !selected for! shade-avoidance strategy
shade availability: !induces! environmental stress
Veronica chamaedrys: !adapts to! environmental stress
Veronica chamaedrys: !persists due to! adaptive evolutionary changes