The development of pepper cultivars with durable resistance to the oomycete <i>Phytophthora capsici</i> has been challenging due to differential interactions between the species that allow certain pathogen isolates to cause disease on otherwise resistant host genotypes. Currently, little is known about the pathogen genes involved in these interactions. To investigate the genetic basis of <i>P. capsici</i> virulence on individual pepper genotypes, we inoculated sixteen pepper accessions, representing commercial varieties, sources of resistance, and host differentials, with 117 isolates of <i>P. capsici</i>, for a total of 1,864 host-pathogen combinations. Analysis of disease outcomes revealed a significant effect of inter-species genotype-by-genotype interactions, although these interactions were quantitative rather than qualitative in scale. Isolates were classified into five pathogen subpopulations, as determined by their genotypes at over 60,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). While absolute virulence levels on certain pepper accessions significantly differed between subpopulations, a multivariate phenotype reflecting relative virulence levels on certain pepper genotypes compared with others showed the strongest association with pathogen subpopulation. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified four pathogen loci significantly associated with virulence, two of which colocalized with putative RXLR effector genes and another with a polygalacturonase gene cluster. All four loci appeared to represent broad-spectrum virulence genes, as significant SNPs demonstrated consistent effects regardless of the host genotype tested. Host genotype-specific virulence variants in <i>P. capsici</i> may be difficult to map via GWAS with all but excessively large sample sizes, perhaps controlled by genes of small effect or by multiple allelic variants that have arisen independently. [Formula: see text] Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Pathogen: !interacts with! Pepper Accessions
Pathogen: !classified into! 5 Subpopulations
Pathogen: !associated with! Virulence
Pathogen: !colocalized with! Putative RXLR Effector Genes
Pathogen: !associated with! Polygalacturonase Gene Cluster
Pathogen: !controlled by! Genes of Small Effect