The consumption of fruit and vegetables play an important role in human nutrition, dietary diversity and health. Fruit and vegetable industries impart significant impact on our society, economy, and environment, contributing towards sustainable development in both developing and developed countries. The eating quality of fruit is determined by its appearance, color, firmness, flavor, nutritional components, and the absence of defects from physiological disorders. However, all of these components are affected by many pre- and postharvest factors that influence fruit ripening and senescence. Significant efforts have been made to maintain and improve fruit eating quality by expanding our knowledge of fruit ripening and senescence, as well as by controlling and reducing losses. Innovative approaches are required to gain better understanding of the management of eating quality. With completion of the genome sequence for many horticultural products in recent years and development of the proteomic research technique, quantitative proteomic research on fruit is changing rapidly and represents a complementary research platform to address how genetics and environment influence the quality attributes of various produce. Quantiative proteomic research on fruit is advancing from protein abundance and protein quantitation to gene-protein interactions and post-translational modifications of proteins that occur during fruit development, ripening and in response to environmental influences. All of these techniques help to provide a comprehensive understanding of eating quality. This review focuses on current developments in the field as well as limitations and challenges, both in broad term and with specific examples. These examples include our own research experience in applying quantitative proteomic techniques to identify and quantify the protein changes in association with fruit ripening, quality and development of disorders, as well as possible control mechanisms.

Gene: !affects! Eating quality 
Gene: !interacts with! Protein 
Gene: !enhances! Fruit ripening 
Gene: !represses! Senescence 
Gene: !synthesizes! Post-translational modifications