Citrus is one of the most important fruits in China. Miyagawa Satsuma, one kind of citrus, is a nutritious agricultural product with regional characteristics of Chongming Island. Near-infrared Spectroscopy (NIR) is a proper method for studying the quality of fruits, because it is low-cost, efficient, non-destructive, and repeatable. Therefore, the NIR technique is used to detect citrus's soluble solid content (SSC) in this study. After obtaining the original spectral data, the first 70% of them are divided into the training set and 30% into the test set. Then, the Random Frog algorithm is chosen to select characteristic wavelengths, which reduces the dimension of the data and the complexity of the model, and accordingly makes the generalization of the classification model better. After comparing the performance of various classifiers (AdaBoost, KNN, LS-SVM, and Bayes) under different characteristic wavelength numbers, the AdaBoost classifier outperforms using 275 characteristic wavelengths for modeling eventually. The accuracy, precision, recall, and <i>F</i> <sub>1</sub>-score are 78.3%, 80.5%, 78.3%, and 0.780, respectively and the ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve, ROC curve) is close to the upper left corner, suggesting that the classification model is acceptable. The results demonstrate that it is feasible to use the NIR technique to estimate whether the citrus is sweet or not. Furthermore, it is beneficial for us to apply the obtained models for identifying the quality of citrus correctly. For fruit traders, the model helps them to determine the growth cycle of citrus more scientifically, improve the level of citrus cultivation and management and the final fruit quality, and thus increase the economic income of fruit traders.

NIR: !used to detect! SSC 
Random Frog Algorithm: !selects! characteristic wavelengths 
AdaBoost Classifier: !outperforms! other classifiers 
NIR: !feasible to use! for estimating sweetness 
Model: !beneficial for! identifying quality of citrus 
Model: !helps! fruit traders determine growth cycle