Multiple C2 domain and transmembrane region proteins (MCTPs) are evolutionarily conserved and important signaling molecules. However, the MCTP gene family has not been comprehensively analyzed in maize. In this study, 385 MCTP genes were identified in all surveyed 38 species. Moreover, gene duplication mode exploration showed that whole genome duplication (WGD) mainly contributed to the expansion of MCTP genes in angiosperms. Phylogeny reconstruction with all surveyed species by the maximum-likelihood (ML) method showed five clades of MCTPs, Clades I to V. Each clade of MCTPs had conservative structures and motifs. Focusing on maize, 17 MCTPs were identified, and a neighborjoining (NJ) phylogenetic tree with only ZmMCTPs was also constructed. As expected, 17 MCTPs showed similar phylogenetic relationships in the neighbor-joining (NJ) tree with those in the maximum-likelihood (ML) tree and could also be divided into five subclades. Moreover, ZmMCTP members in different clades showed specific gene structure, conserved motif, and domain structure compositions. Intriguingly, most ZmMCTP genes were intronless. Analyses of isoelectric points (pIs) and grand averages of hydropathicity (GRAVYs) indicated that the N-terminus was more dispersive than the C-terminus. Further tissue-specific expression analysis indicated that duplicated ZmMCTP pairs involved in whole genome duplication (WGD) had similar expression trends. Finally, ZmMCTPs were transcriptionally altered under diverse abiotic stresses and hormone treatments. Our results contribute to deciphering the evolutionary history of MCTPs in maize and other plants, facilitating further functional analysis of these factors, and provide a basis for further clarification of the molecular mechanism of stress responses.

MCTPs: !evolutionarily conserved! signaling molecules 
MCTPs: !expanded by! WGD 
MCTPs: !divided into! five clades 
ZmMCTPs: !phylogenetically related! in NJ and ML trees 
ZmMCTPs: !structurally similar! in different clades 
ZmMCTPs: !intronless! in maize 
ZmMCTPs: !N-terminus more dispersive than C-terminus! 
Duplicated ZmMCTP pairs: !similar expression trends! 
ZmMCTPs: !transcriptionally altered! under abiotic stresses and hormone treatments