Vegetatively propagated crops are particularly prone to disease dissemination through their seed systems. Strict phytosanitary measures are important to limit the impact of diseases as illustrated by the potato seed system in Europe. Cassava brown streak disease (CBSD) is a devastating disease caused by two viral species collectively named cassava brown streak viruses (CBSVs). CBSD can cause substantial root yield losses of up to 100% in the worst affected areas and is easily transmitted through stem cuttings. In Eastern and Central Africa, the epidemiology of CBSVs in the local socio-economical context of production remains poorly known while a better understanding would be an asset to properly manage the disease. This lack of information explains partially the limited efficiency of current regulatory schemes in increasing the availability of quality seed to smallholders and mitigating the spread of pests and diseases. This study surveyed the epidemiology of CBSVs in Uvira territory, Eastern D.R. Congo, and its drivers using a multivariate approach combining farmer's interview, field observation, sampling and molecular detection of CBSVs. Investigation on the epidemiology of CBSD revealed that three clusters in the study area could be identified using five most significant factors: (i) symptoms incidence, (ii) number of whiteflies, (iii) types of foliar symptoms, (iv) cutting's pathways and (v) plant age. Among the three clusters identified, one proved to be potentially interesting for seed multiplication activities since the disease pressure was the lowest. Through risk assessment, we also identified several key socio-economic determinants on disease epidemy: (i) factors related to farmer's knowledge and awareness (knowledge of cassava pests and diseases, knowledge of management practices, support from extension services and management strategies applied), (ii) factors related to the geographical location of farmer's fields (proximity to borders, proximity to town, distance to acquire cuttings), as well as (iii) the pathways used to acquire cuttings.

symptoms incidence: !influences! clusters
number of whiteflies: !influences! clusters
types of foliar symptoms: !influences! clusters
cutting's pathways: !influences! clusters
plant age: !influences! clusters
farmer's knowledge and awareness: !influences! disease epidemy
geographical location of farmer's fields: !influences! disease epidemy
pathways used to acquire cuttings: !influences! disease epidemy