Loquat (<i>Eriobotrya japonica</i> Lindl. ) is one of the most economically important evergreen fruit crops in China, while it often suffered the injury of cold stress in winter and earlier spring, and the annual yield loss of loquat fruits caused by cold or freezing stress was immeasurable. However, knowledge about the physiological response and molecular mechanism under cold stress is still limited. To investigate the potential regulation mechanism pre- and post-cold stress in loquat and the changes in physiological indicators, a comparative transcriptome analysis was performed against a cold-resistant cv. "Huoju" and a cold-sensitive cv. "Ninghaibai". The results of physiological indicators related to cold resistance indicated that rachis was most sensitive to cold stress and was considered as the representative organ to directly evaluate cold resistance of loquat based on subordinate function analysis. Here, we compared the transcriptome profiles of rachis pre- and under cold stress in "Huoju" and "Ninghaibai". A total of 4,347 and 3,513 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were detected in "Ninghaibai" and "Huoju", among which 223 and 166 were newly identified genes, respectively, most of them were functionally enriched in plant hormone signal transduction (Huoju: 142; Ninghaibai: 200), and there were higher plant hormone content and related DEG expression levels in "Huoju" than that of "Ninghaibai". Moreover, a total of 3,309 differentially expressed transcription factors (DETFs) were identified, and some DEGs and DETFs were screened to be subjected to co-expression network analysis based on the gene expression profile data. Some candidate DEGs, including UDP-glycosyltransferase (UGT), glycosyltransferase (GT), sugar phosphate/phosphate translocator (SPT), sugar transport protein (STP), proline-rich receptor-like protein kinase (PERK), and peroxidise (POD), were significantly affected by cold stress, and the expression level of these genes obtained from real-time quantitative RT-PCR was consistent with the pattern of transcriptome profile, which suggested that these genes might play the vital roles in cold resistance of loquat. Our results provide an invaluable resource for the identification of specific genes and TFs and help to clarify gene transcription during the cold stress response of loquat.

UGT: !affects! Cold Stress
GT: !affects! Cold Stress
SPT: !affects! Cold Stress
STP: !affects! Cold Stress
PERK: !affects! Cold Stress
POD: !affects! Cold Stress
Hormone Signal Transduction: !enriched in! Huoju & Ninghaibai
DEGs: !identified in! Huoju & Ninghaibai
DETFs: !identified in! Huoju & Ninghaibai
Co-expression Network Analysis: !performed on! DEGs & DETFs