Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) is a powerful tool for high-throughput analysis of gene function. Here, we developed the VIGS vector pCF93, from which expression of the cucumber fruit mottle mosaic virus genome is driven by the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter to produce viral transcripts in inoculated plants. To test the utility of the pCF93 vector, we identified candidate genes related to male sterility (MS) in watermelon (Citrullus lanatus), which is recalcitrant to genetic transformation. Specifically, we exploited previously reported reference-based and de novo transcriptome data to define 38 differentially expressed genes between a male-sterile line and its fertile near-isogenic line in the watermelon cultivar DAH. We amplified 200- to 300-bp fragments of these genes, cloned them into pCF93, and inoculated DAH with the resulting VIGS clones. The small watermelon cultivar DAH enabled high-throughput screening using a small cultivation area. We simultaneously characterized the phenotypes associated with each of the 38 candidate genes in plants grown in a greenhouse. Silencing of 8 of the 38 candidate genes produced male-sterile flowers with abnormal stamens and no pollen. We confirmed the extent of gene silencing in inoculated flowers using reverse transcription-qPCR. Histological analysis of stamens from male-fertile and male-sterile floral buds and mature flowers revealed developmental defects and shrunken pollen sacs. Based on these findings, we propose that the pCF93 vector and our VIGS system will facilitate high-throughput analysis for the study of gene function in watermelons.

Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS): !utilizes! pCF93 vector 
pCF93 vector: !drives expression of! cucumber fruit mottle mosaic virus genome 
cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter: !promotes! viral transcripts in inoculated plants 
watermelon cultivar DAH: !enables! high-throughput screening 
silencing of 8 candidate genes: !produces! male-sterile flowers 
reverse transcription-qPCR: !confirms! extent of gene silencing 
histological analysis: !reveals! developmental defects and shrunken pollen sacs