The PROTON GRADIENT REGULATION5 (PGR5) protein is required for trans-thylakoid proton gradient formation and acclimation to fluctuating light (FL). PGR5 functionally interacts with two other thylakoid proteins, PGR5-like 1 (PGRL1) and 2 (PGRL2); however, the molecular details of these interactions are largely unknown. In the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) pgr5-1 mutant, the PGR5G130S protein accumulates in only small amounts. In this work, we generated a knockout allele of PGR5 (pgr5-Cas) using CRISPR-Cas9 technology. Like pgr5-1, pgr5-Cas is seedling-lethal under FL, but photosynthesis and particularly cyclic electron flow, as well as chlorophyll content, are less severely affected in both pgr5-Cas and pgrl1ab (which lacks PGRL1 and PGR5) than in pgr5-1. These differences are associated with changes in the levels of 260 proteins, including components of the Calvin-Benson cycle, photosystems II and I, and the NDH complex, in pgr5-1 relative to the wild type (WT), pgr5-Cas, and pgrl1ab. Some of the differences between pgr5-1 and the other mutant lines could be tentatively assigned to second-site mutations in the pgr5-1 line, identified by whole-genome sequencing. However, others, particularly the more pronounced photosynthetic defects and PGRL1 depletion (compared to pgr5-Cas), are clearly due to specific negative effects of the amino-acid substitution in PGR5G130S, as demonstrated by complementation analysis. Moreover, pgr5-1 and pgr5-Cas plants are less tolerant to long-term exposure to high light than pgrl1ab plants. These results imply that, in addition to the previously reported necessity of PGRL1 for optimal PGR5 function, PGR5 is required alongside PGRL1 to avoid harmful effects on plant performance.

PGR5: !interacts with! PGRL1 
PGR5: !interacts with! PGRL2 
PGR5: !affects! photosynthesis 
PGR5: !affects! cyclic electron flow 
PGR5: !affects! chlorophyll content 
PGR5: !affects! Calvin-Benson cycle 
PGR5: !affects! photosystems II and I 
PGR5: !affects! NDH complex 
PGR5: !affects! plant performance