Carotenoid cleavage oxygenases (CCOs) include the carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase (CCD) and 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid (NCED), which can catalize carotenoid to form various apocarotenoids and their derivatives, has been found that play important role in the plant world. But little information of CCO gene family has been reported in litchi (Litchi chinensis Sonn.) till date. In this study, a total of 15 LcCCO genes in litchi were identified based on genome wide lever. Phylogeny analysis showed that LcCCO genes could be classified into six subfamilies (CCD1, CCD4, CCD7, CCD8, CCD-like, and NCED), which gene structure, domain and motifs exhibited similar distribution patterns in the same subfamilies. MiRNA target site prediction found that there were 32 miRNA target sites in 13 (86.7%) LcCCO genes. Cis-elements analysis showed that the largest groups of elements were light response related, following was plant hormones, stress and plant development related. Expression pattern analysis revealed that LcCCD4, LcNCED1, and LcNCED2 might be involving with peel coloration, LcCCDlike-b might be an important factor deciding fruit flavor, LcNCED2 and LcNCED3 might be related to flower control, LcNCED1 and LcNCED2 might function in fruitlet abscission, LcCCD4a1, LcCCD4a2, LcCCD1, LcCCD4, LcNCED1, and LcNCED2 might participate in postharvest storage of litchi. Herein, Genome-wide analysis of the LcCCO genes was conducted in litchi to investigate their structure features and potential functions. These valuable and expectable information of LcCCO genes supplying in this study will offer further more possibility to promote quality improvement and breeding of litchi and further function investigation of this gene family in plant.

LcCCO: !classified into! 6 subfamilies
LcCCO: !targeted by! 32 miRNAs
LcCCD4: !involved in! peel coloration
LcCCDlike-b: !important for! fruit flavor
LcNCED2/3: !related to! flower control
LcNCED1/2: !function in! fruitlet abscission
LcCCD4a1/2, LcCCD1, LcCCD4, LcNCED1/2: !participate in! postharvest storage