Rice is a staple food for more than 50% of the global population and it is one of the most valuable cereal crops. To fulfill the dietary requirement of the ever-growing world population, an increase in per-unit production of rice is direly required. In Pakistan, it stands as the 2nd in consumption after wheat, which is a staple food. A huge gap is observed between yield potential and actual yield of the aromatic rice cultivars at a farmer-field level. The significant limitations responsible for this gap are shortage of irrigation water, inappropriate application of fertilizers, less plant population, deficiency of micronutrients, and improper and poor plant protection measures. A field study was planned to assess the yield response and quality attributes of aromatic rice to three levels of zinc (Zn) and nitrogen (N) under three irrigation regimes (8-, 12-, and 16-acre inches) in the Sheikhupura and Sargodha districts of Pakistan. Irrigation treatments significantly influenced the growth, yield, and quality attributes; however, maximum improvement was observed by the application of irrigation at 12-acre inches. Among the Zn treatments, application of Zn at 10 kg ha<sup>-1</sup> was observed to be more responsive to improving the growth and quality parameters of aromatic rice crops. In the case of N treatments, application of N at 140 kg ha<sup>-1</sup> produced the maximum total tillers, as well as productive tillers per hill, spikelets per panicle, leaf area index, leaf area duration, crop growth rate, total dry matter, harvest index, kernel length, kernel width, and 1,000-kernel weight. Application of N at 140 kg ha<sup>-1</sup> not only improved the growth attributes but also increased the net assimilation rate, photosynthetically active radiation, and radiation use efficiency, with respect to total dry matter and kernel yield. The maximum percentage of normal kernels and minimum percentage of opaque, abortive, and chalky kernels were also recorded by application of N at 140 kg ha<sup>-1</sup>. The outcomes of current experiments depicted that application of irrigational water, zinc, and nitrogen at 12-acre inches, 10, and 140 kg ha<sup>-1</sup>, respectively, are responsible to achieve maximum resource utilization efficiency, along with increased yield and quality of rice.

irrigation: !influences! growth, yield, quality
Zn: !improves! growth, quality
N: !increases! tillers, spikelets, leaf area, dry matter, kernel length, width, weight
N: !enhances! net assimilation rate, photosynthetically active radiation, radiation use efficiency
N: !reduces! opaque, abortive, chalky kernels