Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) as the important food crop worldwide has abundant morphological and genetic diversity. To understand the underlying molecular mechanisms determining phenotypic differences in wild species and cultivated potato, a comparative proteomics approach was applied to analyze leaf proteome alteration among three tetraploid cultivars and three diploid wild species using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE). Quantitative image analysis showed a total of 47 protein spots with significantly altered abundance (>3-fold, P < 0.05), and 45 differentially abundant proteins were identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS. These proteins exhibited both the qualitative and quantitative changes. Most of them were involved in photosynthesis, cell defense and rescue, protein biosynthesis, which might exhibit the main differences between tetraploid cultivars and diploid wild species. The photosynthesis and protein biosynthesis-related proteins were up-regulated or only present in tetraploid cultivars, suggesting the higher photosynthetic efficiency and more newly synthesized peptides. It might contribute to some superior traits of tetraploid cultivars, such as larger leaf size, greater growth vigor, better tuber yield and quality. However, some cell defense and rescue-related proteins, especially the pathogenesis-related proteins and antioxidant enzymes, were up-regulated or only present in diploid wild species. It might be responsible for stronger resistance to diseases and pests or tolerance to environmental stresses in diploid wild species. This study would provide valuable information for the underlying molecular mechanisms of potato genetic diversity, and help in developing strategies for the utilization of wild species for potato improvement.

Photosynthesis: !enhances! Tetraploid cultivars 
Cell defense and rescue: !enhances! Diploid wild species 
Protein biosynthesis: !enhances! Tetraploid cultivars 
Pathogenesis-related proteins: !enhances! Diploid wild species 
Antioxidant enzymes: !enhances! Diploid wild species