By the year 2050, the world's population is predicted to have grown to around 9-10 billion people. The food demand in many countries continues to increase with population growth. Various abiotic stresses such as temperature, soil salinity and moisture all have an impact on plant growth and development at all levels of plant growth, including the overall plant, tissue cell, and even sub-cellular level. These abiotic stresses directly harm plants by causing protein denaturation and aggregation as well as increased fluidity of membrane lipids. In addition to direct effects, indirect damage also includes protein synthesis inhibition, protein breakdown, and membranous loss in chloroplasts and mitochondria. Abiotic stress during the reproductive stage results in flower drop, pollen sterility, pollen tube deformation, ovule abortion, and reduced yield. Plant nutrition is one of the most effective ways of reducing abiotic stress in agricultural crops. In this paper, we have discussed the effectiveness of different nutrients for alleviating abiotic stress. The roles of primary nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium), secondary nutrients (calcium, magnesium and sulphur), micronutrients (zinc, boron, iron and copper), and beneficial nutrients (cobalt, selenium and silicon) in alleviating abiotic stress in crop plants are discussed.

Abiotic stress: !affects! Plant growth
Nutrients: !alleviate! Abiotic stress
Protein: !denatures and aggregates! Under abiotic stress
Membrane lipids: !increase fluidity! Under abiotic stress
Protein synthesis: !inhibited! By abiotic stress
Protein breakdown: !occurs! Under abiotic stress
Chloroplasts/Mitochondria: !lose membranous material! Under abiotic stress
Flower drop: !caused! By abiotic stress
Pollen sterility: !induced! By abiotic stress
Pollen tube deformation: !observed! Under abiotic stress
Ovule abortion: !happens! Under abiotic stress
Yield: !reduced! By abiotic stress
Primary nutrients: !alleviate! Abiotic stress
Secondary nutrients: !alleviate! Abiotic stress
Micronutrients: !alleviate! Abiotic stress
Beneficial nutrients: !alleviate! Abiotic stress