Nitrogen fixing symbioses between plants and bacteria are ancient and, while not numerous, are formed in diverse lineages of plants ranging from microalgae to angiosperms. One symbiosis stands out as the most widespread one is that between legumes and rhizobia, leading to the formation of nitrogen-fixing nodules. The legume family is one of the largest and most diverse group of plants and legumes have been used by humans since the beginning of agriculture, both as high nitrogen food, as well as pastures and rotation crops. One open question is whether their ability to form a nitrogen-fixing symbiosis has contributed to legumes' success, and whether legumes have any unique characteristics that have made them more diverse and widespread than other groups of plants. This review examines the evolutionary journey that has led to the diversification of legumes, in particular its nitrogen-fixing symbiosis, and asks four questions to investigate which legume traits might have contributed to their success: 1. In what ways do legumes differ from other plant groups that have evolved nitrogen-fixing symbioses? In order to answer this question, the characteristics of the symbioses, and efficiencies of nitrogen fixation are compared between different groups of nitrogen fixing plants. 2. Could certain unique features of legumes be a reason for their success? This section examines the manifestations and possible benefits of a nitrogen-rich 'lifestyle' in legumes. 3. If nitrogen fixation was a reason for such a success, why have some species lost the symbiosis? Formation of symbioses has trade-offs, and while these are less well known for non-legumes, there are known energetic and ecological reasons for loss of symbiotic potential in legumes. 4. What can we learn from the unique traits of legumes for future crop improvements? While exploiting some of the physiological properties of legumes could be used to improve legume breeding, our increasing molecular understanding of the essential regulators of root nodule symbioses raise hope of creating new nitrogen fixing symbioses in other crop species.

Legumes: !form! Nitrogen-fixing symbiosis 
Legumes: !differ from! Other plant groups 
Legumes: !have unique features! Reason for success 
Legumes: !lose! Symbiotic potential 
Legumes: !exploit! Physiological properties