Fusarium head blight (FHB), caused by the fungus <i>Fusarium graminearum</i> Schwabe is an important disease of wheat that causes severe yield losses along with serious quality concerns. Incorporating the host resistance from either wild relatives, landraces, or exotic materials remains challenging and has shown limited success. Therefore, a better understanding of the genetic basis of native FHB resistance in hard winter wheat (HWW) and combining it with major quantitative trait loci (QTLs) can facilitate the development of FHB-resistant cultivars. In this study, we evaluated a set of 257 breeding lines from the South Dakota State University (SDSU) breeding program to uncover the genetic basis of native FHB resistance in the US hard winter wheat. We conducted a multi-locus genome-wide association study (ML-GWAS) with 9,321 high-quality single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). A total of six distinct marker-trait associations (MTAs) were identified for the FHB disease index (DIS) on five different chromosomes including 2A, 2B, 3B, 4B, and 7A. Further, eight MTAs were identified for Fusarium-damaged kernels (FDK) on six chromosomes including 3B, 5A, 6B, 6D, 7A, and 7B. Out of the 14 significant MTAs, 10 were found in the proximity of previously reported regions for FHB resistance in different wheat classes and were validated in HWW, while four MTAs represent likely novel loci for FHB resistance. Accumulation of favorable alleles of reported MTAs resulted in significantly lower mean DIS and FDK score, demonstrating the additive effect of FHB resistance alleles. Candidate gene analysis for two important MTAs identified several genes with putative proteins of interest; however, further investigation of these regions is needed to identify genes conferring FHB resistance. The current study sheds light on the genetic basis of native FHB resistance in the US HWW germplasm and the resistant lines and MTAs identified in this study will be useful resources for FHB resistance breeding <i>via</i> marker-assisted selection.

Fusarium head blight: !caused by! Fusarium graminearum Schwabe 
257 breeding lines: !evaluated to uncover! genetic basis of native FHB resistance 
Multi-locus genome-wide association study: !conducted with! 9,321 SNPs 
Marker-trait associations: !identified for! FHB disease index & Fusarium-damaged kernels 
10 MTAs: !validated in! HWW 
4 MTAs: !represent likely novel loci for! FHB resistance 
Favorable alleles: !accumulated to result in! lower mean DIS & FDK score 
Candidate gene analysis: !identified several genes with putative proteins of interest!