Long-read sequencing technologies are revolutionizing the sequencing and analysis of plant and pathogen genomes and transcriptomes, as well as contributing to emerging areas of interest in plant-pathogen interactions, disease management techniques, and the introduction of new plant varieties or cultivars. Long-read sequencing (LRS) technologies are progressively being implemented to study plants and pathogens of agricultural importance, which have substantial economic effects. The variability and complexity of the genome and transcriptome affect plant growth, development and pathogen responses. Overcoming the limitations of second-generation sequencing, LRS technology has significantly increased the length of a single contiguous read from a few hundred to millions of base pairs. Because of the longer read lengths, new analysis methods and tools have been developed for plant and pathogen genomics and transcriptomics. LRS technologies enable faster, more efficient, and high-throughput ultralong reads, allowing direct sequencing of genomes that would be impossible or difficult to investigate using short-read sequencing approaches. These benefits include genome assembly in repetitive areas, creating more comprehensive and exact genome determinations, assembling full-length transcripts, and detecting DNA and RNA alterations. Furthermore, these technologies allow for the identification of transcriptome diversity, significant structural variation analysis, and direct epigenetic mark detection in plant and pathogen genomic regions. LRS in plant pathology is found efficient for identifying and characterization of effectors in plants as well as known and unknown plant pathogens. In this review, we investigate how these technologies are transforming the landscape of determination and characterization of plant and pathogen genomes and transcriptomes efficiently and accurately. Moreover, we highlight potential areas of interest offered by LRS technologies for future study into plant-pathogen interactions, disease control strategies, and the development of new plant varieties or cultivars.

LRS: !enables! Genome Assembly 
LRS: !allows for! Transcriptome Diversity 
LRS: !identifies and characterizes! Effectors 
LRS: !detects! DNA/RNA Alterations 
LRS: !investigates! Plant-Pathogen Interactions 
LRS: !develops! Disease Control Strategies 
LRS: !creates! New Plant Varieties