Purple-stem <i>Brassica napus</i> (<i>B. napus</i>) is a phenotype with unique color because of its high anthocyanins content. Anthocyanins are naturally occurring plant pigments that have antioxidants activity and play important role in plant defense against abiotic and biotic stresses. In the present study, drought induced effects on plants were investigated in hydroponically grown seedlings of green stem (GS) and purple stem (PS) genotypes of <i>B. napus</i>. The results of this study showed that the major function of anthocyanins accumulation during drought was to enhance the antioxidant capability and stress tolerance in <i>B. napus</i> plants. Our results showed that drought significantly inhibited the plant growth in terms of decreased biomass accumulation in both genotypes, although marked decline was observed in GS genotype. The reduction in photosynthetic attributes was more noticeable in the GS genotype, whereas the PS genotype showed better performance under drought stress. Under stressful conditions, both the genotype showed excessive accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and malondialdehyde (MDA), as well as higher levels of antioxidant enzymes activities. Under drought conditions, the GS genotype showed apparent damages on chloroplast deformation like in thylakoid membrane and grana structural distortion and fewer starch grains and bigger plastoglobuli. Moreover, during drought stress, the PS genotype exhibited maximum expression levels of anthocyanins biosynthesis genes and antioxidant enzymes accompanied by higher stress tolerance relative to GS genotype. Based on these findings, it can be concluded that GS genotype found more sensitive to drought stress than the PS genotype. Furthermore this research paper also provides practical guidance for plant biologists who are developing stress-tolerant crops by using anthocyanin biosynthesis or regulatory genes.

Gene: !synthesizes! Anthocyanins 
Anthocyanins: !enhances! Antioxidant capability 
Gene: !represses! Plant growth 
Gene: !enhances! Stress tolerance 
Reactive Oxygen Species: !increases! Under drought conditions 
Malondialdehyde: !increases! Under drought conditions 
Antioxidant Enzymes: !increases! Under drought conditions 
Gene: !enhances! Stress tolerance in PS genotype