Globally, climate change could hinder future food security that concurrently implies the importance of investigating drought stress and genotype screening under stressed environments. Hence, the current study was performed to screen 45 diverse maize inbred lines for 18 studied traits comprising phenological, physiological, morphological, and yield characters under optimum and water stress conditions for two successive growing seasons (2018 and 2019). The results showed that growing seasons and water regimes significantly influenced (<i>p</i> < 0.01) most of the studied traits, while inbred lines had a significant effect (<i>p</i> < 0.01) on all of the studied traits. The findings also showed a significant increase in all studied characters under normal conditions compared to drought conditions, except chlorophyll content, transpiration rate, and proline content which exhibited higher levels under water stress conditions. Furthermore, the results of the principal component analysis indicated a notable distinction between the performance of the 45 maize inbred lines under normal and drought conditions. In terms of grain yield, the drought tolerance index (DTI) showed that Nub60 (1.56), followed by Nub32 (1.46), Nub66 (1.45), and GZ603 (1.44) were the highest drought-tolerant inbred lines, whereas Nub46 (0.38) was the lowest drought-tolerant inbred line. These drought-tolerant inbred lines were able to maintain a relatively high grain yield under normal and stress conditions, whereas those drought-sensitive inbred lines showed a decline in grain yield when exposed to drought conditions. The hierarchical clustering analysis based on DTI classified the forty-five maize inbred lines and eighteen measured traits into three column- and row-clusters, as inbred lines in cluster-3 followed by those in cluster-2 exhibited greater drought tolerance in most of the studied traits. Utilizing the multi-trait stability index (MTSI) criterion in this study identified nine inbred lines, including GZ603, as stable genotypes in terms of the eighteen studied traits across four environments. The findings of the current investigation motivate plant breeders to explore the genetic potential of the current maize germplasm, especially in water-stressed environments.

inbred line: !influences! studied traits
growing season: !affects! studied traits
water regime: !impacts! studied traits
chlorophyll content: !increases! under water stress
transpiration rate: !rises! under water stress
proline content: !elevates! under water stress
DTI: !classifies! inbred lines
MTSI: !identifies! stable genotypes