Photoperiod- and thermosensitive genic male sterility (PTGMS) rice is a vital germplasm resource consisting of two-line hybrid rice in which light and temperature strictly control their fertility changes. Variable environmental conditions present huge risks to the two-lines hybrid seed production. Explaining the regulatory mechanism of male fertility in rice PTGMS lines is an essential prerequisite to ensuring food security production. A group of near-isogenic lines (NILs) of a rice PTGMS line unique to this research group was used for this study. These lines have the same genetic background and regulate male fertility by responding to different temperature changes. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that 315 upregulated genes and 391 regulated genes regulated male fertility in response to temperature changes, and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were mainly characterized in enrichment analysis as having roles in the metabolic pathways of sugar, lipid and phenylpropanoid. Electron microscopy analysis revealed that a lack of starch accumulation in sterile pollen grains induced by high temperature, with an abnormal exine development and a lack of inner pollen grains. Defective processes for sporopollenin synthesis, sporopollenin transport and pollen wall formation in sterile anthers were verified using qPCR. Targeted metabolomics analysis revealed that most lipids (phospholipids, sphingolipids and fatty acids) and flavonoids (flavones and flavanones) were upregulated in fertile anthers and involved in pollen wall development and male fertility formation, while lignin G units and C-type lignin were the major contributors to pollen wall development. The coding genes for trehalose 6-phosphate phosphatase, beta-1,3-glucanase, phospholipase D and 4-coumarate-CoA ligase are considered essential regulators in the process of male fertility formation. In conclusion, our results indicated that the expression of critical genes and accumulation of metabolites in the metabolism of sugar, lipid, and phenylpropanoid are essential for male fertility formation. The results provide new insights for addressing the negative effects of environmental variation on two-line hybrid rice production.

Gene: !affects! Male fertility 
Gene: !synthesizes! Sporopollenin 
Gene: !enhances! Pollen wall formation 
Gene: !represses! Starch accumulation 
Gene: !interacts with! Metabolites 
Gene: !localizes to! Metabolic pathways