The cuticle is a protective extracellular matrix that covers the above-ground epidermis of land plants. Here, we studied the cuticle of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) fruits in situ using confocal Raman microscopy. Microsections from cuticles isolated at different developmental stages were scanned to visualize cuticle components with a spatial resolution of 342 nm by univariate and multivariate data analysis. Three main components, cutin, polysaccharides, and aromatics, were identified, with the latter exhibiting the strongest Raman scattering intensity. Phenolic acids and flavonoids were differentiated within the cuticle, and three schematic cuticle models were identified during development. Phenolic acids were found across the entire cuticle at the earliest stage of development, i.e. during the formation of the procuticle layer. Based on a mixture analysis with reference component spectra, the phenolic acids were identified as mainly esterified p-coumaric acid together with free p-hydroxybenzoic acid. During the cell expansion period of growth, phenolic acids accumulated in an outermost layer of the cuticle and in the middle region of the pegs. In these stages of development, cellulose and pectin were detected next to the inner cuticle region, close to the epidermal cell where flavonoid impregnation started during ripening. In the first ripening stage, chalconaringenin was observed, while methoxylated chalcones were chosen by the algorithm to fit the mature cuticle spectra. The colocation of carbohydrates, esterified p-coumaric acid, and methoxylated chalconaringenin suggests that the latter two link polysaccharide and cutin domains. Elucidating the different distribution of aromatics within the cuticle, suggests important functions: (1) overall impregnation conferring mechanical and thermal functions (2) the outermost phenolic acid layer displaying UV-B protection of the plant tissue.

Gene: !affects! Cuticle
Cutin: !localizes to! Procuticle layer
Phenolic acids: !interacts with! Polysaccharides
Flavonoids: !enhances! UV-B protection
Cellulose: !represses! Methoxylated chalcones
Pectin: !synthesizes! Chalconaringenin