Flower color patterns play an important role in the evolution and subsequent diversification of flowers by attracting animal pollinators. This interaction can drive the diversity observed in angiosperms today in many plant families such as Liliaceae, Paeoniaceae, and Orchidaceae, and increased their ornamental values. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the differential distribution of anthocyanins within petals remains unclear in Paeonia. In this study, we used an intersectional hybrid between the section Moutan and Paeonia, hereafter named Paeonia 'He Xie', which has purple flowers with dark purple blotches. After Ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-diode array detector (UPLC-DAD) analysis of blotched and non-blotched parts of petals, we found the anthocyanin content in the blotched part was always higher than that in the non-blotched part. Four kinds of anthocyanins, namely cyanidin-3-O-glucoside (Cy3G), cyanidin-3,5-O-glucoside (Cy3G5G), peonidin-3-O-glucoside (Pn3G), and peonidin-3,5-O-glucoside (Pn3G5G) were detected in the blotched parts, while only Cy3G5G and Pn3G5G were detected in the non-blotched parts. This suggests that glucosyltransferases may play a vital role in the four kinds of glucosylated anthocyanins in the blotched parts. Moreover, 2433 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were obtained from transcriptome analysis of blotched and non-blotched parts, and a key UDP-glycosyltransferase named PhUGT78A22 was identified, which could use Cy3G and Pn3G as substrates to produce Cy3G5G and Pn3G5G, respectively, in vitro. Furthermore, silencing of PhUGT78A22 reduced the content of anthocyanidin 3,5-O-diglucoside in P. 'He Xie'. A UDP-glycosyltransferase, PhUGT78A22, was identified in P. 'He Xie', and the molecular mechanism underlying differential distribution of anthocyanins within petals was elucidated. This study provides new insights on the biosynthesis of different kinds of anthocyanins within colorful petals, and helps to explain petal blotch formation, which will facilitate the cultivar breeding with respect to increasing ornamental value. Additionally, it provides a reference for understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible for precise regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis and distribution patterns.

Flower color patterns: !attract! Animal pollinators
Anthocyanins: !differentially distributed! Within petals
Ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-diode array detector (UPLC-DAD): !detects! Anthocyanins
Glucosyltransferases: !play a vital role in! Four kinds of glucosylated anthocyanins
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs): !identified from! Transcriptome analysis
UDP-glycosyltransferase, PhUGT78A22: !uses! Cy3G and Pn3G as substrates
Silencing of PhUGT78A22: !reduces! Content of anthocyanidin 3,5-O-diglucoside