Cucumber is an extremely perishable vegetable; however, under room conditions, the fruits become unfit for consumption 2-3 days after harvesting. One natural variant, DC-48 with an extended shelf-life was identified, fruits of which can be stored up to 10-15 days under room temperature. The genes involved in this economically important trait are regulated by non-coding RNAs. The study aims to identify the long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and circular RNAs (circRNAs) by taking two contrasting genotypes, DC-48 and DC-83, at two different fruit developmental stages. The upper epidermis of the fruits was collected at 5 days and 10 days after pollination (DAP) for high throughput RNA sequencing. The differential expression analysis was performed to identify differentially expressed (DE) lncRNAs and circRNAs along with the network analysis of lncRNA, miRNA, circRNA, and mRNA interactions. A total of 97 DElncRNAs were identified where 18 were common under both the developmental stages (8 down regulated and 10 upregulated). Based on the back-spliced reads, 238 circRNAs were found to be distributed uniformly throughout the cucumber genomes with the highest numbers (71) in chromosome 4. The majority of the circRNAs (49%) were exonic in origin followed by inter-genic (47%) and intronic (4%) origin. The genes related to fruit firmness, namely, polygalacturonase, expansin, pectate lyase, and xyloglucan glycosyltransferase were present in the target sites and co-localized networks indicating the role of the lncRNA and circRNAs in their regulation. Genes related to fruit ripening, <i>namely</i>, trehalose-6-phosphate synthase, squamosa promoter binding protein, WRKY domain transcription factors, MADS box proteins, abscisic stress ripening inhibitors, and different classes of heat shock proteins (HSPs) were also found to be regulated by the identified lncRNA and circRNAs. Besides, ethylene biosynthesis and chlorophyll metabolisms were also found to be regulated by DElncRNAs and circRNAs. A total of 17 transcripts were also successfully validated through RT PCR data. These results would help the breeders to identify the complex molecular network and regulatory role of the lncRNAs and circRNAs in determining the shelf-life of cucumbers.

lncRNA: !regulates! Fruit firmness
circRNA: !regulates! Fruit firmness
lncRNA: !regulates! Fruit ripening
circRNA: !regulates! Fruit ripening
lncRNA: !regulates! Ethylene biosynthesis
circRNA: !regulates! Ethylene biosynthesis
lncRNA: !regulates! Chlorophyll metabolism
circRNA: !regulates! Chlorophyll metabolism