As global change continues to intensify, the mode and rate of nitrogen input from the atmosphere to grassland ecosystems had changed dramatically. Firstly, we conducted a systematic analysis of the literature on the topic of nitrogen deposition impacts over the past 30 years using a bibliometric analysis. A systematic review of the global research status, publication patterns, research hotspots and important literature. We found a large number of publications in the Chinese region, and mainly focuses on the field of microorganisms. Secondly, we used a meta-analysis to focus on microbial changes using the Chinese grassland ecosystem as an example. The results show that the research on nitrogen deposition in grassland ecosystems shows an exponential development trend, and the authors and research institutions of the publications are mainly concentrated in China, North America, and Western Europe. The keyword clustering results showed 11 important themes labeled climate change, elevated CO<sub>2</sub>, species richness and diversity, etc. in these studies. The burst keyword analysis indicated that temperature sensitivity, microbial communities, etc. are the key research directions. The results of the meta-analysis found that nitrogen addition decreased soil microbial diversity, and different ecosystems may respond differently. Treatment time, nitrogen addition rate, external environmental conditions, and pH had major effects on microbial alpha diversity and biomass. The loss of microbial diversity and the reduction of biomass with nitrogen fertilizer addition will alter ecosystem functioning, with dramatic impacts on global climate change. The results of the study will help researchers to further understand the subject and have a deep understanding of research hotspots, which are of great value to future scientific research.

Nitrogen deposition: !affects! Microbial diversity 
Climate change: !affects! Species richness and diversity 
Nitrogen addition: !decreases! Soil microbial diversity 
Treatment time: !affects! Microbial alpha diversity 
Nitrogen addition rate: !affects! Microbial biomass 
External environmental conditions: !affects! Microbial alpha diversity 
pH: !affects! Microbial biomass