Manganese (Mn2+) is essential for a diversity of processes, including photosynthetic water splitting and the transfer of glycosyl moieties. Various Golgi-localized glycosyltransferases that mediate cell wall matrix polysaccharide biosynthesis are Mn2+ dependent, but the supply of these enzymes with Mn2+ is not well understood. Here, we show that the BIVALENT CATION TRANSPORTER 3 (BICAT3) localizes specifically to trans-cisternae of the Golgi. In agreement with a role in Mn2+ and Ca2+ homeostasis, BICAT3 rescued yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) mutants defective in their translocation. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) knockout mutants of BICAT3 were sensitive to low Mn2+ and high Ca2+ availability and showed altered accumulation of these cations. Despite reduced cell expansion and leaf size in Mn2+-deficient bicat3 mutants, their photosynthesis was improved, accompanied by an increased Mn content of chloroplasts. Growth defects of bicat3 corresponded with an impaired glycosidic composition of matrix polysaccharides synthesized in the trans-Golgi. In addition to the vegetative growth defects, pollen tube growth of bicat3 was heterogeneously aberrant. This was associated with a severely reduced and similarly heterogeneous pectin deposition and caused diminished seed set and silique length. Double mutant analyses demonstrated that the physiological relevance of BICAT3 is distinct from that of ER-TYPE CA2+-ATPASE 3, a Golgi-localized Mn2+/Ca2+-ATPase. Collectively, BICAT3 is a principal Mn2+ transporter in the trans-Golgi whose activity is critical for specific glycosylation reactions in this organelle and for the allocation of Mn2+ between Golgi apparatus and chloroplasts.

BICAT3: !localizes to! trans-cisternae of Golgi
BICAT3: !rescues! yeast mutants
BICAT3: !affects! Mn2+ and Ca2+ homeostasis
BICAT3: !enhances! photosynthesis
BICAT3: !impairs! glycosidic composition of matrix polysaccharides
BICAT3: !diminishes! pollen tube growth
BICAT3: !distinct from! ER-TYPE CA2+-ATPASE 3