Plants activate a myriad of signaling cascades to tailor adaptive responses under environmental stresses, such as salinity. While the roles of exogenous karrikins (KARs) in salt stress mitigation are well comprehended, genetic evidence of KAR signaling during salinity responses in plants remains unresolved. Here, we explore the functions of the possible KAR receptor KARRIKIN-INSENSITIVE2 (KAI2) in Arabidopsis thaliana tolerance to salt stress by investigating comparative responses of wild-type (WT) and kai2-mutant plants under a gradient of NaCl. Defects in KAI2 functions resulted in delayed and inhibited cotyledon opening in kai2 seeds compared with WT seeds, suggesting that KAI2 played an important role in enhancing seed germination under salinity. Salt-stressed kai2 plants displayed more phenotypic aberrations, biomass reduction, water loss and oxidative damage than WT plants. kai2 shoots accumulated significantly more Na+ and thus had a lower K+/Na+ ratio, than WT, indicating severe ion toxicity in salt-stressed kai2 plants. Accordingly, kai2 plants displayed a lower expression of genes associated with Na+ homeostasis, such as SALT OVERLY SENSITIVE (SOS) 1, SOS2, HIGH-AFFINITY POTASSIUM TRANSPORTER 1;1 (HKT1;1) and CATION-HYDROGEN EXCHANGER 1 (NHX1) than WT plants. WT plants maintained a better glutathione level, glutathione-related redox status and antioxidant enzyme activities relative to kai2 plants, implying KAI2's function in oxidative stress mitigation in response to salinity. kai2 shoots had lower expression levels of genes involved in the biosynthesis of strigolactones (SLs), salicylic acid and jasmonic acid and the signaling of abscisic acid and SLs than those of WT plants, indicating interactive functions of KAI2 signaling with other hormone signaling in modulating plant responses to salinity. Collectively, these results underpin the likely roles of KAI2 in the alleviation of salinity effects in plants by regulating several physiological and biochemical mechanisms involved in ionic and osmotic balance, oxidative stress tolerance and hormonal crosstalk.

KAI2: !enhances! Seed germination
KAI2: !represses! Na+ accumulation
KAI2: !synthesizes! Strigolactones
KAI2: !interacts with! Abscisic acid signaling
KAI2: !interacts with! Salicylic acid signaling
KAI2: !interacts with! Jasmonic acid signaling
KAI2: !enhances! Glutathione level
KAI2: !enhances! Antioxidant enzyme activities