Ripening is the last, irreversible developmental stage during which fruit become palatable, thus promoting seed dispersal by frugivory. In Alisa Craig fruit, mRNAs with increasing m5C levels, such as STPK and WRKY 40, were identified as being involved in response to biotic and abiotic stresses. Furthermore, two mRNAs involved in cell wall metabolism, PG and EXP-B1, also presented increased m5C levels. In the Nr mutant, several m5C-modified mRNAs involved in fruit ripening, including those encoding WRKY and MADS-box proteins, were found. Targets of long non-coding RNAs and circular RNAs with different m5C sites were also found; these targets included 2-alkenal reductase, soluble starch synthase 1, WRKY, MADS-box, and F-box/ketch-repeat protein SKIP11. A combined analysis of changes in 5mC methylation and mRNA revealed many differentially expressed genes with differentially methylated regions encoding transcription factors and key enzymes related to ethylene biosynthesis and signal transduction; these included ERF084, EIN3, AP2/ERF, ACO5, ACS7, EIN3/4, EBF1, MADS-box, AP2/ERF, and ETR1. Taken together, our findings contribute to the global understanding of the mechanisms underlying fruit ripening, thereby providing new information for both fruit and post-harvest behavior.

STPK: !increases m5C levels!
WRKY 40: !increases m5C levels!
PG: !increases m5C levels!
EXP-B1: !increases m5C levels!
Nr mutant: !contains! m5C-modified mRNAs
2-alkenal reductase: !target of! long non-coding RNAs
soluble starch synthase 1: !target of! long non-coding RNAs
WRKY: !target of! long non-coding RNAs
MADS-box: !target of! long non-coding RNAs
F-box/ketch-repeat protein SKIP11: !target of! circular RNAs
ERF084: !differentially expressed!
EIN3: !differentially expressed!
AP2/ERF: !differentially expressed!
ACO5: !differentially expressed!
ACS7: !differentially expressed!
EIN3/4: !differentially expressed!
EBF1: !differentially expressed!
MADS-box: !differentially expressed!
AP2/ERF: !differentially expressed