Water scarcity is a serious agricultural problem causing significant losses to crop yield and product quality. The development of technologies to mitigate the damage caused by drought stress is essential for ensuring a sustainable food supply for the increasing global population. We herein report that the exogenous application of ethanol, an inexpensive and environmentally friendly chemical, significantly enhances drought tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana, rice and wheat. The transcriptomic analyses of ethanol-treated plants revealed the upregulation of genes related to sucrose and starch metabolism, phenylpropanoids and glucosinolate biosynthesis, while metabolomic analysis showed an increased accumulation of sugars, glucosinolates and drought-tolerance-related amino acids. The phenotyping analysis indicated that drought-induced water loss was delayed in the ethanol-treated plants. Furthermore, ethanol treatment induced stomatal closure, resulting in decreased transpiration rate and increased leaf water contents under drought stress conditions. The ethanol treatment did not enhance drought tolerance in the mutant of ABI1, a negative regulator of abscisic acid (ABA) signaling in Arabidopsis, indicating that ABA signaling contributes to ethanol-mediated drought tolerance. The nuclear magnetic resonance analysis using 13C-labeled ethanol indicated that gluconeogenesis is involved in the accumulation of sugars. The ethanol treatment did not enhance the drought tolerance in the aldehyde dehydrogenase (aldh) triple mutant (aldh2b4/aldh2b7/aldh2c4). These results show that ABA signaling and acetic acid biosynthesis are involved in ethanol-mediated drought tolerance and that chemical priming through ethanol application regulates sugar accumulation and gluconeogenesis, leading to enhanced drought tolerance and sustained plant growth. These findings highlight a new survival strategy for increasing crop production under water-limited conditions.

ethanol: !enhances! drought tolerance 
ABA signaling: !contributes to! ethanol-mediated drought tolerance 
acetic acid biosynthesis: !involved in! ethanol-mediated drought tolerance 
chemical priming: !regulates! sugar accumulation and gluconeogenesis 
sugar accumulation: !leads to! enhanced drought tolerance