The rattan is a valuable plant resource with multiple applications in tropical forests. Calamus simplicifolius and Daemonorops jenkinsiana are the two most representative rattan species, supplying over 95% of the raw materials for the rattan industry. Hence, the wood properties of both rattans have always attracted researchers' attention. We re-annotated the genomes, obtained 81 RNA-Seq datasets, and developed an improved pipeline to increase the reliability of co-expression networks of both rattans. Based on the data and pipeline, co-expression relationships were detected in 11 NACs, 49 MYBs, and 86 lignin biosynthesis genes in C. simplicifolius and four NACs, 59 MYBs, and 76 lignin biosynthesis genes in D. jenkinsiana, respectively. Among these co-expression pairs, several genes had a close relationship to the development of wood properties. Additionally, we detected the enzyme gene on the lignin biosynthesis pathway was regulated by either NAC or MYB, while LACCASES was regulated by both NAC and MYB. For D. jenkinsiana, the lignin biosynthesis regulatory network was characterized by positive regulation, and MYB possible negatively regulate non-expressed lignin biosynthesis genes in stem tissues. For C. simplicifolius, NAC may positively regulate highly expressed genes and negatively regulate non-expressed lignin biosynthesis genes in stem tissues. Furthermore, we established core regulatory networks of NAC and MYB for both rattans. This work improved the accuracy of rattan gene annotation by integrating an efficient co-expression network analysis pipeline, enhancing gene coverage and accuracy of the constructed network, and facilitating an understanding of co-expression relationships among NAC, MYB, and lignin biosynthesis genes in rattan and other plants.

NAC: !regulates! lignin biosynthesis genes
MYB: !regulates! lignin biosynthesis genes
NAC: !positively regulates! highly expressed genes
NAC: !negatively regulates! non-expressed genes
MYB: !positively regulates! lignin biosynthesis genes
MYB: !negatively regulates! non-expressed genes