The microbial structure and metabolic function of plant-associated endophytes play a key role in the ecology of various environments, including trees. Here, the structure and functional profiles of the endophytic bacterial community, associated with <i>Paulownia elongata</i> × <i>fortunei</i>, in correlation with seasonality, were evaluated using Biolog EcoPlates. Biolog EcoPlates was used to analyse the functional diversity of the microbiome. The total communities of leaf endophyte communities were investigated using 16S rRNA V5-V7 region amplicon deep sequencing via Illumina MiSeq. Community level physiological profiling (CLPP) analysis by the Biolog EcoPlate™ assay revealed that the carboxylic acids (19.67-36.18%) and amino acids (23.95-35.66%) were preferred by all by all communities, whereas amines and amides (0.38-9.46%) were least used. Seasonal differences in substrate use were also found. Based on the sequencing data, mainly phyla Proteobacteria (18.4-97.1%) and Actinobacteria (2.29-78.7%) were identified. A core microbiome could be found in leaf-associated endophytic communities in trees growing in different locations. This work demonstrates the application of Biolog EcoPlates in studies of the functional diversity of microbial communities in a niche other than soil and shows how it can be applied to the functional analyses of endomicrobiomes. This research can contribute to the popularisation of Biolog EcoPlates for the functional analysis of the endomicrobiome. This study confirms that the analysis of the structure and function of the plant endophytic microbiome plays a key role in the health control and the development of management strategies on bioenergy tree plantations.

Proteobacteria: !dominates! endophytic bacterial community 
Actinobacteria: !dominates! endophytic bacterial community 
Biolog EcoPlates: !used to analyse! functional diversity of microbiome 
Carboxylic acids: !preferred by! all communities 
Amino acids: !preferred by! all communities 
Amines and amides: !least used by! all communities 
Seasonality: !influences! substrate use 
Biolog EcoPlates: !applied to! functional analysis of endomicrobiome