Crop domestication has a tremendous impact on socioeconomic conditions and human civilization. Modern cultivars were domesticated from their wild progenitors thousands of years ago by the selection of natural variation by humans. New cultivars are being developed by crossing two or more compatible individuals. But the limited genetic diversity in the cultivars severely affects the yield and renders the crop susceptible to many biotic and abiotic stresses. Crop wild relatives (CWRs) are the rich reservoir for many valuable agronomic traits. The incorporation of useful genes from CWR is one of the sustainable approaches for enriching the gene pool of cultivated crops. However, CWRs are not suited for urban and intensive cultivation because of several undesirable traits. Researchers have begun to study the domestication traits in the CWRs and modify them using genome-editing tools to make them suitable for extensive cultivation. Growing evidence has shown that modification in these genes is not sufficient to bring the desired change in the neodomesticated crop. However, the other dynamic genetic factors such as microRNAs (miRNAs), transposable elements, cis-regulatory elements and epigenetic changes have reshaped the domesticated crops. The creation of allelic series for many valuable domestication traits through genome editing holds great potential for the accelerated development of neodomesticated crops. The present review describes the current understanding of the genetics of domestication traits that are responsible for the agricultural revolution. The targeted mutagenesis in these domestication genes via clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 could be used for the rapid domestication of CWRs.

Crop domestication: !affects! Socioeconomic conditions 
Humans: !select! Natural variation 
Genetic diversity: !limits! Yield 
Crop wild relatives: !provide! Valuable agronomic traits 
Genome-editing tools: !modify! CWRs 
Domestication genes: !reshape! Domesticated crops 
CRISPR/CRISPR-associated protein 9: !target! Mutagenesis 
Rapid domestication: !accelerate! Development of neodomesticated crops