Low light stress increases the chalkiness of rice; however, this effect has not been fully characterized. In this study, we demonstrated that low light resulted in markedly decreased activity of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in the grains and those of sucrose synthase and soluble starch synthase in the early period of grain filling. Furthermore, low light also resulted in decreased activities of granule-bound starch synthase and starch branching enzyme in the late period of grain filling. Therefore, the maximum and mean grain filling rates were reduced but the time to reach the maximum grain filling rates and effective grain filling period were increased by low light. Thus, it significantly decreased the grain weight at the maximum grain filling rate and grain weight and retarded the endosperm growth and development, leading to a loose arrangement of the amyloplasts and an increase in the chalkiness of the rice grains. Compared to the grains at the top panicle part, low light led to a greater decrease in the grain weight at the maximum grain filling rate and time to reach the grain weight at the maximum grain filling rate at the bottom panicle part, which contributed to an increase in chalkiness by increasing the rates of different chalky types at the bottom panicle part. In conclusion, low light disturbed starch synthesis in grains, thereby impeding the grain filling progress and increasing chalkiness, particularly for grains at the bottom panicle part.

Low light: !increases! Chalkiness
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !decreases activity! Low light
Sucrose synthase: !decreases activity! Low light
Soluble starch synthase: !decreases activity! Low light
Granule-bound starch synthase: !decreases activity! Low light
Starch branching enzyme: !decreases activity! Low light
Maximum grain filling rate: !reduced! Low light
Mean grain filling rate: !reduced! Low light
Time to reach maximum grain filling rate: !increased! Low light
Grain weight at maximum grain filling rate: !decreased! Low light
Grain weight: !decreased! Low light
Endosperm growth and development: !retarded! Low light
Loose arrangement of amyloplasts: !increased! Low light
Chalky types: !increased! Low light