Plants are sessile organisms that take up nitrogen (N) from the soil for growth and development. At the postflowering stage, N that plants require for seed growth and filling derives from either root uptake or shoot remobilization. The balance between N uptake and N remobilization determines the final carbon (C) and N composition of the seed. The N uptake and N remobilization mechanisms are regulated by endogenous signals, including hormones, developmental stage, and carbon/nitrogen ratio, and by environmental factors. The cellular responses to the environment are relatively well known. However, the effects of environmental stresses on the balance between N uptake and N remobilization are still poorly understood. Thus, this study aims to analyze the impact of environmental stresses (drought, heat, darkness, triggered defense, and low nitrate) on N fluxes within plants during seed filling. Using publicly available Arabidopsis transcriptome data, expression of several marker genes involved in N assimilation, transport, and recycling was analyzed in relation to stress. Results showed that the responses of genes encoding inorganic N transporters, N assimilation, and N recycling are mainly regulated by N limitation, the genes encoding housekeeping proteases are principally sensitive to C limitation, and the response of genes involved in the transport of organic N is controlled by both C and N limitations. In addition, <sup>15</sup>N data were used to examine the effects of severe environmental stresses on N remobilization and N uptake, and a schematic representation of the major factors that regulate the balance between N remobilization and N uptake under the stress and control conditions was provided.

N: !regulated by! endogenous signals 
N: !controlled by! C and N limitations 
N: !remobilized by! environmental stresses 
genes: !encoding inorganic N transporters! regulated by N limitation 
genes: !encoding housekeeping proteases! sensitive to C limitation 
genes: !involved in transport of organic N! controlled by C and N limitations