The correlations were explored between fertility indicators of intraspecific <i>V. vinifera</i> hybrids and different cultivars were subjected to selfing or used in reciprocal crosses by testing them as female parents or male parents. Two cold-resistant and four high-quality cultivars were selected, and the offspring of fourteen crosses and six self-combinations were evaluated. The pollen viability of the six cultivars was determined by TTC staining. Compatibility and the rates of fruit-setting, seediness, germination, emergence, and seedling were measured as parameters that can affect fertility of both hybridization and self-crossing processes. Using principal component analysis, the six fertility indexes were transformed into comprehensive principal components, and the weights of the indexes were determined. Combined with the membership function method, the fertility index was comprehensively evaluated for different crosses to screen for hybrid combinations with higher fertility. The results showed a high positive correlation between the pollen viability of the cultivar subjected to selfing and the fruit-setting rate, seediness rate, and hybrid compatibility index of the cultivar used as the male parent for crossing. Additionally, there was a one-to-one positive correlation between the fruit-setting rate, germination rate, emergence rate, and seedling rate of the selfed cultivar and the fruit-setting rate, germination rate, and seedling rate of the cultivar used as the female parent for crossing. There was some variation in the comprehensive fertility index values for the parents and combinations in different years. The comprehensive fertility index was always the highest for Ecolly as the male parent. The composite fertility index values were relatively high when Dunkelfelder, Cabernet Sauvignon, or Marselan were used as the female parent. The combinations of C1 (Cabernet Sauvignon × Ecolly), C3 (Marselan × Ecolly) and C6 (Dunkelfelder × Ecolly) exhibited relatively high comprehensive fertility indices, and pedigree clustering shows that these three combinations cluster into one class of highly fertile hybrid combinations. This study provides the basis for effective intraspecific hybrid breeding of grape (<i>V. vinifera</i>).

Pollen viability: !correlates with! Fruit-setting rate
Selfing cultivar: !correlates with! Male parent's fruit-setting rate
Selfing cultivar: !correlates with! Male parent's seediness rate
Selfing cultivar: !correlates with! Male parent's hybrid compatibility index
Female parent: !correlates with! Selfing cultivar's fruit-setting rate
Female parent: !correlates with! Selfing cultivar's germination rate
Female parent: !correlates with! Selfing cultivar's emergence rate
Female parent: !correlates with! Selfing cultivar's seedling rate
Ecolly: !highest comprehensive fertility index as! Male parent
Cabernet Sauvignon: !high comprehensive fertility index as! Female parent
Marselan: !high comprehensive fertility index as! Female parent
Dunkelfelder: !high comprehensive fertility index as! Female parent
C1, C3, C6: !cluster into one class of highly fertile hybrid combinations!