TaATLa1 was identified to respond to nitrogen deprivation through transcriptome analysis of wheat seedlings. TaATLa1 specifically transports Gln, Glu, and Asp, and affects the biomass of Arabidopsis and wheat. Nitrogen is an essential macronutrient and plays a crucial role in wheat production. Amino acids, the major form of organic nitrogen, are remobilized by amino acid transporters (AATs) in plants. AATs are commonly described as central components of essential developmental processes and yield formation via taking up and transporting amino acids in plants. However, few studies have reported the detailed biochemical properties and biological functions of these AATs in wheat. In this study, key genes encoding AATs were screened from transcriptome analysis of wheat seedlings treated with normal nitrogen (NN) and nitrogen deprivation (ND). Among them, 21 AATs were down-regulated and eight AATs were up-regulated under ND treatment. Among the homoeologs, TaATLa1.1-3A, TaATLa1.1-3B, and TaATLa1.1-3D (TaATLa1.1-3A, -3B, and -3D), belonging to amino acid transporter-like a (ATLa) subfamily, were significantly down-regulated in response to ND in wheat, and accordingly were selected for functional analyses. The results demonstrated that TaATLa1.1-3A, -3B, and -3D effectively transported glutamine (Gln), glutamate (Glu), and aspartate (Asp) in yeast. Overexpression of TaAILa1.1-3A, -3B, and -3D in Arabidopsis thaliana L. significantly increased amino acid content in leaves, storage protein content in seeds and the plant biomass under NN. Knockdown of TaATLa1.1-3A, -3B, and -3D in wheat seedlings resulted in a significant block of amino acid remobilization and growth inhibition. Taken together, TaATLa1.1-3A, -3B, and -3D contribute substantially to Arabidopsis and wheat growth. We propose that TaATLa1.1-3A, -3B, and -3D may participate in the source-sink translocation of amino acid, and they may have profound implications for wheat yield improvement.

TaATLa1: !responds to! nitrogen deprivation 
TaATLa1: !transports! Gln, Glu, and Asp 
TaATLa1: !affects! biomass of Arabidopsis and wheat 
TaATLa1: !enhances! amino acid content in leaves 
TaATLa1: !enhances! storage protein content in seeds 
TaATLa1: !enhances! plant biomass under NN 
TaATLa1: !represses! amino acid remobilization 
TaATLa1: !inhibits! growth