Geitonogamy is inevitable in hermaphrodite and monecious. Even for self-incompatible species, the negative effects of self-pollen are unavoidable when geitonogamous or self-mating occurs. However, the influence of self-pollen on consecutive development of flowers (e.g., fruiting and seeding) was seldom evaluated. Here, the self-incompatible monecious species, <i>Akebia quinata</i>, was used to estimate the influence of self-pollen deposition. We evaluated the extent of pollen limitation and geitonogamous mating under natural conditions by count of stigmatic pollen load and pollen tracking experiment. Hand pollination with different amount and combinations of self vs. cross pollen grains was applied to detect the response of fruit and seed set. The results showed that geitonogamy and pollen limitation occurred under natural conditions in <i>A. quinata</i>. Carpel numbers, ratio of self- and cross-pollen, and the interactive effect of ratio of self- and cross-pollen and total mixed pollen numbers, and not total pollen grain number, determined the effect of self-pollen on female reproductive success. The effect of self-pollen depended on its intensity. In general, the transfer of self-pollen significantly affected young fruit set. However, a little self-pollen together with cross-pollen did not reduce young fruit production. Although self-incompatible plants have evolved physiological mechanisms that reduce self-fertilization, our results provide new insights into the effects of self-pollen and the adaptive significance of self-incompatible monecious species.

geitonogamy: !inevitable in! hermaphrodite and monecious
self-pollen: !unavoidable when! geitonogamous or self-mating occurs
Akebia quinata: !used to estimate! influence of self-pollen
stigmatic pollen load: !counted to evaluate! extent of pollen limitation
hand pollination: !applied to detect! response of fruit and seed set
carpel numbers: !determine! effect of self-pollen
ratio of self- and cross-pollen: !determine! effect of self-pollen
total mixed pollen numbers: !interact with! ratio of self- and cross-pollen
self-pollen: !affects! young fruit set