As a promising method, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) multispectral remote sensing (RS) has been extensively studied in precision agriculture. However, there are numerous problems to be solved in the data acquisition and processing, which limit its application. In this study, the Micro-MCA12 camera was used to obtain images at different altitudes. The piecewise empirical line (PEL) method suitable for predicting the reflectance of different ground objects was proposed to accurately acquire the reflectance of multi-altitude images by comparing the performance of the conventional methods. Several commonly utilized vegetation indices (VIs) were computed to estimate the rice growth parameters and yield. Then the rice growth monitoring and yield prediction were implemented to verify and evaluate the effects of radiometric calibration methods (RCMs) and UAV flying altitudes (UAV-FAs). The results show that the variation trends of reflectance and VIs are significantly different due to the change in component proportion observed at different altitudes. Except for the milking stage, the reflectance and VIs in other periods fluctuated greatly in the first 100 m and remained stable thereafter. This phenomenon was determined by the field of view of the sensor and the characteristic of the ground object. The selection of an appropriate calibration method was essential as a result of the marked differences in the rice phenotypes estimation accuracy based on different RCMs. There were pronounced differences in the accuracy of rice growth monitoring and yield estimation based on the 50 and 100 m-based variables, and the altitudes above 100 m had no notable effect on the results. This study can provide a reference for the application of UAV RS technology in precision agriculture and the accurate acquisition of crop phenotypes.

UAV-FA: !affects! Reflectance
UAV-FA: !affects! VIs
RCM: !affects! Rice Phenotypes Estimation Accuracy
Altitude: !influences! Reflectance
Altitude: !influences! VIs
Altitude: !influences! Rice Growth Monitoring
Altitude: !influences! Yield Estimation