Aerial bulbils are important vegetative reproductive organs in Lilium. They are often perpetually dormant in most Lilium species, and little is known about the induction of these vegetative structures. The world-famous Oriental hybrid lily cultivar 'Sorbonne', which blooms naturally devoid of aerial bulbils, is known for its lovely appearance and sweet fragrance. We found that decapitation stimulated the outgrowth of aerial bulbils at lower stems (LSs) and then application of low and high concentrations of IAA promoted aerial bulbils emergence around the wound at upper stems (USs) of 'Sorbonne'. However, the genetic basis of aerial bulbil induction is still unclear. Herein, 'Sorbonne' transcriptome has been sequenced for the first time using the combination of third-generation long-read and next-generation short-read technology. A total of 46,557 high-quality non-redundant full-length transcripts were generated. Transcriptomic profiling was performed on seven tissues and stems with treatments of decapitation and application of low and high concentrations of IAA, respectively. Functional annotation of 1918 DEGs within stem samples of different treatments showed that hormone signaling, sugar metabolism and wound-induced genes were crucial to bulbils outgrowth. The expression pattern of auxin-, shoot branching hormone-, plant defense hormone- and wound-inducing-related genes indicated their crucial roles in bulbil induction. Then we established five hormone- and wounding-regulated co-expression modules and identified some candidate transcriptional factors, such as MYB, bZIP, and bHLH, that may function in inducing bulbils. High connectivity was observed among hormone signaling genes, wound-induced genes, and some transcriptional factors, suggesting wound- and hormone-invoked signals exhibit extensive cross-talk and regulate bulbil initiation-associated genes via multilayered regulatory cascades. We propose that the induction of aerial bulbils at LSs after decapitation can be explained as the release of apical dominance. In contrast, the induction of aerial bulbils at the cut surface of USs after IAA application occurs via a process similar to callus formation. This study provides abundant candidate genes that will deepen our understanding of the regulation of bulbil outgrowth, paving the way for further molecular breeding of lily.

decapitation: !stimulates! aerial bulbils
IAA: !promotes! aerial bulbils emergence
hormone signaling: !crucial to! bulbils outgrowth
shoot branching hormone: !related to! bulbil induction
plant defense hormone: !related to! bulbil induction
wound-inducing: !related to! bulbil induction
auxin: !regulates! bulbil initiation-associated genes
MYB: !functions in! inducing bulbils
bZIP: !functions in! inducing bulbils
bHLH: !functions in! inducing bulbils
hormone signaling genes: !cross-talk with! wound-induced genes
apical dominance: !explains! aerial bulbils at LSs