Asian cotton (Gossypium arboreum L.), as a precious germplasm resource of cotton with insect resistance and stress tolerance, possesses a broad spectrum of phenotypic variation related to pigmentation. Flower color affects insect pollination and the ornamental value of plants. Studying flower color of Asian cotton varieties improves the rate of hybridization and thus enriches the diversity of germplasm resources. Meanwhile, it also impacts the development of the horticultural industry. Unfortunately, there is a clear lack of studies concerning intricate mechanisms of cotton flower-color differentiation. Hereby, we report an integrative approach utilizing transcriptome and metabolome concerning flower color variation in three Gossypium arboreum cultivars. A total of 215 differentially accumulated metabolites (DAMs) were identified, including 83 differentially accumulated flavonoids (DAFs). Colorless kaempferol was more abundant in white flowers, while gossypetin-fer showed specificity in white flowers. Quercetin and gossypetin were the main contributors to yellow petal formation. Pelargonidin 3-O-beta-D-glucoside and cyanidin-3-O-(6''-Malonylglucoside) showed high accumulation levels in purple petals. Quercetin and gossypetin pigments also promoted purple flower coloration. Moreover, 8178 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by RNA sequencing. The correlation results between total anthocyanins and DEGs were explored, indicating that 10 key structural genes and 29 transcription factors promoted anthocyanin biosynthesis and could be candidates for anthocyanin accumulation. Ultimately, we constructed co-expression networks of key DAFs and DEGs and demonstrated the interactions between specific metabolites and transcripts in different color flowers. This study provides new insights into elucidating the regulatory mechanisms of cotton flower color and lays a potential foundation for generate cotton varieties with highly attractive flowers for pollinators.

gene: !affects! Flower color
metabolite: !contributes to! Yellow petal formation
gene: !promotes! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
gene: !interacts with! Metabolites
metabolite: !specific to! White flowers