The ever-changing climate and the current COVID-19 pandemic compound the problems and seriously impact agriculture production, resulting in socio-economic insecurities and imposing health implications globally. Most of the poor and malnourished population in the developing countries depends on agriculture for food, income, and employment. Impact of climate change together with the COVID-19 outbreak revealed immense problems highlighting the importance of mainstreaming climate-resilient and low input crops with more contemporary agriculture practices. Orphan millets play a vital role in the poor and malnourished population's livelihood, food and nutrition security. Recognizing their unique potential, the United Nations-Food and Agriculture Organization has announced the year 2023 as the "International Year of Millets". However, despite the unique properties for present and future agriculture of orphan millets, their cultivation is declining in many countries. As a result, millets have gained attention from researchers which eventually decelerated "multi-omics" resource generation. This review summarizes the benefits of millets and major barriers/ bottlenecks in their improvement. We also discuss the pre- and post-harvest technologies; policies required to introduce and establish millets in mainstream agriculture. To improve and ensure the livelihood of the poor/malnourished population, intensive efforts are urgently needed in advancing the research and development, implementing pre- and post-harvest technological intervention strategies, and making favorable policies for orphan crops to accomplish food and nutrition security. National and international collaborations are also indispensable to address the uncertain effects of climate change and COVID-19.

Climate Change: !impacts! Agriculture
COVID-19: !impacts! Agriculture
Orphan Millets: !play a vital role in! Poor and Malnourished Population's Livelihood
UN-FAO: !announced! International Year of Millets
Researchers: !decelerated! Multi-omics Resource Generation
Pre-Harvest Technologies: !required to! Introduce and Establish Millets
Post-Harvest Technologies: !required to! Introduce and Establish Millets
Favorable Policies: !needed to! Accomplish Food and Nutrition Security
National Collaborations: !needed to! Address Climate Change Effects
International Collaborations: !needed to! Address Climate Change Effects