China is known for its abundant plant resources, but biodiversity conservation faces unprecedented challenges. To provide feasible suggestions for sustainable conservation, we used the species richness algorithm and complementary algorithm to study distribution patterns of 34,082 seed plants based on 1,007,196 county-level distribution records. We reconstructed a phylogenetic tree for 95.35% of species and estimated the spatial phylogenetics, followed by correlation analyses between different distribution patterns. We identified 264 counties concentrated in southern and south-western mountainous areas as hotspots which covered 10% of the land area of China and harbored 85.22% of the Chinese seed plant species. The biodiversity conservation priorities we identified were highly representative as we have considered multiple conservation indicators. We evaluated the conservation effectiveness and gaps in the network of nature reserves and identified 31.44, 32.95, and 9.47%, respectively, of the hotspot counties as gaps in the national nature reserves, provincial nature reserves and both together, with respectively 55.77, 61.53, and 28.94% of the species. Analysis of the species composition showed there were a large number of threatened and endemic species occurring in the nature reserves' gaps. The conservation gaps need to be filled by establishing new nature reserves or national parks, especially in south-western China, and more attentions should be paid to strengthen the conservation of specific plant taxa due to the apparent mismatches between different distribution patterns.

species richness algorithm: !identifies! hotspots 
complementary algorithm: !identifies! hotspots 
phylogenetic tree: !reconstructs! species 
distribution patterns: !correlates with! phylogenetics 
nature reserves: !covers! 10% of land area 
nature reserves: !harbors! 85.22% of species 
nature reserves: !contains! 31.44% gaps 
provincial nature reserves: !contains! 32.95% gaps 
both together: !contains! 9.47% gaps 
gaps: !harbor! threatened and endemic species 
south-western China: !needs! new nature reserves