Serine carboxypeptidase-like protein (SCPL) plays an important role in response to stress in plant. However, our knowledge of the function of the SCPL gene family is limited. In this study, a comprehensive and systematic analysis of SCPL gene family was conducted to explore the phylogeny and evolution of the SCPL gene in Gossypium hirsutum. The phenotype and molecular mechanism of silencing of the Gh_SCPL42 under Verticillium wilt stress was also studied. Our results showed that 96 SCPL genes were observed in genome of G. hirsutum, which distributed on 25 chromosomes and most of them were located in the nucleus. The phylogenetic tree analysis showed that members of SCPL gene family can be divided into three subgroups in G. hirsutum, which are relatively conservative in evolution. SCPL gene has a wide range of tissue expression types in G. hirsutum. Promoter analysis showed that the most cis-acting elements related to MeJA and ABA were contained. Through RNA-seq combined with genotyping, it was found that 11 GhSCPL genes not only had significant expression changes during Verticillium wilt stress but also had differential SNPs in the upstream, downstream, exonic or intronic regions. The expression of these 11 genes in the resistant (Zhongzhimian 2) and susceptible (Junmian 1) materials was further analyzed by qRT-PCR, it was found that 6 genes showed significant expression differences in the two materials. Among them, Gh_SCPL42 has the most obvious expression change. Furthermore, virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) showed necrosis and yellowing of leaves and significantly higher disease severity index (DSI) and disease severity rate (DSR) values in VIGS plants than in control silenced Gh_SCPL42 plants. Moreover, the expression levels of genes related to the SA and JA pathways were significantly downregulated. These results show that Gh_SCPL42 might improve resistance to Verticillium wilt through the SA and JA pathways in G. hirsutum. In conclusion, our findings indicated that Gh_SCPL42 gene plays an important role in resistance to Verticillium wilt in cotton. It was provided an important theoretical basis for further research on the function of SCPL gene family and the molecular mechanism of resistance to Verticillium wilt in cotton.

Gh_SCPL42: !enhances! Resistance to Verticillium wilt
Gh_SCPL42: !affects! SA and JA pathways
Gh_SCPL42: !localizes to! Nucleus
Gh_SCPL42: !synthesizes! Necrosis and yellowing of leaves
96 SCPL genes: !distributed on! 25 chromosomes