Drought is one of the main concerns worldwide and restricts the development of agriculture. Silicon improves the drought resistance of plants, but the underlying mechanism remains unclear. We sequenced the transcriptomes of both control and silicon-treated peach seedlings under drought stress to identify genes or gene networks that could be managed to increase the drought tolerance of peach seedlings. Peach (Prunus persica) seedlings were used to analyse the effects of silicon on plant growth and physiological indexes related to drought resistance under drought stress. The results showed that silicon addition improved the water use efficiency, antioxidant capacity, and net photosynthetic rate, inhibition of stomatal closure, promoted the development of roots, and further regulated the synthesis of hormones, amino acids and sugars in peach seedlings. A comparative transcriptome analysis identified a total of 2275 genes that respond to silicon under drought stress. These genes were mainly involved in ion transport, hormone and signal transduction, biosynthetic and metabolic processes, stress and defence responses and other processes. We analysed the effects of silicon on the modulation of stress-related hormonal crosstalk and amino acid and sugar metabolism. The results showed that silicon promotes zeatin, gibberellin, and auxin biosynthesis, inhibits the synthesis of abscisic acid, then promote lateral root development and inhibit stomatal closure, and regulates the signal transduction of auxin, cytokinin, gibberellin and salicylic acid. Silicon also regulates the metabolism of various amino acids and promotes the accumulation of sucrose and glucose to improve drought resistance of peach seedlings. Silicon enhanced the drought resistance of peach seedlings by regulating stress-related hormone synthesis and signal transduction, and regulating amino acid and sugar metabolism.

Silicon: !enhances! Drought resistance
Silicon: !promotes! Zeatin, Gibberellin, Auxin biosynthesis
Silicon: !inhibits! Abscisic acid synthesis
Silicon: !regulates! Signal transduction of Auxin, Cytokinin, Gibberellin, Salicylic acid
Silicon: !regulates! Metabolism of various amino acids
Silicon: !promotes! Accumulation of Sucrose and Glucose