Cell cycle progression and the phytohormones auxin and abscisic acid (ABA) play key roles in primary root growth, but how ABA mediates the transcription of cell cycle-related genes and the mechanism of crosstalk between ABA and auxin requires further research. Here, we report that ABA inhibits primary root growth by regulating the ABA INSENSITIVE4 (ABI4)-CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE B2;2 (CDKB2;2)/CYCLIN B1;1 (CYCB1;1) module-mediated cell cycle as well as auxin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). ABA induced ABI4 transcription in the primary root tip, and the abi4 mutant showed an ABA-insensitive phenotype in primary root growth. Compared with the wild type (WT), the meristem size and cell number of the primary root in abi4 increased in response to ABA. Further, the transcription levels of several cell-cycle positive regulator genes, including CDKB2;2 and CYCB1;1, were upregulated in abi4 primary root tips. Subsequent chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq, ChIP-qPCR, and biochemical analysis revealed that ABI4 repressed the expression of CDKB2;2 and CYCB1;1 by physically interacting with their promoters. Genetic analysis demonstrated that overexpression of CDKB2;2 or CYCB1;1 fully rescued the shorter primary root phenotype of ABI4-overexpression lines, and consistently, abi4/cdkb2;2-cr or abi4/cycb1;1-cr double mutations largely rescued the ABA-insensitive phenotype of abi4 with regard to primary root growth. The expression levels of DR5promoter-GFP and PIN1promoter::PIN1-GFP in abi4 primary root tips were significantly higher than those in WT after ABA treatment, with these changes being consistent with changes in auxin concentration and expression patterns of auxin biosynthesis genes. Taken together, these findings indicated that ABA inhibits primary root growth through ABI4-mediated cell cycle and auxin-related regulatory pathways.

ABA: !inhibits! primary root growth
ABA: !induces! ABI4 transcription
ABI4: !represses! CDKB2;2 and CYCB1;1
CDKB2;2: !rescues! shorter primary root phenotype of ABI4-overexpression lines
CYCB1;1: !rescues! ABA-insensitive phenotype of abi4
ABI4: !regulates! auxin biosynthesis
ABA: !affects! DR5promoter-GFP and PIN1promoter::PIN1-GFP