Cucurbitales are an important order of flowering plants known for encompassing edible plants of economic and medicinal value and numerous ornamental plants of horticultural value. By reanalyzing the genomes of two representative families (Cucurbitaceae and Begoniaceae) in Cucurbitales, we found that the previously identified Cucurbitaceae common paleotetraploidization that occurred shortly after the core-eudicot-common hexaploidization event is shared by Cucurbitales, including Begoniaceae. We built a multigenome alignment framework for Cucurbitales by identifying orthologs and paralogs and systematically redating key evolutionary events in Cucurbitales. Notably, characterizing the gene retention levels and genomic fractionation patterns between subgenomes generated from different polyploidizations in Cucurbitales suggested the autopolyploid nature of the Begoniaceae common tetraploidization and the allopolyploid nature of the Cucurbitales common tetraploidization and the Cucurbita-specific tetraploidization. Moreover, we constructed the ancestral Cucurbitales karyotype comprising 17 proto-chromosomes, confirming that the most recent common ancestor of Cucurbitaceae contained 15 proto-chromosomes and rejecting the previous hypothesis for an ancestral Cucurbitaceae karyotype with 12 proto-chromosomes. In addition, we found that the polyploidization and tandem duplication events promoted the expansion of gene families involved in the cucurbitacin biosynthesis pathway; however, gene loss and chromosomal rearrangements likely limited the expansion of these gene families.

Cucurbitaceae: !shares! Begoniaceae
Cucurbitales: !has! common paleotetraploidization
Cucurbitales: !built with! multigenome alignment framework
Cucurbitales: !characterized by! gene retention levels
Cucurbitales: !generated from! different polyploidizations
Cucurbitales: !comprising! 17 proto-chromosomes
Cucurbitaceae: !contained! 15 proto-chromosomes
Polyploidization: !promoted! expansion of gene families
Gene loss/rearrangements: !limited! expansion of gene families