Heat stress is a major abiotic stress for temperate plant species with characteristic symptoms of premature leaf senescence. The objectives of this study were to evaluate the physiological effects of cytokinins (CK) and an ethylene inhibitor, aminoethoxyvinylglycine (AVG) on heat-induced leaf senescence in the temperate perennial grass species, perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne), and to investigate whether WRKY transcription factors (TFs) could be associated with CK- or ethylene-mediated regulation of heat-induced leaf senescence by exogenously applying CK or AVG to perennial ryegrass. Perennial ryegrass plants foliar-sprayed with 6-benzylaminopurine (6-BA), and AVG exhibited prolonged stay-green phenotypes and a lesser degree of leaf senescence under heat stress (35/30°C), as shown by a decline in electrolyte leakage, malondialdehyde content, hydrogen peroxide, and superoxide content, and increased chlorophyll (Chl) content along with reduced activities of Chl-degrading enzymes (pheophytinase and chlorophyllase) and increased activity of Chl-synthesizing enzyme (porphobilinogen deaminase) due to 6-BA or AVG application. The suppression of heat-induced leaf senescence by 6-BA or AVG treatment corresponded with the upregulation of LpWRKY69 and LpWRKY70. The LpWRKY69 and LpWRKY70 promoters were predicted to share conserved cis-elements potentially recognized by TFs in the CK or ethylene pathways. These results indicate that LpWRKY69 and LpWRKY70 may negatively regulate heat-induced leaf senescence through CK or ethylene pathways, conferring heat tolerance in perennial ryegrass.

Heat stress: !induces! Leaf senescence
CK/AVG: !prolongs! Stay-green phenotype
CK/AVG: !reduces! Electrolyte leakage
CK/AVG: !decreases! Malondialdehyde content
CK/AVG: !lowers! Hydrogen peroxide
CK/AVG: !decreases! Superoxide content
CK/AVG: !increases! Chlorophyll content
CK/AVG: !inhibits! Chl-degrading enzymes
CK/AVG: !enhances! Chl-synthesizing enzyme
LpWRKY69/70: !upregulated by! CK/AVG
LpWRKY69/70: !negatively regulate! Heat-induced leaf senescence