['36062804', "Rhamnogalacturonan-II (RG-II) is a complex pectic domain in plant primary cell  walls. In vivo, most RG-II domains are covalently dimerised via borate diester  bridges, essential for correct cell-wall assembly, but the dimerisation of pure  RG-II monomers by boric acid in vitro is extremely slow. Cationic 'chaperones'  can promote dimerisation, probably by overcoming the mutual repulsion between  neighbouring anionic RG-II molecules. Highly effective artificial chaperones  include Pb2+ and polyhistidine, but the proposed natural chaperones remained  elusive. We have now tested cationic peptide fragments of several Arabidopsis  thaliana arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) as candidates. Fragments of AGP17, 18,  19 and 31 were effective, typically at  approximately 25 microg/ml (9-19 microM), promoting the boron  bridging of 16-20 microM monomeric RG-II at pH 4.8 in vitro. Native AGP31  glycoprotein was also effective, and hexahistidine was moderately so. All  chaperones tested interacted reversibly with RG-II and were not consumed during  the reaction; thus they acted catalytically, and may constitute the first  reported boron-acting enzyme activity, an RG-II borate diesterase. Many of the  peptide chaperones became less effective catalysts at higher concentration, which  we interpret as due to the formation of RG-II-peptide complexes with a net  positive charge, as mutually repulsive as negatively charged pure RG-II  molecules. The four unique AGPs studied here may serve an enzymic role in the  living plant cell, acting on RG-II within Golgi cisternae and/or in the apoplast  after secretion. In this way, RG-II and specific AGPs may contribute to cell-wall  assembly and hence plant cell expansion and development.", '2022 Sep 30', 'Biochem J', '10.1042/BCJ20220340', 'ORCID:']

Rhamnogalacturonan-II (RG-II): !dimerised by! borate diester bridges 
Cationic 'chaperones': !promote dimerisation of! RG-II 
Pb2+ and polyhistidine: !effective artificial chaperones for! RG-II 
Fragments of AGP17, 18, 19 and 31: !effective natural chaperones for! RG-II 
Native AGP31 glycoprotein: !effective natural chaperone for! RG-II 
Hexahistidine: !moderately effective chaperone for! RG-II 
RG-II and peptide chaperones: !interact reversibly with! each other 
RG-II and specific AGPs: !contribute to! cell-wall assembly