Hormones play an indispensable role during fruit ripening, nine clades in 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase (2OGD) superfamily are responsible for the hormone biosynthesis and metabolism, but less information is known about them. A total of 163 Vv2OGD superfamily members were identified from grape genome, which were mainly expanded by local (tandem and proximal) duplication. Phylogenetic analysis of 2OGD members in grape and Arabidopsis indicates 37 members in Vv2OGD superfamily are related to hormone biosynthesis and metabolism process (Vv2OGD-H), which could be divided into 9 clades, gibberellin (GA) 3-oxidase (GA3ox), GA 20-oxidase (GA20ox), carbon-19 GA 2-oxidase (C<sub>19</sub>-GA2ox), carbon-20 GA 2-oxidase (C<sub>20</sub>-GA2ox), 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid oxidase (ACO), dioxygenase for auxin oxidation (DAO), lateral branching oxidoreductas (LBO), downy mildew resistant 6 and DMR6-like oxygenase (DMR6/DLO) and jasmonate-induced oxygenase (JOX). Sixteen of these 37 Vv2OGD-Hs are expressed in grape berry, in which the expression patterns of VvGA2oxs, VvDAOs and VvJOXs shows a correlation with the change patterns of GAs, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) and jasmonates (JAs), indicating the involvement of these genes in grape berry development by regulating corresponding hormones. Twelve Vv2OGD-Hs respond to methyl JA (MeJA) treatment, of which eight may lead to the inhibition of the ripening process by the crosstalk of JAs-salicylic acids (SAs), JAs-GAs and JAs-JAs, while seven Vv2OGD-Hs respond to ABA treatment may be responsible for the promotion of ripening process by the interplay of abscisic acid (ABA)-strigolactones (SLs), ABA-SAs, ABA-GAs, ABA-JAs. Especially, VvLBO1 reach an expression peak near véraison and up-regulate about four times after ABA treatment, which implies SLs and ABA-SLs crosstalk may be related to the onset of berry ripening in grape. This study provides valuable clues and new insights for the mechanism research of Vv2OGD-Hs in hormones regulation during the grape berry development.

Hormones: !play role in! fruit ripening
2OGD superfamily: !responsible for! hormone biosynthesis/metabolism
Vv2OGD members: !expanded by! local duplication
Vv2OGD-Hs: !related to! hormone biosynthesis/metabolism
Vv2OGD-Hs: !correlate with! change patterns of hormones
Vv2OGD-Hs: !inhibit ripening process! crosstalk of JAs-SAs
Vv2OGD-Hs: !promote ripening process! interplay of ABA-SLs