Chickpea is a cool season crop that is highly vulnerable to abiotic stresses such as heat and drought. High temperature during early flowering and pod development stages significantly reduces the crop yield. The wild relatives of chickpeas can be potential donors for the introgression of heat and drought tolerance into cultivated chickpeas for crop improvement. Initially, 600 interspecific lines were derived from crosses between two elite cultivars, CDC Leader (kabuli chickpea) and CDC Consul (desi chickpea), and 20 accessions of <i>Cicer reticulatum</i>. The F<sub>5</sub> interspecific lines were tested for agronomic and seed quality traits including reaction to ascochyta blight disease under field conditions at two locations in 2018. A subset of 195 lines were selected based on resistance to ascochyta blight and acceptable seed quality. These lines were evaluated for their performance under suboptimal conditions at Lucky Lake (2019 and 2020) and Moose Jaw (2019), Saskatchewan, Canada, and Yuma, Arizona, United States (2019-2020). The lines were grown and evaluated at two seeding dates, normal (SD1) and late (SD2) seeding dates, at each location and year. The same lines were genotyped using Cicer60K Axiom® SNP chip. The population structure was determined based on 35,431 informative SNPs using fastStructure, and the interspecific lines were clustered at a <i>k</i>-value of 15. Significant marker-trait associations were identified for seed yield from SD1 and SD2 seeding dates, and stress tolerance indices (ATI, K<sub>1</sub>STI, MP, SSPI, and TOL) using phenotypic values both from individual locations and combined analyses based on BLUP values. SNP marker Ca2_34600347 was significantly associated with yield from both the seeding dates. This and other SNP markers identified in this study may be useful for marker-assisted introgression of abiotic stress tolerance in chickpea.

Chickpea: !vulnerable to! abiotic stresses 
Wild relatives: !potential donors for! introgression of heat and drought tolerance 
Interspecific lines: !tested for! agronomic and seed quality traits 
Lines: !evaluated for! performance under suboptimal conditions 
Lines: !genotyped using! Cicer60K Axiom® SNP chip 
Population structure: !determined based on! 35,431 informative SNPs 
SNP marker: !associated with! yield from seeding dates 
SNP markers: !may be useful for! marker-assisted introgression of abiotic stress tolerance