Circadian rhythms enable organisms to anticipate and adjust their physiology to periodic environmental changes. These rhythms are controlled by biological clocks that consist of a set of clock genes that regulate each other's expression. Circadian oscillations in messenger RNA (mRNA) levels require the regulation of mRNA production and degradation. While transcription factors controlling clock function have been well characterized from cyanobacteria to humans, the role of factors controlling mRNA decay is largely unknown. Here, we show that mutations in SM-LIKE PROTEIN 1 (LSM1) and exoribonucleases 4 (XRN4), components of the 5'-3' mRNA decay pathway, alter clock function in Arabidopsis. We found that lsm1 and xrn4 mutants display long-period phenotypes for clock gene expression. In xrn4, these circadian defects were associated with changes in circadian phases of expression, but not overall mRNA levels, of several core-clock genes. We then used noninvasive transcriptome-wide mRNA stability analysis to identify genes and pathways regulated by XRN4. Among genes affected in the xrn4 mutant at the transcriptional and posttranscriptional level, we found an enrichment in genes involved in auxin, ethylene and drought recovery. Large effects were not observed for canonical core-clock genes, although the mRNAs of several auxiliary clock genes that control the pace of the clock were stabilized in xrn4 mutants. Our results establish that the 5'-3' mRNA decay pathway constitutes a novel posttranscriptional regulatory layer of the circadian gene network, which probably acts through a combination of small effects on mRNA stability of several auxiliary and some core-clock genes.

Circadian rhythms: !controlled by! biological clocks 
Biological clocks: !consist of! clock genes 
Clock genes: !regulate! mRNA production/degradation 
SM-LIKE PROTEIN 1 (LSM1): !alters! clock function 
Exoribonucleases 4 (XRN4): !alters! clock function 
XRN4: !regulates! genes/pathways 
XRN4: !stabilizes! mRNAs of auxiliary/core-clock genes