As a glycophyte plant, pepper (<i>Capsicum annuum</i> L.) is widely cultivated worldwide, but its growth is susceptible to salinity damage, especially at the seedling stage. Here, we conducted a study to determine the physiological and transcriptional differences between two genotype seedlings (P300 and 323F3) with contrasting tolerance under salt stress. The P300 seedlings were more salt-tolerant and had higher K<sup>+</sup> contents, higher antioxidase activities, higher compatible solutes, and lower Na<sup>+</sup> contents in both their roots and their leaves than the 323F3 seedlings. During RNA-seq analysis of the roots, more up-regulated genes and fewer down-regulated genes were identified between salt-treated P300 seedlings and the controls than between salt-treated 323F3 and the controls. Many ROS-scavenging genes and several SOS pathway genes were significantly induced by salt stress and exhibited higher expressions in the salt-treated roots of the P300 seedlings than those of 323F3 seedlings. Moreover, biosynthesis of the unsaturated fatty acids pathway and protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum pathway were deeply involved in the responses of P300 to salt stress, and most of the differentially expressed genes involved in the two pathways, including the genes that encode mega-6 fatty acid desaturases and heat-shock proteins, were up-regulated. We also found differences in the hormone synthesis and signaling pathway genes in both the P300 and 323F3 varieties under salt stress. Overall, our results provide valuable insights into the physiological and molecular mechanisms that affect the salt tolerance of pepper seedlings, and present some candidate genes for improving salt tolerance in pepper.

ROS-scavenging genes: !enhances! Salt tolerance 
SOS pathway genes: !enhances! Salt tolerance 
Unsaturated fatty acids pathway: !involved in! Pepper seedling responses to salt stress 
Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum pathway: !involved in! Pepper seedling responses to salt stress 
Mega-6 fatty acid desaturases: !up-regulated! By salt stress 
Heat-shock proteins: !up-regulated! By salt stress 
Hormone synthesis and signaling pathway genes: !differ! Between P300 and 323F3 varieties under salt stress