Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis in soil may be directly or indirectly involved in the reproductive process of sexually reproducing plants (seed plants), and affect their reproductive fitness. However, it is not clear how underground AM symbiosis affects plant reproductive function. Here, we reviewed the studies on the effects of AM symbiosis on plant reproductive fitness including both male function (pollen) and female function (seed). AM symbiosis regulates the development and function of plant sexual organs by affecting the nutrient using strategy and participating in the formation of hormone networks and secondary compounds in host plants. The nutrient supply (especially phosphorus supply) of AM symbiosis may be the main factor affecting plant's reproductive function. Moreover, the changes in hormone levels and secondary metabolite content induced by AM symbiosis can also affect host plants reproductive fitness. These effects can occur in pollen formation and transport, pollen tube growth and seed production, and seedling performance. Finally, we discuss other possible effects of AM symbiosis on the male and female functional fitness, and suggest several additional factors that may be involved in the influence of AM symbiosis on the reproductive fitness of host plants. We believe that it is necessary to accurately identify and verify the mechanisms driving the changes of reproductive fitness of host plant in symbiotic networks in the future. A more thorough understanding of the mechanism of AM symbiosis on reproductive function will help to improve our understanding of AM fungus ecological roles and may provide references for improving the productivity of natural and agricultural ecosystems.

AM symbiosis: !regulates! development and function of plant sexual organs 
AM symbiosis: !affects! nutrient using strategy 
AM symbiosis: !participates in! formation of hormone networks 
AM symbiosis: !affects! secondary compound content 
AM symbiosis: !influences! pollen formation and transport 
AM symbiosis: !affects! seed production and seedling performance