Sugar beet is an important crop for sugar production. Sugar beet roots are stored up to several weeks post-harvest waiting for processing in the sugar factories. During this time, sucrose loss and invert sugar accumulation decreases the final yield and processing quality. To improve storability, more information about post-harvest metabolism is required. We investigated primary and secondary metabolites of six sugar beet varieties during storage. Based on their variety-specific sucrose loss, three storage classes representing well, moderate, and bad storability were compared. Furthermore, metabolic data were visualized together with transcriptome data to identify potential mechanisms involved in the storage process. We found that sugar beet varieties that performed well during storage have higher pools of 15 free amino acids which were already observable at harvest. This storage class-specific feature is visible at harvest as well as after 13 weeks of storage. The profile of most of the detected organic acids and semi-polar metabolites changed during storage. Only pyroglutamic acid and two semi-polar metabolites, including ferulic acid, show higher levels in well storable varieties before and/or after 13 weeks of storage. The combinatorial OMICs approach revealed that well storable varieties had increased downregulation of genes involved in amino acid degradation before and after 13 weeks of storage. Furthermore, we found that most of the differentially genes involved in protein degradation were downregulated in well storable varieties at both timepoints, before and after 13 weeks of storage. Our results indicate that increased levels of 15 free amino acids, pyroglutamic acid and two semi-polar compounds, including ferulic acid, were associated with a better storability of sugar beet taproots. Predictive metabolic patterns were already apparent at harvest. With respect to elongated storage, we highlighted the role of free amino acids in the taproot. Using complementary transcriptomic data, we could identify potential underlying mechanisms of sugar beet storability. These include the downregulation of genes for amino acid degradation and metabolism as well as a suppressed proteolysis in the well storable varieties.

Sugar beet: !stores! better with increased levels of 15 free amino acids
15 free amino acids: !associated with! better storability
pyroglutamic acid: !associated with! better storability
ferulic acid: !associated with! better storability
amino acid degradation: !downregulated in! well storable varieties
protein degradation: !downregulated in! well storable varieties