Apple leaf diseases seriously damage the yield and quality of apples. Current apple leaf disease diagnosis methods primarily rely on human visual inspection, which often results in low efficiency and insufficient accuracy. Many computer vision algorithms have been proposed to diagnose apple leaf diseases, but most of them are designed to run on high-performance GPUs. This potentially limits their application in the field, in which mobile devices are expected to be used to perform computer vision-based disease diagnosis on the spot. In this paper, we propose a lightweight one-stage network, called the Mobile Ghost Attention YOLO network (MGA-YOLO), which enables real-time diagnosis of apple leaf diseases on mobile devices. We also built a dataset, called the Apple Leaf Disease Object Detection dataset (ALDOD), that contains 8,838 images of healthy and infected apple leaves with complex backgrounds, collected from existing public datasets. In our proposed model, we replaced the ordinary convolution with the Ghost module to significantly reduce the number of parameters and floating point operations (FLOPs) due to cheap operations of the Ghost module. We then constructed the Mobile Inverted Residual Bottleneck Convolution and integrated the Convolutional Block Attention Module (CBAM) into the YOLO network to improve its performance on feature extraction. Finally, an extra prediction head was added to detect extra large objects. We tested our method on the ALDOD testing set. Results showed that our method outperformed other state-of-the-art methods with the highest <i>mAP</i> of 89.3%, the smallest model size of only 10.34 MB and the highest frames per second (FPS) of 84.1 on the GPU server. The proposed model was also tested on a mobile phone, which achieved 12.5 FPS. In addition, by applying image augmentation techniques on the dataset, <i>mAP</i> of our method was further improved to 94.0%. These results suggest that our model can accurately and efficiently detect apple leaf diseases and can be used for real-time detection of apple leaf diseases on mobile devices.

MGA-YOLO: !enables! real-time diagnosis of apple leaf diseases on mobile devices 
Ghost module: !reduces! number of parameters and FLOPs 
Mobile Inverted Residual Bottleneck Convolution: !integrates! CBAM into YOLO network 
Extra prediction head: !added to! detect extra large objects 
ALDOD dataset: !contains! 8,838 images of healthy and infected apple leaves 
Image augmentation techniques: !applied to! ALDOD dataset 
MGA-YOLO: !achieves! highest mAP of 89.3%, smallest model size of 10.34 MB, highest FPS of 84.1 on GPU server 
MGA-YOLO: !achieves! 12.5 FPS on mobile phone 
Image augmentation techniques: !improves! mAP of MGA-YOLO to 94.0%