This study displayed the transcriptional regulation network of key regulators and downstream pathway in seedling morphogenesis of Brassica napus under different light quality. Plants undergo photomorphogenesis upon the presence of light, mediated by different light (e.g., blue, red, and far-red) signaling pathways. Although the light signaling pathway has been well documented in Arabidopsis, the underlying mechanisms were studied to a less extent in other plant species including Brassica napus. In this study, we investigated the effect of different light qualities (white, blue, red, and far-red light) on the hypocotyl elongation in B. napus, and performed the transcriptomic analysis of seedlings in response to different light qualities. The results showed that hypocotyl elongation was slightly inhibited by red light, while it was strongly inhibited by blue/far-red light. Transcriptome analysis identified 9748 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) among treatments. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of DEGs showed that light-responsive and photosynthesis-related genes were highly expressed in response to blue/far-red light rather than in red light. Furthermore, the key genes in light signaling (i.e., PHYB, HY5, HYH, HFR1, and PIF3) exhibited distinct expression patterns between blue/far-red and red light treatments. In addition, subgenome dominant expression of homoeologous genes were observed for some genes, such as PHYA, PHYB, HFR1, and BBXs. The current study displayed a comprehensive dissection of light-mediated transcriptional regulation network, including light signaling, phytohormone, and cell elongation/modification, which improved the understanding on the underlying mechanism of light-regulated hypocotyl growth in B. napus.

PHYB: !enhances! hypocotyl elongation
HY5: !enhances! hypocotyl elongation
HYH: !enhances! hypocotyl elongation
HFR1: !enhances! hypocotyl elongation
PIF3: !enhances! hypocotyl elongation
PHYA: !enhances! hypocotyl elongation
BBXs: !enhances! hypocotyl elongation
blue/far-red light: !induces! photosynthesis-related genes
red light: !inhibits! hypocotyl elongation