Vascular development-related TRN1 transcription is suppressed by cytosine methylation in fully developed leaves of tomato. ToLCNDV infection disrupts methylation machinery and reactivates TRN1 expression - likely causing abnormal leaf growth pattern. Leaf curl disease of tomato caused by tomato leaf curl New Delhi virus (ToLCNDV) inflicts huge economical loss. Disease symptoms resemble leaf developmental defects including abnormal vein architecture. Leaf vein patterning-related TORNADO1 gene's (SlTRN1) transcript level is augmented in virus-infected leaves. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of the upregulation of SlTRN1 in vivo, we have deployed SlTRN1 promoter-reporter transgenic tomato plants and investigated the gene's dynamic expression pattern in leaf growth stages and infection. Expression of the gene was delimited in the vascular tissues and suppressed in fully developed leaves. WRKY16 transcription factor readily activated SlTRN1 promoter in varied sized leaves and upon virus infection, while silencing of WRKY16 gene resulted in dampened promoter activity. Methylation-sensitive PCR analyses confirmed the accumulation of CHH methylation at multiple locations in the SlTRN1 promoter in older leaves. However, ToLCNDV infection reverses the methylation status and restores expression level in the leaf vascular bundle. The virus dampens the level of key maintenance and de novo DNA methyltransferases SlDRM5, SlMET1, SlCMT2 with concomitant augmentation of two DNA demethylases, SlDML1 and SlDML2 levels in SlTRN1 promoter-reporter transgenics. Transient overexpression of SlDML2 mimics the virus-induced hypomethylation state of the SlTRN1 promoter in mature leaves, while silencing of SlDML2 lessens promoter activity. Furthermore, in line with the previous studies, we confirm the crucial role of viral suppressors of RNA silencing AC2 and AC4 proteins in promoting DNA demethylation and directing it to restore activated transcription of SlTRN1. Unusually elevated expression of SlTRN1 may negatively impact normal growth of leaves.

SlTRN1: !localizes to! vascular tissues 
SlTRN1: !suppressed by! cytosine methylation 
ToLCNDV: !disrupts! methylation machinery 
ToLCNDV: !reactivates! TRN1 expression 
WRKY16: !activates! SlTRN1 promoter 
SlDRM5, SlMET1, SlCMT2: !dampened by! ToLCNDV 
SlDML1, SlDML2: !augmented by! ToLCNDV 
SlDML2: !mimics! virus-induced hypomethylation 
AC2, AC4: !promote! DNA demethylation 
SlTRN1: !elevated by! ToLCNDV