Floral nectar contains mainly sugars as well as smaller amounts of amino acids and further compounds. The nectar composition varies between different plant species and it is related to the pollination type of the plant. In addition to this, other factors can influence the composition. Nectar is produced in and secreted from nectaries. A few models exist to explain the origin of nectar for dicotyl plant species, a complete elucidation of the processes, however, has not yet been achieved. This is particularly true for monocots or plant species with CAM photosynthesis. To get closer to such an elucidation, nectar, nectaries, and leaves of 36 bromeliad species were analyzed for sugars, starch, amino acids, and inorganic ions. The species studied include different photosynthesis types (CAM/C3), different pollination types (trochilophilous/chiropterophilous), or different live forms. The main sugars in nectar and nectaries were glucose, fructose, and sucrose, the total sugar concentration was about twofold higher in nectar than in nectaries, which suggests that sugars are actively transported from the nectaries into the nectar. The composition of amino acids in nectar is already determined in the nectaries, but the concentration is much lower in nectar than in nectaries, which suggests selective retention of amino acids during nectar secretion. The same applies to inorganic ions. Statistical analyses showed that the photosynthesis type and the pollination type can explain more data variation in nectar than in nectaries and leaves. Furthermore, the pollinator type has a stronger influence on the nectar or nectary composition than the photosynthesis type. Trochilophilous C3 plants showed significant correlations between the nitrate concentration in leaves and the amino acid concentration in nectaries and nectar. It can be assumed that the more nitrate is taken up, the more amino acids are synthesized in leaves and transported to the nectaries and nectar. However, chiropterophilous C3 plants show no such correlation, which means that the secretion of amino acids into the nectar is regulated by further factors. The results help understand the physiological properties that influence nectaries and nectar as well as the manner of metabolite and ion secretion from nectaries to nectar.

Photosynthesis type: !influences! Nectar composition
Pollination type: !influences! Nectar composition
Pollinator type: !has stronger influence on! Nectar composition
Nitrate concentration: !correlates with! Amino acid concentration in nectaries/nectar (C3 plants)