The genetic information and functional properties of plants have been further identified with the completion of the whole-genome sequencing of numerous crop species and the rapid development of high-throughput phenotyping technologies, laying a suitable foundation for advanced precision agriculture and enhanced genetic gains. Collecting phenotypic data from dicotyledonous crops in the field has been identified as a key factor in the collection of large-scale phenotypic data of crops. On the one hand, dicotyledonous plants account for 4/5 of all angiosperm species and play a critical role in agriculture. However, their morphology is complex, and an abundance of dicot phenotypic information is available, which is critical for the analysis of high-throughput phenotypic data in the field. As a result, the focus of this paper is on the major advancements in ground-based, air-based, and space-based field phenotyping platforms over the last few decades and the research progress in the high-throughput phenotyping of dicotyledonous field crop plants in terms of morphological indicators, physiological and biochemical indicators, biotic/abiotic stress indicators, and yield indicators. Finally, the future development of dicots in the field is explored from the perspectives of identifying new unified phenotypic criteria, developing a high-performance infrastructure platform, creating a phenotypic big data knowledge map, and merging the data with those of multiomic techniques.

Gene: !affects! Process 
Phenotypic Data: !collected from! Dicotyledonous Crops 
Morphology: !complex! Dicotyledonous Plants 
Field Phenotyping Platforms: !advanced over! Last Few Decades 
Indicators: !measured for! Morphological, Physiological, Biochemical, Biotic/Abiotic Stress, Yield 
Unified Criteria: !identified for! Future Development of Dicots 
High-Performance Infrastructure Platform: !developed for! Future Development of Dicots 
Phenotypic Big Data Knowledge Map: !created for! Future Development of Dicots 
Multiomic Techniques: !merged with! Data for Future Development of Dicots