Cycas multipinnata and C. panzhihuaensis are two attractive ornamental tree species. With the global climate change, the temperature in the natural habitats of both the species shows a marked rising trend. However, how the two species respond to extreme high temperatures are not clear. Chlorophyll fluorescence parameters, chlorophyll content, chloroplast ultrastructure and lipid metabolism in the two species were determined following plant exposure to heat stress. The results demonstrated that the photosynthetic efficiency decreased significantly in both the species following heat shock and recovery, but to a greater extent in C. panzhihuaensis. Compared to the control, chlorophyll content of C. multipinnata did not change significantly following heat stress and recovery. However, chlorophyll content of C. panzhihuaensis increased significantly after 1 d of recovery in comparison with the control. Chloroplast ultrastructures of C. panzhihuaensis were more severely affected by heat shock than C. multipinnata. C. multipinnata and C. panzhihuaensis followed a similar change trend in the amounts of most of the lipid categories after heat stress. However, only the amounts of lysophospholipids and fatty acyls differed significantly between the two species following heat treatment. Additionally, the unsaturation levels of the major lipid classes in C. multipinnata were significantly lower than or equal to those in C. panzhihuaensis. C. multipinnata was less affected by extremely high temperatures than C. panzhihuaensis. The differential stability of chlorophyll and chloroplast ultrastructure and the differential adjustment of lipid metabolism might contribute to the different responses to heat shock between the two species.

C. multipinnata: !less affected by! heat shock
C. panzhihuaensis: !more affected by! heat shock
C. multipinnata: !lower unsaturation levels of! major lipid classes
C. panzhihuaensis: !higher unsaturation levels of! major lipid classes
C. multipinnata: !no change in! chlorophyll content
C. panzhihuaensis: !increase in! chlorophyll content
C. multipinnata: !less severe! chloroplast ultrastructure damage
C. panzhihuaensis: !more severe! chloroplast ultrastructure damage