Drought is a significant condition that restricts vegetation growth on the Tibetan Plateau. Artemisia wellbyi is a unique semi-shrub-like herb in the family Compositae, which distributed in northern and northwest of Tibetan Plateau. It is a dominant species in the community that can well adapt to virous environment stress, such as drought and low temperature. Therefore, A. wellbyi. has a potential ecological value for soil and water conservation of drought areas. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of A. wellbyi. that defense drought stress can acquire the key genes for drought resistance breeding of A. wellbyi. and provide a theoretical basis for vegetation restoration of desertification area. However, they remain unclear. Thus, our study compared the transcriptomic characteristics of drought-tolerant "11" and drought-sensitive "6" material of A. wellbyi under drought stress. A total of 4875 upregulated and 4381 downregulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were induced by drought in the tolerant material; however, only 1931 upregulated and 4174 downregulated DEGs were induced by drought in the sensitive material. The photosynthesis and transcriptional regulation differed significantly with respect to the DEGs number and expression level. We found that CDPKs (calmodulin-like domain protein kinases), SOS3 (salt overly sensitive3), MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades), RLKs (receptor like kinase), and LRR-RLKs (repeat leucine-rich receptor kinase) were firstly involved in response to drought stress in drought tolerant A. wellbyi. Positive regulation of genes associated with the metabolism of ABA (abscisic acid), ET (ethylene), and IAA (indole acetic acid) could play a crucial role in the interaction with other transcriptional regulatory factors, such as MYBs (v-myb avian myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog), AP2/EREBPs (APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein family), WRKYs, and bHLHs (basic helix-loop-helix family members) and receptor kinases, and regulate downstream genes for defense against drought stress. In addition, HSP70 (heat shock protein70) and MYB73 were considered as the hub genes because of their strong association with other DEGs. Positive transcriptional regulation and negative regulation of photosynthesis could be associated with better growth performance under drought stress in the drought-tolerant material. In addition, the degradation of sucrose and starch in the tolerant A. wellbyi to alleviate osmotic stress and balance excess ROS. These results highlight the candidate genes that are involved in enhancing the performance of drought-tolerant A. wellbyi and provide a theoretical basis for improving the performance of drought-resistant A. wellbyi.

CDPKs: !enhances! Transcriptional regulation 
SOS3: !enhances! Transcriptional regulation 
MAPKs: !enhances! Transcriptional regulation 
RLKs: !enhances! Transcriptional regulation 
LRR-RLKs: !enhances! Transcriptional regulation 
ABA: !positively regulates! Genes 
ET: !positively regulates! Genes 
IAA: !positively regulates! Genes 
MYBs: !interacts with! Transcriptional regulatory factors 
AP2/EREBPs: !interacts with! Transcriptional regulatory factors 
WRKYs: !interacts with! Transcriptional regulatory factors 
bHLHs: !interacts with! Transcriptional regulatory factors 
Receptor kinases: !interacts with! Transcriptional regulatory factors 
HSP70: !synthesizes! Hub genes 
MYB73: !synthesizes! Hub genes 
Photosynthesis: !repressed! Positive transcriptional regulation 
Sucrose: !degraded! To alleviate osmotic stress 
Starch: !deg