When plants are subjected to various biotic and abiotic stresses, the root system responds actively by secreting different types and amounts of bioactive compounds, while affects the structure of rhizosphere soil bacterial community. Therefore, understanding plant-soil-microbial interactions, especially the strength of microbial interactions, mediated by root exudates is essential. A short-term experiment was conducted under drought and salt stress to investigate the interaction between root exudates and <i>Nitraria tangutorum</i> rhizosphere bacterial communities. We found that drought and salt stress increased rhizosphere soil pH (9.32 and 20.6%) and electrical conductivity (1.38 and 11 times), respectively, while decreased organic matter (27.48 and 31.38%), total carbon (34.55 and 29.95%), and total phosphorus (20 and 28.57%) content of <i>N. tangutorum</i> rhizosphere soil. Organic acids, growth hormones, and sugars were the main differential metabolites of <i>N. tangutorum</i> under drought and salt stress. Salt stress further changed the <i>N. tangutorum</i> rhizosphere soil bacterial community structure, markedly decreasing the relative abundance of Bacteroidota as r-strategist while increasing that of Alphaproteobacteria as k-strategists. The co-occurrence network analysis showed that drought and salt stress reduced the connectivity and complexity of the rhizosphere bacterial network. Soil physicochemical properties and root exudates in combination with salt stress affect bacterial strategies and interactions. Our study revealed the mechanism of plant-soil-microbial interactions under the influence of root exudates and provided new insights into the responses of bacterial communities to stressful environments.

drought: !affects! rhizosphere soil pH 
drought: !affects! electrical conductivity 
drought: !affects! organic matter 
drought: !affects! total carbon 
drought: !affects! total phosphorus 
drought: !affects! bacterial community structure 
drought: !affects! co-occurrence network 
salt stress: !affects! rhizosphere soil pH 
salt stress: !affects! electrical conductivity 
salt stress: !affects! organic matter 
salt stress: !affects! total carbon 
salt stress: !affects! total phosphorus 
salt stress: !affects! bacterial community structure 
salt stress: !affects! co-occurrence network 
root exudates: !affects! bacterial strategies 
root exudates: !affects! interactions