The nutritional value of rice can be improved by developing varieties with optimum levels of grain phytic acid (PA). Artificial low-PA mutants with impaired PA biosynthesis have been developed in rice through induced mutagenesis. However, low-PA mutant stocks with drastically reduced grain PA content have poor breeding potential, and their use in rice breeding is restricted due to their detrimental pleiotropic effects, which include decreased seed viability, low grain weight, and low seed yield. Therefore, it is necessary to take advantage of the natural variation in grain PA content in order to reduce the PA content to an ideal level without compromising the crop's agronomic performance. Natural genetic diversity in grain PA content has not been thoroughly examined among elite genetic stocks. Additionally, given grain PA content as a quantitative trait driven by polygenes, DNA marker-assisted selection may be required for manipulation of such a trait; however, informative DNA markers for PA content have not yet been identified in rice. Here we investigated and dissected natural genetic variation and genetic variability components for grain PA content in rice varieties cultivated in Eastern and North-Eastern India during the last 50 years. We developed novel gene-based markers for the low-PA-related candidate genes in rice germplasm, and their allelic diversity and association with natural variation in grain PA content were studied. A wide (0.3-2.8%), significant variation for grain PA content, with decade-wise and ecology-wise differences, was observed among rice varieties. Significant genotype x environment interaction suggested polygenic inheritance. The novel candidate gene-based markers detected 43 alleles in the rice varieties. The new markers were found highly informative as indicated by PIC values (0.11-0.65; average: 0.34) and coverage of total diversity. Marker alleles developed from two putative transporter genes viz., SPDT and OsPT8 were significantly associated with grain PA variation assayed on the panel. A 201 bp allele at the 3' UTR of SPDT gene was negatively associated with grain PA content and explained 7.84% of the phenotypic variation. A rare allele in the coding sequence of OsPT8 gene was positively associated with grain PA content which explained phenotypic variation of 18.49%. Natural variation in grain PA content is substantial and is mostly controlled by genetic factors. The unique DNA markers linked with PA content have significant potential as genomic resources for the development of low-PA rice varieties through genomics-assisted breeding procedures.

grain PA content: !has wide variation among! rice varieties 
grain PA content: !is controlled by! genetic factors 
grain PA content: !has potential for! genomics-assisted breeding 
SPDT gene: !is negatively associated with! grain PA content 
OsPT8 gene: !is positively associated with! grain PA content