Drought restricts the growth of alpine grassland vegetation. This study aimed to explore a new technical system to improve the drought resistance of forage grass. Qinghai cold-land <i>Poa pratensis</i> seedlings were used in the drought stress experiment. A combination of abscisic acid (ABA) and polyacrylamide (PAM) were used to affect the growth, leaf physiology, soil enzyme activity, and rhizosphere microbial diversity of <i>P. pratensis</i>. The fresh leaf weight and root surface area were significantly increased after ABA-PAM combined treatment, while root length was significantly reduced. Besides, the leaf catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme activity, proline and chlorophyll content, increased after the treatment, while malondialdehyde (MDA) content decreased. The treatment also increased sucrase, urease, and alkaline protease activities in rhizosphere soil, while decreasing acid phosphatase and neutral phosphatase enzyme activities. ABA-PAM combined treatment enhanced the rhizosphere microbial community and forage drought resistance by altering the abundance of various dominant microorganisms in the rhizosphere soil. The relative abundances of Actinobacteria, Chloroflexi, and Acidobacteria decreased, while Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Ascomycota increased. Unlike the relative abundance of Gibberella that decreased significantly, Komagataeibacter, Lactobacillus, Pichia, and Dekkera were significantly increased. Single-factor collinearity network analysis revealed a close relationship between the different rhizosphere microbial communities of forage grass, after ABA-PAM treatment. This study implies that ABA-PAM combined treatment can improve the drought resistance of forages. Therefore, it provides a theoretical and practical basis for restoring drought-induced grassland degradation.

ABA-PAM: !enhances! Fresh leaf weight 
ABA-PAM: !enhances! Root surface area 
ABA-PAM: !reduces! Root length 
ABA-PAM: !increases! CAT enzyme activity 
ABA-PAM: !increases! SOD enzyme activity 
ABA-PAM: !increases! Proline content 
ABA-PAM: !increases! Chlorophyll content 
ABA-PAM: !decreases! MDA content 
ABA-PAM: !increases! Sucrase activity 
ABA-PAM: !increases! Urease activity 
ABA-PAM: !increases! Alkaline protease activity 
ABA-PAM: !decreases! Acid phosphatase activity 
ABA-PAM: !decreases! Neutral phosphatase activity 
ABA-PAM: !enhances! Rhizosphere microbial community 
ABA-PAM: !enhances! Forage drought resistance 
Actinobacteria: !decreases! Relative abundance 
Ch