ATP-citrate lyase (ACL) plays a pivotal role in histone acetylation and aerobic glycolysis. In plant, ACL is a heteromeric enzyme composed of ACLA (45 kD) and ACLB (65 kD). So far, the function of ACL genes in cotton still remains unknown. Here, we identified three ACLA homologous sequences and two ACLB homologous in each genome/sub-genome of cotton species. Silencing ACLB in cotton led to cell death at newly-grown leaves and stem apexes. Simultaneously, in ACLB-silenced plants, transcription factors related to senescence including SGR, WRKY23 and Osl57 were observed to be activated. Further investigation showed that excessive H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> was accumulated, salicylic acid-dependent defense response and pathogenesis-related gene expressions were evidently enhanced in ACLB-silenced plants, implying that knockdown of ACLB genes leads to hypersensitive response-like cell death in cotton seedlings. However, as noted, serious cell death happened in newly-grown leaves and stem apexes in ACLB-silenced plants, which led to the failure of subsequent fungal pathogenicity assays. To confirm the role of ACLB gene in regulating plant immune response, the dicotyledonous model plant Arabidopsis was selected for functional verification of ACLB gene. Our results indicate the resistance to Verticillium dahliae infection in the Arabidopsis mutant aclb-2 were enhanced without causing strong cell death. Ectopic expression of GausACLB-2 in Arabidopsis weakened its resistance to V. dahliae either in Col-0 or in aclb-2 background, in which the expression level of ACLB is negatively correlated with the resistance to V. dahliae. These results indicate that ACLB has a new function in negatively affecting the induction of plant defense response and cell death in cotton, which provides theoretical guidance for developing cotton varieties with resistance against Verticillium wilt.

ACL: !composes of! ACLA, ACLB 
ACLB: !silencing leads to! cell death 
ACLB: !activates! transcription factors 
ACLB: !accumulates! H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> 
ACLB: !enhances! salicylic acid-dependent defense response 
ACLB: !negatively affects! plant defense response 
ACLB: !weakens! resistance to V. dahliae