Plants are natural experts in organic synthesis, being able to generate large numbers of specific metabolites with widely varying structures that help them adapt to variable survival challenges. Metabolomics is a research discipline that integrates the capabilities of several types of research including analytical chemistry, statistics, and biochemistry. Its ongoing development provides strategies for gaining a systematic understanding of quantitative changes in the levels of metabolites. Metabolomics is usually performed by targeting either a specific cell, a specific tissue, or the entire organism. Considerable advances in science and technology over the last three decades have propelled us into the era of multi-omics, in which metabolomics, despite at an earlier developmental stage than genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics, offers the distinct advantage of studying the cellular entities that have the greatest influence on end phenotype. Here, we summarize the state of the art of metabolite detection and identification, and illustrate these techniques with four case study applications: (i) comparing metabolite composition within and between species, (ii) assessing spatio-temporal metabolic changes during plant development, (iii) mining characteristic metabolites of plants in different ecological environments and upon exposure to various stresses, and (iv) assessing the performance of metabolomics as a means of functional gene identification , metabolic pathway elucidation, and metabolomics-assisted breeding through analyzing plant populations with diverse genetic variations. In addition, we highlight the prominent contributions of joint analyses of plant metabolomics and other omics datasets, including those from genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, epigenomics, phenomics, microbiomes, and ion-omics studies. Finally, we discuss future directions and challenges exploiting metabolomics-centered approaches in understanding plant metabolic diversity.

Metabolomics: !integrates! Analytical Chemistry, Statistics, and Biochemistry 
Metabolomics: !studies! Quantitative Changes in Metabolite Levels 
Metabolomics: !compares! Metabolite Composition Within and Between Species 
Metabolomics: !assesses! Spatio-Temporal Metabolic Changes During Plant Development 
Metabolomics: !mines! Characteristic Metabolites of Plants in Different Environments 
Metabolomics: !identifies! Functional Genes 
Metabolomics: !elucidates! Metabolic Pathways 
Metabolomics: !assists! Metabolomics-Assisted Breeding 
Metabolomics: !jointly analyses! Other Omics Datasets