Orobanchaceae is the only flowering plant family with species from free-living nonparasite, hemi-parasite to holoparasite, making it an ideal system for studying the evolution of parasitism. However, both plastid and mitochondrial genome have been sequenced in only few parasitic species in Orobanchaceae. Therefore, further comparative study is wanted to investigate the impact of holoparasitism on organelle genomes evolution between close relatives. Here, we sequenced organelle genomes and transcriptome of holoparasitic Christisonia kwangtungensis and compared it with its closely related groups to analyze similarities and differences in adaption strategies to the holoparasitic lifestyle. The plastid genome of C. kwangtungensis has undergone extensive pseudogenization and gene loss, but its reduction pattern is different from that of Aeginetia indica, the close relative of C. kwangtungensis. Similarly, the gene expression detected in the photosynthetic pathway of these two genera is different. In Orobanchaceae, holoparasites in Buchnereae have more plastid gene loss than Rhinantheae, which reflects their longer history of holoparasitism. Distinct from severe degradation of the plastome, protein-coding genes in the mitochondrial genome of C. kwangtungensis are relatively conserved. Interestingly, besides intracellularly transferred genes which are still retained in its plastid genome, we also found several horizontally transferred genes of plastid origin from diverse donors other than their current hosts in the mitochondrial genome, which probably indicate historical hosts. Even though C. kwangtungensis and A. indica are closely related and share severe degradation of plastome, they adapt organelle genomes to the parasitic lifestyle in different ways. The difference between their gene loss and gene expression shows they ultimately lost photosynthetic genes but through different pathways. Our study exemplifies how parasites part company after achieving holoparasitism.

Orobanchaceae: !evolved from! free-living nonparasite to holoparasite
C. kwangtungensis: !has undergone! pseudogenization and gene loss
A. indica: !has undergone! pseudogenization and gene loss
Buchnereae: !has more! plastid gene loss than Rhinantheae
C. kwangtungensis: !relatively conserved! mitochondrial genome
C. kwangtungensis: !found! horizontally transferred genes of plastid origin
C. kwangtungensis: !adapts differently to! A. indica