['36121899', 'In plants, regulated cell expansion determines organ size and shape. Several  members of the family of redundantly acting Small Auxin Up RNA (SAUR) proteins  can stimulate plasma membrane (PM) H+-ATPase proton pumping activity by  inhibiting PM-associated PP2C.D phosphatases, thereby increasing the PM  electrochemical potential, acidifying the apoplast, and stimulating cell  expansion. Similarly, Arabidopsis thaliana SAUR63 was able to increase growth of  various organs, antagonize PP2C.D5 phosphatase, and increase H+-ATPase activity.  Using a gain-of-function approach to bypass genetic redundancy, we dissected  structural requirements for SAUR63 growth-promoting activity. The divergent  N-terminal domain of SAUR63 has a predicted basic amphipathic alpha-helix and was  able to drive partial PM association. Deletion of the N-terminal domain decreased  PM association of a SAUR63 fusion protein, as well as decreasing protein level  and eliminating growth-promoting activity. Conversely, forced PM association  restored ability to promote H+-ATPase activity and cell expansion, indicating  that SAUR63 is active when PM-associated. Lipid binding assays and perturbations  of PM lipid composition indicate that the N-terminal domain can interact with PM  anionic lipids. Mutations in the conserved SAUR domain also reduced PM  association in root cells. Thus, both the N-terminal domain and the SAUR domain  may cooperatively mediate the SAUR63 PM association required to promote growth.', '2022 Sep', 'PLoS Genet', '10.1371/journal.pgen.1010375', 'ORCID:']

SAUR63: !stimulates! H+-ATPase activity 
SAUR63: !antagonizes! PP2C.D5 phosphatase 
N-terminal domain: !predicts! basic amphipathic alpha-helix 
N-terminal domain: !drives! PM association 
Deletion of N-terminal domain: !decreases! PM association 
Forced PM association: !restores! ability to promote H+-ATPase activity 
Lipid binding assays: !indicate! interaction with PM anionic lipids 
Mutations in SAUR domain: !reduce! PM association