Sucrose transporters of the SUT4 clade show dual targeting to both the plasma membrane as well as to the vacuole. Previous investigations revealed a role for the potato sucrose transporter StSUT4 in flowering, tuberization, shade avoidance response, and ethylene production. Down-regulation of StSUT4 expression leads to early flowering, tuberization under long days, far-red light insensitivity, and reduced diurnal ethylene production. Sucrose export from leaves was increased and a phase-shift of soluble sugar accumulation in source leaves was observed, arguing for StSUT4 to be involved in the entrainment of the circadian clock. Here, we show that StSUT4, whose transcripts are highly unstable and tightly controlled at the post-transcriptional level, connects components of the ethylene and calcium signalling pathway. Elucidation of the StSUT4 interactome using the split ubiquitin system helped to prove direct physical interaction between the sucrose transporter and the ethylene receptor ETR2, as well as with the calcium binding potato calmodulin-1 (PCM1) protein, and a calcium-load activated calcium channel. The impact of calcium ions on transport activity and dual targeting of the transporter was investigated in detail. For this purpose, a reliable esculin-based transport assay was established for SUT4-like transporters. Site-directed mutagenesis helped to identify a diacidic motif within the seventh transmembrane spanning domain that is essential for sucrose transport activity and targeting, but not required for calcium-dependent inhibition. A link between sucrose, calcium and ethylene signalling has been previously postulated with respect to pollen tube growth, shade avoidance response, or entrainment of the circadian clock. Here, we provide experimental evidence for the direct interconnection of these signalling pathways at the molecular level by direct physical interaction of the main players.

Sucrose transporter StSUT4: !affects! flowering, tuberization, shade avoidance response, and ethylene production
StSUT4: !interacts with! ethylene receptor ETR2
StSUT4: !interacts with! potato calmodulin-1 (PCM1) protein
StSUT4: !interacts with! calcium-load activated calcium channel
StSUT4: !enhances! sucrose export from leaves
StSUT4: !connects components of! ethylene and calcium signalling pathways