SQUAMOSA promoter binding protein-like (SPL) is a unique family of transcription factors in plants, which is engaged in regulating plant growth and development, physiological and biochemical processes. Fraxinus mandshurica is an excellent timber species with a wide range of uses in northeastern China and enjoys a high reputation in the international market. SPL family analysis has been reported in some plants while SPL family analysis of Fraxinus mandshurica has not been reported. We used phylogeny, conserved motifs, gene structure, secondary structure prediction, miR156 binding sites, promoter cis elements and GO annotation to systematically analyze the FmSPLs family. This was followed by expression analysis by subcellular localization, expression patterns at various tissue sites, abiotic stress and hormone induction. Because FmSPL2 is highly expressed in flowers it was selected to describe the SPL gene family of Fraxinus mandshurica by ectopic expression. Among them, 10 FmSPL genes that were highly expressed at different loci were selected for expression analysis under abiotic stress (NaCl and Cold) and hormone induction (IAA and ABA). These 10 FmSPL genes showed corresponding trends in response to both abiotic stress and hormone induction. We showed that overexpression of FmSPL2 in transgenic Nicotiana tabacum L. resulted in taller plants, shorter root length, increased root number, rounded leaves, and earlier flowering time. We identified 36 SPL genes, which were classified into seven subfamilies based on sequence analysis. FmSPL2 was selected for subsequent heterologous expression by analysis of expression patterns in various tissues and under abiotic stress and hormone induction, and significant phenotypic changes were observed in the transgenic Nicotiana tabacum L. These results provide insight into the evolutionary origin and biological significance of plant SPL. The aim of this study was to lay the foundation for the genetic improvement of Fraxinus mandshurica and the subsequent functional analysis of FmSPL2.

SPL: !regulates! plant growth and development
FmSPLs: !classified into! seven subfamilies
FmSPL2: !highly expressed in! flowers
FmSPL2: !overexpressed in! transgenic Nicotiana tabacum L.
FmSPL2: !results in! taller plants, shorter root length, increased root number, rounded leaves, and earlier flowering time