The responses of plants to different abiotic stresses and mechanisms involved in their mitigation are discussed. Production of osmoprotectants, antioxidants, enzymes and other metabolites by beneficial microorganisms and their bioengineering ameliorates environmental stresses to improve food production. Progressive intensification of global agriculture, injudicious use of agrochemicals and change in climate conditions have deteriorated soil health, diminished the microbial biodiversity and resulted in environment pollution along with increase in biotic and abiotic stresses. Extreme weather conditions and erratic rains have further imposed additional stress for the growth and development of plants. Dominant abiotic stresses comprise drought, temperature, increased salinity, acidity, metal toxicity and nutrient starvation in soil, which severely limit crop production. For promoting sustainable crop production in environmentally challenging environments, use of beneficial microbes has emerged as a safer and sustainable means for mitigation of abiotic stresses resulting in improved crop productivity. These stress-tolerant microorganisms play an effective role against abiotic stresses by enhancing the antioxidant potential, improving nutrient acquisition, regulating the production of plant hormones, ACC deaminase, siderophore and exopolysaccharides and accumulating osmoprotectants and, thus, stimulating plant biomass and crop yield. In addition, bioengineering of beneficial microorganisms provides an innovative approach to enhance stress tolerance in plants. The use of genetically engineered stress-tolerant microbes as inoculants of crop plants may facilitate their use for enhanced nutrient cycling along with amelioration of abiotic stresses to improve food production for the ever-increasing population. In this chapter, an overview is provided about the current understanding of plant-bacterial interactions that help in alleviating abiotic stress in different crop systems in the face of climate change. This review largely focuses on the importance and need of sustainable and environmentally friendly approaches using beneficial microbes for ameliorating the environmental stresses in our agricultural systems.

microbes: !enhance! antioxidant potential
microbes: !improve! nutrient acquisition
microbes: !regulate! production of plant hormones
microbes: !accumulate! osmoprotectants
microbes: !stimulate! plant biomass
microbes: !amplify! crop yield
microbes: !facilitate! use for enhanced nutrient cycling
microbes: !alleviate! abiotic stress
climate change: !deteriorates! soil health
climate change: !diminishes! microbial biodiversity
climate change: !pollutes! environment
climate change: !imposes! additional stress