In eukaryotes, histone acetylation levels directly regulate downstream gene expression. As a plant-specific histone deacetylase (HDAC), HD2D is involved in plant development and abiotic stress. However, the response of HD2D to drought stress and its interacting proteins, is still unclear. In this study, we analysed HD2D gene expression patterns in Arabidopsis, revealing that HD2D gene was highly expressed in roots and rosette leaves, but poorly expressed in other tissues such as stems, flowers, and young siliques. The HD2D gene expression was induced by d-mannitol. We investigated the responses to drought stress in the wild-type plant, HD2D overexpression lines, and hd2d mutants. HD2D-overexpressing lines showed abscisic acid (ABA) hypersensitivity and drought tolerance, and these phenotypes were not present in hd2d mutants. RNA-seq analysis revealed the transcriptome changes caused by HD2D under drought stress, and showed that HD2D responded to drought stress via the ABA signalling pathway. In addition, we demonstrated that CASEIN KINASE II (CKA4) directly interacted with HD2D. The phosphorylation of Ser residues on HD2D by CKA4 enhanced HD2D enzymatic activity. Furthermore, the phosphorylation of HD2D was shown to contribute to lateral root development and ABA sensing in Arabidopsis, but, these phenotypes could not be reproduced by the overexpression of Ser-phospho-null HD2D lines. Collectively, this study suggests that HD2D responded to drought stress by regulating the ABA signalling pathway, and the expression of drought stress-related genes. The regulatory mechanism of HD2D mediated by CKII phosphorylation provides new insights into the ABA response and lateral root development in Arabidopsis.

HD2D: !regulates! downstream gene expression
HD2D: !responds to! drought stress
HD2D: !induces! ABA hypersensitivity and drought tolerance
HD2D: !regulates! ABA signalling pathway
CKA4: !interacts with! HD2D
CKA4: !phosphorylates! HD2D
HD2D: !enhances! enzymatic activity
HD2D: !contributes to! lateral root development and ABA sensing