Polyploidization leads to novel phenotypes and is a major force in evolution. However, the relationship between the evolution of new traits and variations in the post-translational modifications (PTM) of proteins during polyploidization has not been studied. Acetylation of lysine residues is a common protein PTM that plays a critical regulatory role in central metabolism. To test whether changes in metabolism in citrus fruit is associated with the reprogramming of lysine acetylation (Kac) in non-histone proteins during allotetraploidization, we performed a global acetylome analysis of fruits from a synthetic allotetraploid citrus and its diploid parents. A total of 4,175 Kac sites were identified on 1,640 proteins involved in a wide range of fruit traits. In the allotetraploid, parental dominance (i.e. resemblance to one of the two parents) in specific fruit traits, such as fruit acidity and flavonol metabolism, was highly associated with parental Kac level dominance in pertinent enzymes. This association is due to Kac-mediated regulation of enzyme activity. Moreover, protein Kac probably contributes to the discordance between the transcriptomic and proteomic variations during allotetraploidization. The acetylome reprogramming can be partially explained by the expression pattern of several lysine deacetylases (KDACs). Overexpression of silent information regulator 2 (CgSRT2) and histone deacetylase 8 (CgHDA8) diverted metabolic flux from primary metabolism to secondary metabolism and partially restored a metabolic status to the allotetraploid, which expressed attenuated levels of CgSRT2 and CgHDA8. Additionally, KDAC inhibitor treatment greatly altered metabolism in citrus fruit. Collectively, these findings reveal the important role of acetylome reprogramming in trait evolution during polyploidization.

Polyploidization: !leads to! novel phenotypes 
Kac: !plays a critical role in! central metabolism 
allotetraploid: !associated with! parental Kac level dominance 
Kac: !mediates! enzyme activity 
Kac: !contributes to! discordance between transcriptomic and proteomic variations 
CgSRT2/CgHDA8: !divert metabolic flux from! primary metabolism 
KDAC inhibitor: !alters! metabolism