To adapt to variable natural conditions, plants have evolved several strategies to respond to different environmental stresses. MicroRNA (miRNA)-mediated gene regulation is one of such strategies. Variants, e.g., single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the mature miRNAs or their target sites may cause the alteration of regulatory networks and serious phenotype changes. In this study, we proposed a novel approach to construct a miRNA-miRNA crosstalk network in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> based on the notion that two cooperative miRNAs toward common targets are under a strong pressure to be inherited together across ecotypes. By performing a genome-wide scan of the SNPs within the mature miRNAs and their target sites, we defined a "regulation fate profile" to describe a miRNA-target regulation being static (kept) or dynamic (gained or lost) across 1,135 ecotypes compared with the reference genome of Col-0. The cooperative miRNA pairs were identified by estimating the similarity of their regulation fate profiles toward the common targets. The reliability of the cooperative miRNA pairs was supported by solid expressional correlation, high PPImiRFS scores, and similar stress responses. Different combinations of static and dynamic miRNA-target regulations account for the cooperative miRNA pairs acting on various biological characteristics of miRNA conservation, expression, homology, and stress response. Interestingly, the targets that are co-regulated dynamically by both cooperative miRNAs are more likely to be responsive to stress. Hence, stress-related genes probably bear selective pressures in a certain group of ecotypes, in which miRNA regulations on the stress genes reprogram. Finally, three case studies showed that reprogramming miRNA-miRNA crosstalk toward the targets in specific ecotypes was associated with these ecotypes' climatic variables and geographical locations. Our study highlights the potential of miRNA-miRNA crosstalk as a genetic basis underlying environmental adaptation in natural populations.

miRNA: !regulates! target
miRNA: !cooperates with! miRNA
miRNA: !correlates with! expression
miRNA: !responds to! stress
miRNA: !associated with! climatic variables
miRNA: !underlies! environmental adaptation