Plants and rhizosphere bacterial microbiota have intimate relationships. As neighbors of the plant root system, rhizosphere microorganisms have a crucial impact on plant growth and health. In this study, we sampled rhizosphere soil of sugarcane in May (seedling), July (tillering), September (elongation) and November (maturity), respectively. We employ 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing to investigate seasonal variations in rhizosphere bacteria community structure and abundance, as well as their association with soil edaphic factors. The results demonstrate that soil pH, total nitrogen (TN) and available nitrogen (AN) decrease substantially with time. Rhizosphere bacteria diversity (Shannon) and the total enriched OTUs are also significantly higher in July relative to other months. Bacteria OTUs and functional composition exhibit a strong and significant correlation with soil temperature (Tem), suggesting that Tem was the potential determinant controlling rhizosphere bacteria diversity, enriched OTUs as well as functional composition. Redundancy analysis (RDA) point toward soil total potassium (TK), pH, TN, Tem and AN as principal determinant altering shifting bacteria community structure. Variation partitioning analysis (VPA) analysis further validate that a substantial proportion of variation (70.79%) detected in the rhizosphere bacteria community structure was attributed to edaphic factors. Mfuzz analysis classified the bacterial genera into four distinct clusters, with cluster two exhibiting a distinct and dramatic increase in July, predominantly occupied by Allocatelliglobosispora. The stochastic forest model found the key characteristic bacterial populations that can distinguish the four key growth periods of sugarcane. It may help us to answer some pending questions about the interaction of rhizosphere microorganisms with plants in the future.

Soil pH: !affects! Rhizosphere bacteria diversity 
Total nitrogen (TN): !affects! Rhizosphere bacteria diversity 
Available nitrogen (AN): !affects! Rhizosphere bacteria diversity 
Soil temperature (Tem): !correlates with! Bacteria OTUs and functional composition 
Total potassium (TK): !determines! Shifting bacteria community structure 
Edaphic factors: !alter! Rhizosphere bacteria community structure 
Allocatelliglobosispora: !increases in! July