Heat stress during the preflowering panicle initiation stage seriously decreases rice grain weight in an invisible way and has not been given enough attention. The current review aims to (i) specify the heat effects on rice grain weight during the panicle initiation stage compared with the most important grain-filling stage; and (ii) discuss the physiological mechanisms of the decreased rice grain weight induced by heat during panicle initiation in terms of assimilate supply and phytohormone regulation, which are key physiological processes directly regulating rice grain weight. We emphasize that the effect of heat during the panicle initiation stage on rice grain weight is more serious than that during the grain-filling stage. Heat stress during the panicle initiation stage induces alterations in endogenous phytohormones, leading to the inhibition of the photosynthesis of functional leaves (source) and the formation of vascular bundles (flow), thus reducing the accumulation and transport of nonstructural carbohydrates and the growth of lemmata and paleae. The disruptions in the "flow" and restrictions in the preanthesis "source" tissue reduce grain size directly and decrease grain plumpness indirectly, resulting in a reduction in the final grain weight, which could be the direct physiological causes of the lower rice grain weight induced by heat during the panicle initiation stage. We highlight the seriousness of preflowering heat stress on rice grain weight, which can be regarded as an invisible disaster. The physiological mechanisms underlying the lower grain weight induced by heat during panicle initiation show a certain novelty because they distinguish this stage from the grain-filling stage. Additionally, a number of genes that control grain size through phytohormones have been summarized, but their functions have not yet been fully tested under heat conditions, except for the <i>Grain Size and Abiotic stress tolerance 1</i> (<i>GSA1</i>) and <i>BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1</i> (<i>OsBRI1</i>) genes, which are reported to respond rapidly to heat stress. The mechanisms of reduced rice grain weight induced by heat during the panicle initiation stage should be studied in more depth in terms of molecular pathways.

Heat stress: !decreases! Rice grain weight
Assimilate supply: !regulates! Rice grain weight
Phytohormone regulation: !regulates! Rice grain weight
Photosynthesis: !inhibited by! Heat stress
Vascular bundles: !inhibited by! Heat stress
Nonstructural carbohydrates: !reduced by! Heat stress
Grain size: !directly affected by! Heat stress
Grain plumpness: !indirectly affected by! Heat stress
GSA1 gene: !responds to! Heat stress
OsBRI1 gene: !responds to! Heat stress