CgVPE1 is important in the differentiation of TE cells in C. grandis 'Tomentosa' fruits as it may directly affects secondary cell wall construction while participating in PCD. The vacuolar processing enzyme (VPE) plays an important role in both developmental and environmentally inducible programmed cell death (PCD); it was originally identified as a cysteine protease localized in the vacuole to activate and mature vacuolar proteins in plants. Interestingly, we found a VPE called CgVPE1 to be associated with deposition of the secondary cell wall in tracheary element (TE) cells in the pericarp of Citrus grandis 'Tomentosa' fruits. We then used ultrathin sections and the TUNEL assay to verify that PCD is involved in TE development. Furthermore, CgVPE1 was found to be mainly expressed in secretory cavities and TEs in the pericarp of Citrus grandis 'Tomentosa' fruits. Immunolocalization of CgVPE1 in the pericarp indicated that CgVPE1 is mainly distributed in the central large vacuole, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi vesicles, cytosol, and secondary wall before TE maturation. CgVPE1 appeared earlier in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi vesicles of TEs cells. The vesicles containing CgVPE1 near the large central vacuole and secondary wall were observed, respectively. CgVPE1 proteins content in the cytoplasm decreased sharply, while the CgVPE1 content in the secondary cell wall did not change significantly after vacuole rupture. CgVPE1 protein contents in the secondary cell wall were significantly reduced until the TE cells developed into hollow thick-walled cells. Furthermore, labeling of VPE homologues in Arabidopsis thaliana using immunoelectron microscopy with anti-CgVPE1 antibody revealed that VPE homologues were specifically distributed in the secondary cell wall of stem TEs. Overall, these results suggested that CgVPE1 is not only involved PCD during TE cell development; furthermore, it may directly participate in the construction of plant secondary cell walls.

CgVPE1: !affects! Secondary cell wall construction 
CgVPE1: !localizes to! Central large vacuole, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi vesicles, cytosol, and secondary wall 
CgVPE1: !interacts with! Vacuolar processing enzyme 
CgVPE1: !enhances! PCD in TE cells 
CgVPE1: !represses! Protein content in cytoplasm 
CgVPE1: !synthesizes! VPE homologues in Arabidopsis thaliana