Terpenoids are the most important natural products collected from conifer species. However, the molecular mechanisms and core factors underlying terpenoid biosynthesis in Pinus massoniana remain unclear. To clarify these mechanisms, this study aimed to identify potential genes that might participate in the terpenoid biosynthesis of P. massoniana. In this study, single molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing and expression analysis were used to confirm the expression patterns of genes involved in the cones, immature needles, mature needles, immature branches, and mature branches of P. massoniana. A total of 31,331 lncRNAs and 71,240 mRNAs were identified from these organs, and the greatest number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was discovered between needles and branches. Weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) classified all expressed genes into nine typical modules with 11 kinds of transcription factors (TFs), namely, AP2-ERF, ARF, AUX-IAA, C2H2, Dof, F-box, SBP, WRKY, bHLH, bZIP, and GRAS, and seven kinds of functional genes, namely, ABC transporter, cellulose synthase (CesA), leucine-rich repeats (LRR), cytochrome P450 (CYT P450), pathogenesis-related protein (PR), terpene synthase (TPS), and chlorophyllase enzyme. A molecular network was constructed for hub genes, TFs, and functional genes in three modules. The potential function of eight candidate genes, including PmbHLH2, PmERF1, PmRGA, PmGAI, PmbZIP1, PmLOB1, PmMADS1, and PmMYB1, was validated through correlation analysis between terpenoid contents and expression levels, subcellular localization, and transcriptional activation activity, which provides us with probable regulators of terpenoid biosynthesis in conifers.

SMRT sequencing: !identifies! genes
DEGs: !greatest between! needles and branches
WGCNA: !classifies! genes
TFs: !identified as! AP2-ERF, ARF, AUX-IAA, C2H2, Dof, F-box, SBP, WRKY, bHLH, bZIP, GRAS
Functional genes: !identified as! ABC transporter, CesA, LRR, CYT P450, PR, TPS, chlorophyllase enzyme
Hub genes: !interacts with! TFs, functional genes
Candidate genes: !correlated with! terpenoid contents, expression levels, subcellular localization, transcriptional activation activity