Global food security, both in terms of quantity and quality remains as a challenge with the increasing population. In parallel, micronutrient deficiency in the human diet leads to malnutrition and several health-related problems collectively known as "hidden hunger" more prominent in developing countries around the globe. Biofortification is a potential tool to fortify grain legumes with micronutrients to mitigate the food and nutritional security of the ever-increasing population. Anti-nutritional factors like phytates, raffinose (RFO's), oxalates, tannin, etc. have adverse effects on human health upon consumption. Reduction of the anti-nutritional factors or preventing their accumulation offers opportunity for enhancing the intake of legumes in diet besides increasing the bioavailability of micronutrients. Integrated breeding methods are routinely being used to exploit the available genetic variability for micronutrients through modern "omic" technologies such as genomics, transcriptomics, ionomics, and metabolomics for developing biofortified grain legumes. Molecular mechanism of Fe/Zn uptake, phytate, and raffinose family oligosaccharides (RFOs) biosynthesis pathways have been elucidated. Transgenic, microRNAs and genome editing tools hold great promise for designing nutrient-dense and anti-nutrient-free grain legumes. In this review, we present the recent efforts toward manipulation of genes/QTLs regulating biofortification and Anti-nutrient accumulation in legumes using genetics-, genomics-, microRNA-, and genome editing-based approaches. We also discuss the success stories in legumes enrichment and recent advances in development of low Anti-nutrient lines. We hope that these emerging tools and techniques will expedite the efforts to develop micronutrient dense legume crop varieties devoid of Anti-nutritional factors that will serve to address the challenges like malnutrition and hidden hunger.

Gene: !affects! Biofortification 
Gene: !regulates! Anti-nutrient accumulation 
Gene: !manipulated by! Genetics 
Gene: !manipulated by! Genomics 
Gene: !manipulated by! MicroRNA 
Gene: !manipulated by! Genome editing