Parental environmental effects can be a rapid and effective means for clonal plants in response to temporally or spatially varying environments. However, few studies have quantitatively measured the ecological significance of parental effects in aquatic clonal plants. In this study, we developed a two-generation (parent-offspring) growth model to examine the parental effects of nitrogen (N) conditions on summed and mean performance of clonal offspring of one wetland species <i>Alternanthera philoxeroides</i>. We also examined the role of survival status and developmental stage of clonal offspring in the consequence of parental effects in aquatic clonal plants. Our results indicated direct evidence that (1) there were significant non-linear correlations between the performance of parental plants and initial status of clonal offspring (i.e., the mass and number of clonal propagules); (2) parental N effects on the summed performance of clonal offspring were content-dependent (i.e., there were significant interactions between parental and offspring N effects), while parental effects on the mean performance of offspring were independent of offspring conditions; (3) parental effects mainly occurred at the early development stage of clonal offspring, and then gradually declined at the late stage; (4) the context-dependent parental effects on the summed performance of clonal offspring gradually strengthened when offspring survival was high. The mathematical models derived from the experimental data may help researchers to not only deeply explore the ecological significance of parental environmental effects in aquatic clonal plants, but also to reveal the importance of potential factors that have been often neglected in empirical studies.

Parental N: !affects! Offspring performance
Offspring mass/number: !correlates with! Parental performance
Parental N: !interacts with! Offspring N
Parental effects: !occur at! Early development stage
Survival status: !influences! Parental effects