Broomcorn millet is highly tolerant to drought and barren soil. Changes in chlorophyll content directly affect leaf color, which subsequently leadsleading to poor photosynthetic performance and reduced crop yield. Herein, we isolated a yellow leaf mutant (YX-yl) using a forward genetics approach and evaluated its agronomic traits, photosynthetic pigment content, chloroplast ultrastructure, and chlorophyll precursors. Furthermore, the molecular mechanism of yellowing was explored using transcriptome sequencing. The YX-yl mutant showed significantly decreased plant height and low yield. The leaves exhibited a yellow-green phenotype and poor photosynthetic capacity during the entire growth period. The content of chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, and carotenoids in YX-yl leaves was lower than that in wild-type leaves. Chlorophyll precursor analysis results showed that chlorophyll biosynthesis in YX-yl was hindered by the conversion of porphobilinogen to protoporphyrin IX. Examination of chloroplast ultrastructure in the leaves revealed that the chloroplasts of YX-yl accumulated on one side of the cell. Moreover, the chloroplast structure of YX-yl was degraded. The inner and outer membranes of the chloroplasts could not be distinguished well. The numbers of grana and grana thylakoids in the chloroplasts were low. The transcriptome of the yellowing mutant YX-yl was sequenced and compared with that of the wild type. Nine chlorophyll-related genes with significantly different expression profiles were identified: PmUROD, PmCPO, PmGSAM, PmPBDG, PmLHCP, PmCAO, PmVDE, PmGluTR, and PmPNPT. The proteins encoded by these genes were located in the chloroplast, chloroplast membrane, chloroplast thylakoid membrane, and chloroplast matrix and were mainly involved in chlorophyll biosynthesis and redox-related enzyme regulation. YX-yl is an ideal material for studying pigment metabolism mechanisms. Changes in the expression patterns of some genes between YX-yl and the wild type led to differences in chloroplast structures and enzyme activities in the chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway, ultimately resulting in a yellowing phenotype in the YX-yl mutant. Our findings provide an insight to the molecular mechanisms of leaf color formation and chloroplast development in broomcorn millet.

PmUROD: !localizes to! chloroplast 
PmCPO: !localizes to! chloroplast membrane 
PmGSAM: !localizes to! chloroplast thylakoid membrane 
PmPBDG: !localizes to! chloroplast matrix 
PmLHCP: !localizes to! chloroplast 
PmCAO: !localizes to! chloroplast 
PmVDE: !localizes to! chloroplast 
PmGluTR: !localizes to! chloroplast 
PmPNPT: !localizes to! chloroplast 
chlorophyll: !synthesized by! PmUROD, PmCPO, PmGSAM, PmPBDG, PmLHCP, PmCAO, PmVDE, PmGluTR, PmPNPT 
YX-yl mutant: !affects! chlorophyll biosynthesis 
YX-yl mutant: !represses! photosynthetic capacity 
YX-yl mutant: !reduces! plant height 
YX-yl mutant