Circadian clock components exhibit structural variations in different plant systems, and functional variations during various abiotic stresses. These variations bear relevance for plant fitness and could be important evolutionarily. All organisms on earth have the innate ability to measure time as diurnal rhythms that occur due to the earth's rotations in a 24-h cycle. Circadian oscillations arising from the circadian clock abide by its fundamental properties of periodicity, entrainment, temperature compensation, and oscillator mechanism, which is central to its function. Despite the fact that a myriad of research in Arabidopsis thaliana illuminated many detailed aspects of the circadian clock, many more variations in clock components' organizations and functions remain to get deciphered. These variations are crucial for sustainability and adaptation in different plant systems in the varied environmental conditions in which they grow. Together with these variations, circadian clock functions differ drastically even during various abiotic and biotic stress conditions. The present review discusses variations in the organization of clock components and their role in different plant systems and abiotic stresses. We briefly introduce the clock components, entrainment, and rhythmicity, followed by the variants of the circadian clock in different plant types, starting from lower non-flowering plants, marine plants, dicots to the monocot crop plants. Furthermore, we discuss the interaction of the circadian clock with components of various abiotic stress pathways, such as temperature, light, water stress, salinity, and nutrient deficiency with implications for the reprogramming during these stresses. We also update on recent advances in clock regulations due to post-transcriptional, post-translation, non-coding, and micro-RNAs. Finally, we end this review by summarizing the points of applicability, a remark on the future perspectives, and the experiments that could clear major enigmas in this area of research.

Circadian clock: !exhibits structural variations! in different plant systems
Circadian clock: !differs functionally! during various abiotic stresses
Circadian clock: !governs periodicity, entrainment, temperature compensation, and oscillator mechanism! 
Circadian clock: !interacts with components of various abiotic stress pathways! 
Circadian clock: !regulated by post-transcriptional, post-translation, non-coding, and micro-RNAs!