Plants' primary metabolites are of great importance from the survival and nutritional perspectives. However, the genetic bases underlying the profiles of primary metabolites in oilseed crops remain largely unclear. As one of the main oilseed crops, sesame (Sesamum indicum L.) is a potential model plant for investigating oil metabolism in plants. Therefore, the objective of this study is to disclose the genetic variants associated with variation in the content of primary metabolites in sesame. We performed a comprehensive metabolomics analysis of primary metabolites in 412 diverse sesame accessions using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and identified a total of 45 metabolites, including fatty acids, monoacylglycerols (MAGs), and amino acids. Genome-wide association study unveiled 433 significant single-nucleotide polymorphism loci associated with variation in primary metabolite contents in sesame. By integrating diverse genomic analyses, we identified 10 key candidate causative genes of variation in MAG, fatty acid, asparagine, and sucrose contents. Among them, SiDSEL was significantly associated with multiple traits. SiCAC3 and SiKASI were strongly associated with variation in oleic acid and linoleic acid contents. Overexpression of SiCAC3, SiKASI, SiLTPI.25, and SiLTPI.26 in transgenic Arabidopsis and Saccharomyces cerevisiae revealed that SiCAC3 is a potential target gene for improvement of unsaturated fatty acid levels in crops. Furthermore, we found that it may be possible to breed several quality traits in sesame simultaneously. Our results provide valuable genetic resources for improving sesame seed quality and our understanding of oilseed crops' primary metabolism.

SiDSEL: !associated with! multiple traits
SiCAC3: !associated with! oleic acid content
SiKASI: !associated with! linoleic acid content
SiLTPI.25: !associated with! unsaturated fatty acid levels
SiLTPI.26: !associated with! unsaturated fatty acid levels
Metabolomics analysis: !identified! 45 metabolites
Genome-wide association study: !revealed! 433 SNPs
Overexpression of genes: !improved! unsaturated fatty acid levels