In rice (Oryza sativa L.), vascular bundle phloem tissue in the panicle neck is vital for the transport of photosynthetic products from leaf to panicle and is positively associated with grain yield. However, genetic regulation of the single large vascular bundle phloem area (LVPA) in rice panicle neck tissue remains poorly understood. In this study, we carried out genome-wide association analysis of LVPA in the panicle neck using 386 rice accessions and isolated and characterized the gene LVPA4, which is allelic to NARROW LEAF1 (NAL1). Phenotypic analyses were carried out on the near-isogenic line (NIL) NIL-LVPA4LT in the high-yielding indica (xian) cultivar Teqing and on overexpression lines transformed with a vector carrying the Lemont alleles of LVPA4. Both NIL-LVPA4LT and LVPA4 overexpression lines exhibited significantly increased LVPA, enlarged flag leaf size, and improved panicle type. NIL-LVPA4LT had a 7.6%-9.6% yield increase, mainly due to the significantly higher filled grain number per panicle, larger vascular system for transporting photoassimilates to spikelets, and more sufficient source supply that could service the increased sink capacity. Moreover, NIL-LVPA4LT had improved grain quality compared with Teqing, which was mainly attributed to substantial improvement in grain filling, especially for inferior spikelets in NIL-LVPA4LT. The single-nucleotide variation in the third exon of LVPA4 was associated with LVPA, spikelet number, and leaf size throughout sequencing analysis in 386 panels. The results demonstrate that LVPA4 has synergistic effects on source capacity, sink size, and flow transport and plays crucial roles in rice productivity and grain quality, thus revealing the value of LVPA4 in rice breeding programs for improved varieties.

LVPA4: !affects! LVPA
LVPA4: !enhances! Grain yield
LVPA4: !enhances! Grain quality
LVPA4: !enhances! Flag leaf size
LVPA4: !enhances! Panicle type
LVPA4: !synthesizes! NARROW LEAF1 (NAL1)
LVPA4: !associated with! Single-nucleotide variation