Cultivation of resistant rootstocks can effectively prevent apple replant disease (ARD), and grafting tests are an important means of evaluating the compatibility of rootstocks with scions. The apple rootstocks 12-2 (self-named) and Malus hupehensis Rehd. (PYTC) were planted in a replanted 20-year-old apple orchard. The two rootstocks were grafted with scions of 13 apple varieties. Multiple aboveground physiological parameters of the grafted combinations were measured and evaluated to verify the grafting affinity of 12-2 with the scions as compared to Malus hupehensis Rehd. (PYTC). The graft survival rate and graft interface healing of 12-2 did not differ significantly from those of PYTC. Mechanical strength tests of the grafted interfaces showed that some mechanical strength indices of Redchief, Jonagold, Starking, Goldspur and Yinv apple varieties were significantly higher when they were grafted onto 12-2 compared to the PYTC control. The height and diameter of shoots and the relative chlorophyll content, photosynthetic and fluorescence parameters, antioxidant enzyme activities and malondialdehyde content of leaves showed that Fuji 2001, Tengmu No.1, RedChief, Gala, USA8, and Shoufu1 grew similarly on the two rootstocks, but Tianhong 2, Lvguang, Jonagold, Starking, Goldspur, Yinv and Luli grew better when grafted onto 12-2 than onto the PYTC control. The rootstock 12-2, therefore, showed good grafting affinity. These results provide experimental materials and theoretical guidance for the cultivation of a new grafting compatible rootstock to the 13 studied apple cultivars.

Rootstock 12-2: !grafts with! 13 apple varieties 
Rootstock 12-2: !enhances! mechanical strength indices of Redchief, Jonagold, Starking, Goldspur and Yinv 
Rootstock 12-2: !promotes growth of! Fuji 2001, Tengmu No.1, RedChief, Gala, USA8, and Shoufu1 
Rootstock 12-2: !improves growth of! Tianhong 2, Lvguang, Jonagold, Starking, Goldspur, Yinv and Luli 
Grafting tests: !evaluate! compatibility of rootstocks with scions