Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) is a trait of economic importance in the production of hybrid seeds. In CMS-S maize, exerted anthers appear frequently in florets of field-grown female populations where only complete male-sterile plants were expected. It has been reported that these reversions are associated with the loss of sterility-conferring regions or other rearrangements in the mitochondrial genome. However, the relationship between mitochondrial function and sterility stability is largely unknown. In this study, we determined the ratio of plants carrying exerted anthers in the population of two CMS-S subtypes. The subtype with a high ratio of exerted anthers was designated as CMS-Sa, and the other with low ratio was designated as CMS-Sb. Through next-generation sequencing, we assembled and compared mitochondrial genomes of two CMS-S subtypes. Phylogenetic analyses revealed strong similarities between the two mitochondrial genomes. The sterility-associated regions, S plasmids, and terminal inverted repeats (TIRs) were intact in both genomes. The two subtypes maintained high transcript levels of the sterility gene orf355 in anther tissue. Most of the functional genes/proteins were identical at the nucleotide sequence and amino acid sequence levels in the two subtypes, except for NADH dehydrogenase subunit 1 (nad1). In the mitochondrial genome of CMS-Sb, a 3.3-kilobase sequence containing nad1-exon1 was absent from the second copy of the 17-kb repeat region. Consequently, we detected two copies of nad1-exon1 in CMS-Sa, but only one copy in CMS-Sb. During pollen development, nad1 transcription and mitochondrial biogenesis were induced in anthers of CMS-Sa, but not in those of CMS-Sb. We suggest that the impaired mitochondrial function in the anthers of CMS-Sb is associated with its more stable sterility. Comprehensive analyses revealed diversity in terms of the copy number of the mitochondrial gene nad1-exon1 between two subtypes of CMS-S maize. This difference in copy number affected the transcript levels of nad1 and mitochondrial biogenesis in anther tissue, and affected the reversion rate of CMS-S maize. The results of this study suggest the involvement of mitochondrial robustness in modulation of sterility stability in CMS-S maize.

CMS-Sa: !maintains! high transcript levels of sterility gene
CMS-Sb: !lacks! 3.3-kb sequence containing nad1-exon1
nad1: !transcribed in! CMS-Sa anthers
nad1: !not transcribed in! CMS-Sb anthers
mitochondrial biogenesis: !induced in! CMS-Sa anthers
mitochondrial biogenesis: !not induced in! CMS-Sb anthers
sterility stability: !modulated by! mitochondrial robustness