Infections by root-feeding nematodes have profound effects on root system architecture and consequently shoot growth of host plants. Plants harbor intraspecific variation in their growth responses to belowground biotic stresses by nematodes, but the underlying mechanisms are not well understood. Here, we show that the transcription factor TEOSINTE BRANCHED/CYCLOIDEA/PROLIFERATING CELL FACTOR-9 (TCP9) modulates root system architectural plasticity in Arabidopsis thaliana in response to infections by the endoparasitic cyst nematode Heterodera schachtii. Young seedlings of tcp9 knock-out mutants display a significantly weaker primary root growth inhibition response to cyst nematodes than wild-type Arabidopsis. In older plants, tcp9 reduces the impact of nematode infections on the emergence and growth of secondary roots. Importantly, the altered growth responses by tcp9 are most likely not caused by less biotic stress on the root system, because TCP9 does not affect the number of infections, nematode development, and size of the nematode-induced feeding structures. RNA-sequencing of nematode-infected roots of the tcp9 mutants revealed differential regulation of enzymes involved in reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis and responses to oxidative stress. We also found that root and shoot growth of tcp9 mutants is less sensitive to exogenous hydrogen peroxide and that ROS accumulation in nematode infection sites in these mutants is reduced. Altogether, these observations demonstrate that TCP9 modulates the root system architectural plasticity to nematode infections via ROS-mediated processes. Our study further points at a novel regulatory mechanism contributing to the tolerance of plants to root-feeding nematodes by mitigating the impact of belowground biotic stresses.

TCP9: !modulates! root system architectural plasticity 
TCP9: !affects! ROS-mediated processes 
ROS: !regulate! enzymes 
ROS: !accumulate! in nematode infection sites 
TCP9: !reduces! ROS accumulation 
TCP9: !mitigates! impact of belowground biotic stresses