<i>Tetrastigma hemsleyanum</i> Diels et Gilg is a folk herb in Zhejiang Province with anti-inflammatory, antineoplastic, and anti-oxidation effects. Given its pharmacological activity, <i>T. hemsleyanum</i> is known as New "Zhebawei" and included in the medical insurance system of Zhejiang and other provinces. Flavonoids are the most important components of <i>T. hemsleyanum</i>, and their contents are mainly regulated by ultraviolet (UV) radiation. In this study, the total flavonoid contents, flavonoid monomer contents, and flavonoid synthesis related enzyme activities (phenylalanine ammonia-lyase, chalcone synthase, and chalcone isomerase), anti-oxidant enzyme activities (catalase, peroxidase, and superoxide dismutase), and biochemical indicators (malondialdehyde, free amino acid, soluble protein, and soluble sugar) in the leaves (L) and root tubers (R) of <i>T. hemsleyanum</i> with UV treatments were determined. Three kinds of UV radiation (UV-A, UV-B, and UV-C) and six kinds of radiation durations (15 and 30 min, 1, 2, 3, and 5 h) were used. Appropriate doses of UV-B and UV-C radiation (30 min to 3 h) induced eustress, which contributed to the accumulation of flavonoids and improve protective enzyme system activities and bioactive compound contents. Especially, certain results were observed in several special structures of the flavonoid monomer: quercetin contents in L increased by nearly 20 times, isoquercitrin contents in R increased by nearly 34 times; most of flavonoids with glycoside content, such as quercitrin (19 times), baicalin (16 times), and apigenin-7G (13 times), increased multiple times. Compared with the CK group, the flavonoid synthase activities, anti-oxidant enzyme activities, and biochemical substance contents in L and R all increased with UV treatments. This study provides a theoretical foundation for regulating flavonoids by light factors and improving the quality of <i>T. hemsleyanum</i> in production and medical industries.

UV-B: !induces eustress! flavonoids
UV-C: !induces eustress! flavonoids
UV-B: !improves! protective enzyme system activities
UV-C: !improves! protective enzyme system activities
UV-B: !increases! quercetin content
UV-C: !increases! isoquercitrin content
UV-B: !increases! quercitrin content
UV-C: !increases! baicalin content
UV-B: !increases! apigenin-7G content
UV-C: !increases! flavonoid synthase activities
UV-B: !increases! anti-oxidant enzyme activities
UV-C: !increases! anti-oxidant enzyme activities
UV-B: !increases! biochemical substance contents
UV-C: !increases! biochemical substance contents