The extent of freeze dehydration of mesophyll cells in response to extracellular ice varies from supercooling to severe freezing cytorrhysis. The structural factors involved are poorly understood. In a comparison of mesophyll cells of 11 species, the factors "cell wall", "cellular" and "tissue" traits were investigated. The extent of freeze dehydration was quantified as reduction in the sectional area during controlled freezing in the presence of ice. The cell wall thickness, cell size, cell area and the relative area of intercellular spaces were determined. The modulus of elasticity was determined by psychrometry. To grasp the relationships between factors and with freeze dehydration, we applied a principal component analysis. The first two components explain 84% of the variance in the dataset. The first principal component correlated negatively with the extent of freeze dehydration and relative area of intercellular spaces, and positively with the squared cell wall thickness to cell size ratio, elasticity and cell wall thickness. The cell size parameters determined the second principal component. Supercooling appeared preferable in cells with a high squared cell wall thickness to cell size ratio and a low relative area of intercellular spaces. Such factors are hypothesised to affect the magnitude of negative turgor pressure being built up below the turgor loss point. Negative turgor pressure slows dehydration by reducing the water potential gradient to the extracellular ice. With high levels of freeze dehydration, sufficient intercellular spaces for extracellular ice accommodation are needed. The low relative area of intercellular spaces increases cell-to-cell contact area and could support tissue stability.

cell wall thickness: !correlates with! extent of freeze dehydration 
cell size: !determines! second principal component 
squared cell wall thickness to cell size ratio: !positively correlates with! extent of freeze dehydration 
elasticity: !positively correlates with! extent of freeze dehydration 
relative area of intercellular spaces: !negatively correlates with! extent of freeze dehydration 
negative turgor pressure: !slows! dehydration 
intercellular spaces: !accommodate! extracellular ice 
cell-to-cell contact area: !increases! tissue stability