Tea plant (Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze) is an important economic tea crop, but flowering will consume a lot of nutrients of C. sinensis, which will seriously affect the nutritional growth of C. sinensis. However, there are few studies on the development mechanism of C. sinensis flower, and most studies focus on a single C. sinensis cultivar. Here, we identified a 92-genes' C. sinensis flower development core transcriptome from the transcriptome of three C. sinensis cultivars ('BaiYe1', 'HuangJinYa' and 'SuChaZao') in three developmental stages (bud stage, white bud stage and blooming stage). In addition, we also reveal the changes in endogenous hormone contents and the expression of genes related to synthesis and signal transduction during the development of C. sinensis flower. The results showed that most genes of the core transcriptome were involved in circadian rhythm and autonomous pathways. Moreover, there were only a few flowering time integrators, only 1 HD3A, 1 SOC1 and 1 LFY, and SOC1 played a dominant role in the development of C. sinensis flower. Furthermore, we screened out 217 differentially expressed genes related to plant hormone synthesis and 199 differentially expressed genes related to plant hormone signal transduction in C. sinensis flower development stage. By constructing a complex hormone regulation network of C. sinensis flowering, we speculate that MYC, FT, SOC1 and LFY play key roles in the process of endogenous hormones regulating C. sinensis flowering development. The results of this study can a provide reference for the further study of C. sinensis flowering mechanism.

Circadian rhythm: !affects! C. sinensis flower development
HD3A: !regulates! C. sinensis flowering
SOC1: !dominates! C. sinensis flowering
MYC: !regulates! hormone synthesis
FT: !regulates! hormone synthesis
SOC1: !regulates! hormone synthesis
LFY: !regulates! hormone synthesis
Hormone synthesis: !influences! C. sinensis flowering
Hormone signal transduction: !influences! C. sinensis flowering