Bud dormancy is a phenological adaptation of temperate perennials that ensures survival under winter temperature conditions by ceasing growth and increasing cold hardiness. SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP)-like factors, and particularly a subset of them named DORMANCY-ASSOCIATED MADS-BOX (DAM), are master regulators of bud dormancy in perennials, prominently Rosaceae crops widely adapted to varying environmental conditions. SVP-like proteins from recently sequenced Rosaceae genomes were identified and characterized using sequence, phylogenetic and synteny analysis tools. SVP-like proteins clustered in three clades (SVP1-3), with known DAM proteins located within SVP2 clade, which also included Arabidopsis AGAMOUS-LIKE 24 (AthAGL24). A more detailed study on these protein sequences led to the identification of a 15-amino acid long motif specific to DAM proteins, which affected protein heteromerization properties by yeast two-hybrid system in peach PpeDAM6, and the unexpected finding of predicted DAM-like genes in loquat, an evergreen species lacking winter dormancy. DAM gene expression in loquat trees was studied by quantitative PCR, associating with inflorescence development and growth in varieties with contrasting flowering behaviour. Phylogenetic, synteny analyses and heterologous overexpression in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana supported three major conclusions: 1) DAM proteins might have emerged from the SVP2 clade in the Amygdaloideae subfamily of Rosaceae; 2) a short DAM-specific motif affects protein heteromerization, with a likely effect on DAM transcriptional targets and other functional features, providing a sequence signature for the DAM group of dormancy factors; 3) in agreement with other recent studies, DAM associates with inflorescence development and growth, independently of the dormancy habit.

SVP-like proteins: !cluster in! 3 clades
DAM proteins: !located within! SVP2 clade
15-amino acid long motif: !specific to! DAM proteins
PpeDAM6: !affected by! motif
Loquat: !contains! predicted DAM-like genes
Quantitative PCR: !studied! DAM gene expression in loquat
SVP2 clade: !emerged from! Amygdaloideae subfamily of Rosaceae
Motif: !affects! protein heteromerization
DAM group: !provides! sequence signature
DAM: !associates with! inflorescence development and growth