RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) is an epigenetic process that directs silencing to specific genomic regions and loci. The biological functions of RdDM are not well studied in horticultural plants. Here, we isolated the ethyl methane-sulfonate-induced mutant reduced organ size (ros) producing small leaves, flowers, and fruits in woodland strawberry (Fragaria vesca) due to reduced cell numbers compared with that in the wild-type (WT). The candidate mutation causes a premature stop codon in FvH4_6g28780, which shares high similarity to Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) Factor of DNA Methylation1 (FDM1) encoding an RdDM pathway component and was named FveFDM1. Consistently, the fvefdm1CR mutants generated by CRISPR/Cas9 also produced smaller organs. Overexpressing FveFDM1 in an Arabidopsis fdm1-1 fdm2-1 double mutant restored DNA methylation at the RdDM target loci. FveFDM1 acts in a protein complex with its homolog Involved in De Novo 2 (FveIDN2). Furthermore, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing revealed that DNA methylation, especially in the CHH context, was remarkably reduced throughout the genome in fvefdm1. Common and specific differentially expressed genes were identified in different tissues of fvefdm1 compared to in WT tissues. DNA methylation and expression levels of several gibberellic acid (GA) biosynthesis and cell cycle genes were validated. Moreover, the contents of GA and auxin were substantially reduced in the young leaves of fvefdm1 compared to in the WT. However, exogenous application of GA and auxin could not recover the organ size of fvefdm1. In addition, expression levels of FveFDM1, FveIDN2, Nuclear RNA Polymerase D1 (FveNRPD1), Domains Rearranged Methylase 2 (FveDRM2), and cell cycle genes were greatly induced by GA treatment. Overall, our work demonstrated the critical roles of FveFDM1 in plant growth and development via RdDM-mediated DNA methylation in horticultural crops.

FveFDM1: !affects! DNA methylation 
FveFDM1: !interacts with! FveIDN2 
FveFDM1: !enhances! expression of FveNRPD1 and FveDRM2 
FveFDM1: !represses! GA and auxin content 
GA: !enhances! expression of FveFDM1, FveIDN2, FveNRPD1, and FveDRM2