Astragalus mongholicus is a widely used Traditional Chinese Medicine. However, cultivated A. mongholicus is often threatened by water shortage at all growth stage, and the content of medicinal compounds of cultivated A. mongholicus is much lower than that of wild plants. To alleviate drought stress on A. mongholicus and improve the accumulation of medicinal components in roots of A. mongholicus, we combined different bacteria with plant growth promotion or abiotic stress resistance characteristics and evaluated the role of bacterial consortium in helping plants tolerate drought stress and improving medicinal component content in roots simultaneously. Through the determination of 429 bacterial strains, it was found that 97 isolates had phosphate solubilizing ability, 63 isolates could release potassium from potash feldspar, 123 isolates could produce IAA, 58 isolates could synthesize ACC deaminase, and 21 isolates could secret siderophore. Eight bacterial consortia were constructed with 25 bacterial isolates with more than three functions or strong growth promoting ability, and six out of eight bacterial consortia significantly improved the root dry weight. However, only consortium 6 could increase the root biomass, astragaloside IV and calycosin-7-glucoside content in roots simultaneously. Under drought challenge, the consortium 6 could still perform these functions. Compared with non-inoculated plants, the root dry weight of consortium inoculated-plants increased by 120.0% and 78.8% under mild and moderate drought stress, the total content of astragaloside IV increased by 183.83% and 164.97% under moderate and severe drought stress, calycosin-7-glucoside content increased by 86.60%, 148.56% and 111.45% under mild, moderate and severe drought stress, respectively. Meanwhile, consortium inoculation resulted in a decrease in MDA level, while soluble protein and proline content and SOD, POD and CAT activities increased. These findings provide novel insights about multiple bacterial combinations to improve drought stress responses and contribute to accumulate more medicinal compounds.

Bacterial consortium: !improves! root dry weight
Bacterial consortium: !increases! astragaloside IV and calycosin-7-glucoside content
Bacterial consortium: !decreases! MDA level
Bacterial consortium: !increases! soluble protein and proline content
Bacterial consortium: !increases! SOD, POD and CAT activities