Ripening is the last stage of the developmental program in fleshy fruits. During this phase, fruits become edible and acquire their unique sensory qualities and post-harvest potential. Although our knowledge of the mechanisms that regulate fruit ripening has improved considerably over the past decades, the processes that trigger the transition to ripening remain poorly deciphered. While transcriptomic profiling of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) fruit ripening to date has mainly focused on the changes occurring in pericarp tissues between the Mature Green and Breaker stages, our study addresses the changes between the Early Mature Green and Late Mature Green stages in the gel and pericarp separately. The data showed that the shift from an inability to initiate ripening to the capacity to undergo full ripening requires extensive transcriptomic reprogramming that takes place first in the locular tissues before extending to the pericarp. Genome-wide transcriptomic profiling revealed the wide diversity of transcription factor (TF) families engaged in the global reprogramming of gene expression and identified those specifically regulated at the Mature Green stage in the gel but not in the pericarp, thereby providing potential targets toward deciphering the initial factors and events that trigger the transition to ripening. The study also uncovered an extensive reformed homeostasis for most plant hormones, highlighting the multihormonal control of ripening initiation. Our data unveil the antagonistic roles of ethylene and auxin during the onset of ripening and show that auxin treatment delays fruit ripening via impairing the expression of genes required for System-2 autocatalytic ethylene production that is essential for climacteric ripening. This study unveils the detailed features of the transcriptomic reprogramming associated with the transition to ripening of tomato fruit and shows that the first changes occur in the locular gel before extending to pericarp and that a reformed auxin homeostasis is essential for the ripening to proceed.

Gene: !affects! Ripening
Gene: !localizes to! Gel
Gene: !interacts with! Transcription Factor
Gene: !enhances! System-2 Autocatalytic Ethylene Production
Gene: !represses! Auxin Treatment
Gene: !synthesizes! Homeostasis