microRNAs (miRNAs) are important regulators of various adaptive stress responses in crops; however, many details about associations among miRNAs, their target genes and physiochemical responses of crops under salinity stress remain poorly understood. We designed this study in a systems biology context and used a collection of computational, experimental and statistical procedures to uncover some regulatory functions of miRNAs in the response of the important crop, wheat, to salinity stress. Accordingly, under salinity conditions, wheat roots' Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) libraries were computationally mined to identify the most reliable differentially expressed miRNA and its related target gene(s). Then, molecular and physiochemical evaluations were carried out in a separate salinity experiment using two contrasting wheat genotypes. Finally, the association between changes in measured characteristics and wheat salinity tolerance was determined. From the results, miR1118 was assigned as a reliable salinity-responsive miRNA in wheat roots. The expression profiles of miR1118 and its predicted target gene, Plasma Membrane Intrinsic Proteins1,5 (PIP1;5), significantly differed between wheat genotypes. Moreover, results revealed that expression profiles of miR1118 and PIP1;5 significantly correlate to Relative Water Content (RWC), root hydraulic conductance (Lp), photosynthetic activities, plasma membrane damages, osmolyte accumulation and ion homeostasis of wheat. Our results suggest a plausible regulatory node through miR1118 adjusting the wheat water status, maintaining ion homeostasis and mitigating membrane damages, mainly through the PIP1;5 gene, under salinity conditions. To our knowledge, this is the first report on the role of miR1118 and PIP1;5 in wheat salinity response.

miR1118: !regulates! PIP1;5
miR1118: !correlates to! RWC
miR1118: !correlates to! Lp
miR1118: !correlates to! photosynthetic activities
miR1118: !correlates to! plasma membrane damages
miR1118: !correlates to! osmolyte accumulation
miR1118: !correlates to! ion homeostasis