As the king of all herbs, the medicinal value of ginseng is self-evident. The perennial nature of ginseng causes its quality to be influenced by various factors, one of which is the soil environment. During plant growth and development, MYB transcription factors play an important role in responding to abiotic stresses and regulating the synthesis of secondary metabolites. However, there are relatively few reports on the MYB transcription factor family in Panax ginseng. This study identified 420 PgMYB transcripts under 117 genes ID in the Jilin ginseng transcriptome database. Phylogenetic analysis showed that PgMYB transcripts in Jilin ginseng were classified into 19 functional subclasses. The GO annotation result indicated that the functional differentiation of PgMYB transcripts was annotated to 11 functional nodes at GO Level 2 in ginseng. Expression pattern analysis of PgMYB transcripts based on the expression data (TPM) that PgMYB transcripts were revealed spatiotemporally specific in expression patterns. We performed a weighted network co-expression network analysis on the expression of PgMYB transcripts from different samples. The co-expression network containing 51 PgMYB transcripts was formed under a soft threshold of 0.85, revealing the reciprocal relationship of PgMYB in ginseng. Treatment of adventitious roots of ginseng with different concentrations of NaCl revealed four up-regulated expression of PgMYB transcripts that can candidate genes for salt resistance studies in ginseng. The present findings provide data resources for the subsequent study of the functions of MYB transcription factor family members in ginseng, and provide an experimental basis for the anti-salt functions of MYB transcription factors in Panax ginseng.

PgMYB: !classified into! 19 functional subclasses
PgMYB: !annotated to! 11 functional nodes
PgMYB: !revealed spatiotemporally specific in expression patterns!
PgMYB: !formed co-expression network! 0.85 soft threshold
PgMYB: !up-regulated expression! NaCl treatment