Natural selection favors the competitive ideotype, enabling native plants to survive in the face of intense competition. The productive ideotype is the goal of artificial selection to achieve high crop yields <i>via</i> the efficient use of resources in a self-competition regime. When breeding is established under inter-genotypic competition, the competitive ideotype dominates and may fictitiously become selectable. The productive ideotype becomes selectable at the nil-competition regime, where widely spaced individuals prevent plant-to-plant interference for any input. Principal reasons bring to the fore the productive ideotype that combines low competitiveness and improved plant yield efficiency. Crop spacing <i>via</i> the productive ideotype is mandated to alleviate the varying optimum density and ensure efficient use of resources inter-seasonally, cope with intra-field variation and optimize resource use, compensate for missing plants and promote stability, counteract unpredictable stresses and offer a buffer against environmental diversity, and adopt low-input agriculture to conserve natural resources and the environment. For breeding toward the productive ideotype, nil-competition is the due condition to overcome the confounding effects of competition, maximize phenotypic differentiation and facilitate selection from an early segregating generation, optimize heritability due to moderated environmental variance and experimental designs that sample spatial heterogeneity, apply high selection pressure focusing exclusively on the targeted genotype, and avoid the risk of bias selection or loss of desired genotypes due to proximity to empty hills. The view of a modern crop variety composed of genotype(s) belonging to the productive ideotype is a viable option to reach crop resilience serving sustainability in enormously fluctuating agroecosystems.

Natural selection: !favors! Competitive ideotype
Inter-genotypic competition: !dominates! Competitive ideotype
Nil-competition regime: !selects for! Productive ideotype
Crop spacing: !mandates! Productive ideotype
Breeding: !targets! Productive ideotype
Modern crop variety: !comprises of! Productive ideotype