G6PDH negatively regulates viral accumulation in Nicotiana benthamiana through RBOHB-associated ROS signaling. Anti-oxidative metabolism and phytohormone-mediated immunity responses play important roles in virus infection. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH) is an enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway, which plays an important role in maintaining intracellular redox homeostasis and has functions in plant growth, development and stress tolerance. However, the role of G6PDH in plants response to virus infection is poorly understood. In this study, NbG6PDH was found to be down-regulated after Chilli veinal mottle virus (ChiVMV-GFP) infection in Nicotiana benthamiana. Subcellular localization of NbG6PDH showed that it was punctate distributed in the protoplasm. Silencing of NbG6PDH reduced the sensitivity of N. benthamiana plants to ChiVMV-GFP. By contrast, transient overexpression of NbG6PDH promoted the accumulation of the virus. The results of physiological indexes showed that glutathione (GSH), catalase (CAT) and proline played an important role in maintaining plants physiological homeostasis. The results of gene expression detection showed that jasmonic acid/ethylene (JA/ET) signaling pathway was significantly correlated with the response of N. benthamiana to ChiVMV-GFP infection, and the changes of N. benthamiana respiratory burst oxidase homologues B (NbRBOHB) indicated that the NbG6PDH-dependent ROS may be regulated by NbRBOHB. Pretreatment of the inducer of reactive oxygen species (ROS) promoted virus infection, whereas inhibitor of ROS alleviated virus infection. Thus, our results indicate that the promoting effect of NbG6PDH on ChiVMV-GFP infection may be related to the NbRBOHB-regulated ROS production.

G6PDH: !negatively regulates! viral accumulation 
G6PDH: !localizes to! protoplasm 
G6PDH: !silencing of! reduces sensitivity 
G6PDH: !overexpression of! promotes virus accumulation 
GSH/CAT/Proline: !play important role in! maintaining physiological homeostasis 
JA/ET signaling pathway: !significantly correlated with! response to virus infection 
NbRBOHB: !regulated by! NbG6PDH-dependent ROS production 
ROS inducer: !promotes! virus infection 
ROS inhibitor: !alleviates! virus infection