Trichomes, which develop from epidermal cells, are considered one of the important characteristics of the tea plant [<i>Camellia sinensis</i> (L.) O. Kuntze]. Many nutritional and metabolomic studies have indicated the important contributions of trichomes to tea products quality. However, understanding the regulation of trichome formation at the molecular level remains elusive in tea plants. Herein, we present a genome-wide comparative transcriptome analysis between the hairless Chuyeqi (CYQ) with fewer trichomes and the hairy Budiaomao (BDM) with more trichomes tea plant genotypes, toward the identification of biological processes and functional gene activities that occur during trichome development. In the present study, trichomes in both cultivars CYQ and BDM were unicellular, unbranched, straight, and soft-structured. The density of trichomes was the highest in the bud and tender leaf periods. Further, using the high-throughput sequencing method, we identified 48,856 unigenes, of which 31,574 were differentially expressed. In an analysis of 208 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) encoding transcription factors (TFs), five may involve in trichome development. In addition, on the basis of the Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and the weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) results, we screened several DEGs that may contribute to trichome growth, including 66 DEGs related to plant resistance genes (PRGs), 172 DEGs related to cell wall biosynthesis pathway, 29 DEGs related to cell cycle pathway, and 45 DEGs related to cytoskeleton biosynthesis. Collectively, this study provided high-quality RNA-seq information to improve our understanding of the molecular regulatory mechanism of trichome development and lay a foundation for additional trichome studies in tea plants.

Trichomes: !develop from! epidermal cells 
CYQ: !has fewer! trichomes 
BDM: !has more! trichomes 
TFs: !may involve in! trichome development 
PRGs: !related to! plant resistance genes 
Cell wall biosynthesis pathway: !related to! DEGs 
Cell cycle pathway: !related to! DEGs 
Cytoskeleton biosynthesis: !related to! DEGs