In cereals with hollow internodes, lodging resistance is influenced by morphological characteristics such as internode diameter and culm wall thickness. Despite their relevance, knowledge of the genetic control of these traits and their relationship with lodging is lacking in temperate cereals such as barley. To fill this gap, we developed an image analysis-based protocol to accurately phenotype culm diameters and culm wall thickness across 261 barley accessions. Analysis of culm trait data collected from field trials in seven different environments revealed high heritability values (>50%) for most traits except thickness and stiffness, as well as genotype-by-environment interactions. The collection was structured mainly according to row-type, which had a confounding effect on culm traits as evidenced by phenotypic correlations. Within both row-type subsets, outer diameter and section modulus showed significant negative correlations with lodging (<-0.52 and <-0.45, respectively), but no correlation with plant height, indicating the possibility of improving lodging resistance independent of plant height. Using 50k iSelect SNP genotyping data, we conducted multi-environment genome-wide association studies using mixed model approach across the whole panel and row-type subsets: we identified a total of 192 quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for the studied traits, including subpopulation-specific QTLs and 21 main effect loci for culm diameter and/or section modulus showing effects on lodging without impacting plant height. Providing insights into the genetic architecture of culm morphology in barley and the possible role of candidate genes involved in hormone and cell wall-related pathways, this work supports the potential of loci underpinning culm features to improve lodging resistance and increase barley yield stability under changing environments.

internode diameter: !influences! lodging resistance
culm wall thickness: !influences! lodging resistance
image analysis-based protocol: !developed to! phenotype culm traits
heritability values: !high for! most traits
row-type: !has effect on! culm traits
outer diameter: !negatively correlates with! lodging
section modulus: !negatively correlates with! lodging
50k iSelect SNP genotyping data: !used to! conduct genome-wide association studies
QTLs: !identified for! studied traits
candidate genes: !involved in! hormone and cell wall-related pathways
loci: !underpinning culm features! improve lodging resistance