Diatoms are an important group of algae, contributing nearly 40% of total marine photosynthetic activity. However, the specific molecular agents and transporters underpinning the metabolic efficiency of the diatom plastid remain to be revealed. We performed <i>in silico</i> analyses of 70 predicted plastid transporters identified by genome-wide searches of <i>Phaeodactylum tricornutum</i>. We considered similarity with <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> plastid transporters, transcriptional co-regulation with genes encoding core plastid metabolic pathways and with genes encoded in the mitochondrial genomes, inferred evolutionary histories using single-gene phylogeny, and environmental expression trends using <i>Tara</i> Oceans meta-transcriptomics and meta-genomes data. Our data reveal diatoms conserve some of the ion, nucleotide and sugar plastid transporters associated with plants, such as non-specific triose phosphate transporters implicated in the transport of phosphorylated sugars, NTP/NDP and cation exchange transporters. However, our data also highlight the presence of diatom-specific transporter functions, such as carbon and amino acid transporters implicated in intricate plastid-mitochondria crosstalk events. These confirm previous observations that substrate non-specific triose phosphate transporters (TPT) may exist as principal transporters of phosphorylated sugars into and out of the diatom plastid, alongside suggesting probable agents of NTP exchange. Carbon and amino acid transport may be related to intricate metabolic plastid-mitochondria crosstalk. We additionally provide evidence from environmental meta-transcriptomic/meta- genomic data that plastid transporters may underpin diatom sensitivity to ocean warming, and identify a diatom plastid transporter (J43171) whose expression may be positively correlated with temperature.

Gene: !affects! Metabolic efficiency 
Gene: !similar to! Arabidopsis thaliana 
Gene: !co-regulates with! Core plastid metabolic pathways 
Gene: !co-regulates with! Mitochondrial genomes 
Gene: !implicated in! Transport of phosphorylated sugars 
Gene: !implicated in! NTP/NDP exchange 
Gene: !implicated in! Cation exchange 
Gene: !implicated in! Carbon transport 
Gene: !implicated in! Amino acid transport 
Gene: !implicated in! Plastid-mitochondria crosstalk 
Gene: !correlated with! Ocean warming 
Gene: !positively correlated with! Temperature