Rapid and accurate identification of tree species <i>via</i> remote sensing technology has become one of the important means for forest inventory. This paper is to develop an accurate tree species identification framework that integrates unmanned airborne vehicle (UAV)-based hyperspectral image and light detection and ranging (LiDAR) data under the complex condition of natural coniferous and broad-leaved mixed forests. First, the UAV-based hyperspectral image and LiDAR data were obtained from a natural coniferous and broad-leaved mixed forest in the Maoer Mountain area of Northeast China. The preprocessed LiDAR data was segmented using a distance-based point cloud clustering algorithm to obtain the point cloud of individual trees; the hyperspectral image was segmented using the projection outlines of individual tree point clouds to obtain the hyperspectral data of individual trees. Then, different hyperspectral and LiDAR features were extracted, respectively, and the importance of the features was analyzed by a random forest (RF) algorithm in order to select appropriate features for the single-source and multi-source data. Finally, tree species identification in the study area were conducted by using a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm together with hyperspectral features, LiDAR features and fused features, respectively. Results showed that the total accuracy for individual tree segmentation was 84.62%, and the fused features achieved the best accuracy for identification of the tree species (total accuracy = 89.20%), followed by the hyperspectral features (total accuracy = 86.08%) and LiDAR features (total accuracy = 76.42%). The optimal features for tree species identification based on fusion of the hyperspectral and LiDAR data included the vegetation indices that were sensitive to the chlorophyll, anthocyanin and carotene contents in the leaves, the partial components of the transformed independent component analysis (ICA), minimum noise fraction (MNF) and principal component analysis (PCA), and the intensity features of the LiDAR echo, respectively. It was concluded that the framework developed in this study was effective in tree species identification under the complex conditions of natural coniferous and broad-leaved mixed forest and the fusion of UAV-based hyperspectral image and LiDAR data can achieve enhanced accuracy compared the single-source UAV-based remote sensing data.

UAV-based hyperspectral image: !fused with! LiDAR data
LiDAR data: !segmented using! distance-based point cloud clustering algorithm
Hyperspectral image: !segmented using! projection outlines of individual tree point clouds
Random forest (RF) algorithm: !analyzed importance of! features
Support vector machine (SVM) algorithm: !used with! hyperspectral features, LiDAR features and fused features
Vegetation indices: !sensitive to! chlorophyll, anthocyanin and carotene contents in the leaves
Partial components of ICA, MNF and PCA: !selected as! optimal features for tree species identification
LiDAR echo intensity features: !selected as! optimal features for tree species identification