Variable application by wind is an efficient application technology recommended by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations that can effectively improve the deposition effect of liquid medicine in a canopy and reduce droplet drift. In view of the difficulty of modelling wind forces in orchard tree canopies and the lack of a wind control model, the wind loss model for a canopy was studied. First, a three-dimensional wind measurement test platform was built for an orchard tree canopy. The orchard tree was located in three-dimensional space, and the inner leaf areas of the orchard tree canopy and the wind force in different areas were measured. Second, light detection and ranging (LiDAR) point cloud data of the orchard tree canopy were obtained by LiDAR scanning. Finally, classic regression, partial least squares regression (PLSR), and back propagation (BP) neural network algorithms were used to build wind loss models in the canopy. The research showed that the BP neural network algorithm can significantly improve the fitting accuracy of the model. Under different fan speeds of 1,381 r/min, 1,502 r/min, and 1,676 r/min, the coefficient of determination (R<sup>2</sup>) of the model were 81.78, 72.85, and 69.20%, respectively, which were 19.38, 7.55, and 12.3% higher than those of the PLSR algorithm and 21.48, 22.25, and 24.3% higher than those of multiple regression analysis. The comparison showed that the BP neural network algorithm obtains the highest model accuracy, but because the model is not intuitive, PLSR has the advantages of intuitive and simple models in the three algorithms. In practical applications, the wind loss model based on a BP neural network or PLSR can be selected according to the operational requirements and software and hardware conditions. This study can provide a basis for wind control in precise variable spraying and promote the development of wind control technologies.

Platform: !built for! Orchard Tree Canopy 
LiDAR: !scanned! Orchard Tree Canopy 
Regression: !used to build! Wind Loss Model 
PLSR: !improved fitting accuracy of! Model 
BP Neural Network: !significantly improved fitting accuracy of! Model 
BP Neural Network: !highest model accuracy of! Three Algorithms 
PLSR: !advantages of intuitive and simple models of! Three Algorithms