<i>Pogostemon cablin</i> (patchouli) cultivation is challenged by serious soil sickness, of which autotoxins accumulation is a major cause. p-hydroxybenzoic acid (p-HBA) is one of the main autotoxins of patchouli. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the response of patchouli to p-HBA remains unclear. In this study, RNA-sequencing combined with physiological analysis was used to monitor the dynamic transcriptomic and physiological changes in patchouli seedlings 0, 6, 12, 24, 48, and 96 h after p-HBA treatment. p-HBA stress inhibited root biomass accumulation, induced excessive hydrogen peroxide accumulation and lipid peroxidation, and activated most antioxidant enzymes. Compared with that of the control, the osmotic adjustment substance content was elevated with treatment. Subsequently, 15,532, 8,217, 8,946, 2,489, and 5,843 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) at 6, 12, 24, 48, and 96 h after p-HBA treatment, respectively, were identified in patchouli roots. GO functional enrichment analysis showed that the DEGs were enriched mainly in plasma membrane, defense response, response to chitin, DNA-binding transcription factor activity and abscisic acid-activated signaling pathway. The upregulated genes were involved in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, cysteine and methionine metabolism, starch and sucrose metabolism, biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, and linoleic acid metabolism. Genes associated with MAPK signaling pathway-plant, plant-pathogen interaction, plant hormone signal transduction were downregulated with p-HBA treatment. These pathways are related to root browning and rotting, leading to plant death.

p-HBA: !inhibits! root biomass accumulation
p-HBA: !induces! hydrogen peroxide accumulation
p-HBA: !activates! antioxidant enzymes
p-HBA: !elevates! osmotic adjustment substance content
DEGs: !enriched in! plasma membrane
DEGs: !enriched in! defense response
DEGs: !enriched in! response to chitin
DEGs: !enriched in! DNA-binding transcription factor activity
DEGs: !enriched in! abscisic acid-activated signaling pathway
upregulated genes: !involved in! glycolysis/gluconeogenesis
upregulated genes: !involved in! cysteine and methionine metabolism
upregulated genes: !involved in! starch and sucrose metabolism
upregulated genes: !involved in! biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids
upregulated genes: !involved in! linoleic acid metabolism
downregulated genes: !associated with! MAPK signaling pathway-plant
downregulated genes: !associated with! plant-pathogen interaction
downregulated genes: !associated with! plant hormone signal transduction