A comprehensive understanding of the effects of mountain roads on plant diversity is critical to finding the most effective solutions for managing this particular driver. Little is known, however, about the simultaneous effects that road have on the multiple facets of biodiversity, although roads are considered to be one of the major disturbances in the Qionglai mountain range. In this study, we analyzed the impact of roads on the multiple facets of plant diversity (taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity) in the study area using Hill numbers by comparing plant diversity between roadside and interior plots at the landscape scale, then, we used linear mixed models to analyze the effect of mountain roads on the multiple facets of plant diversity along an elevational gradient. The results showed that the roadside plots lacked 29.45% of the total number of species with particular functional traits (such as a relatively high specific leaf area (SLA), a relatively low leaf dry matter content (LDMC) and relatively old clades) and exclusively contained 14.62% of the total number of species. Compared with the interior community, the taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity of roadside community decreased by no more than 26.78%, 24.90% and 16.62%, respectively. Taxonomic and functional diversity of dominant and common species showed greater changes to road disturbances, while rare species showed the greatest change in phylogenetic diversity. Taxonomic homogenization of roadside communities was accompanied by functional and phylogenetic homogenization. Additionally, the impact of roads on these three facets of plant diversity showed the characteristics of peak clipping along the elevation gradient. Our findings highlight the negative impact of roads on the taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity of the Qionglai mountain range, as roads promote communities that are more similar in taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic composition, and to a greater extent contributed to compositional evenness. These effects tend to be functionally and phylogenetically non-random, and species in some clades or with some functional traits are at higher risk of loss. Our results are important for the conservation and management of nature reserves, especially for local governments aiming to create new infrastructure to connect natural mountainous areas.

road: !lacks! species with particular functional traits 
road: !exclusively contains! species 
road: !decreases! taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity 
road: !promotes! communities with similar composition 
road: !contributes to! compositional evenness 
road: !puts at risk! species in some clades or with some functional traits