['36227914', 'The chromosomal passenger complex (CPC) is a heterotetrameric regulator of  eukaryotic cell division, consisting of an Aurora-type kinase and a scaffold  built of INCENP, Borealin, and Survivin. While most CPC components are conserved  across eukaryotes, orthologs of the chromatin reader Survivin have previously  only been found in animals and fungi, raising the question of how its essential  role is carried out in other eukaryotes. By characterizing proteins that bind to  the Arabidopsis Borealin ortholog, we identified BOREALIN RELATED INTERACTOR 1  and 2 (BORI1 and BORI2) as redundant Survivin-like proteins in the context of the  CPC in plants. Loss of BORI function is lethal and a reduced expression of BORIs  causes severe developmental defects. Similar to Survivin, we find that the BORIs  bind to phosphorylated histone H3, relevant for correct CPC association with  chromatin. However, this interaction is not mediated by a BIR domain as in  previously recognized Survivin orthologs but by an FHA domain, a widely conserved  phosphate-binding module. We find that the unifying criterion of Survivin-type  proteins is a helix that facilitates complex formation with the other two  scaffold components and that the addition of a phosphate-binding domain,  necessary for concentration at the inner centromere, evolved in parallel in  different eukaryotic groups. Using sensitive similarity searches, we find  conservation of this helical domain between animals and plants and identify the  missing CPC component in most eukaryotic supergroups. Interestingly, we also  detect Survivin orthologs without a defined phosphate-binding domain, likely  reflecting the situation in the last eukaryotic common ancestor.', '2022 Oct 18', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.2200108119', 'ORCID:']

CPC: !consists of! Aurora-type kinase 
INCENP, Borealin, Survivin: !comprise! CPC 
Survivin: !found in! animals and fungi 
BORI1, BORI2: !redundant to! Survivin 
BORIs: !bind to! phosphorylated histone H3 
BIR domain: !absent in! BORIs 
FHA domain: !substitutes for! BIR domain 
Helix: !unifies! Survivin-type proteins 
Phosphate-binding domain: !evolved in parallel! different eukaryotic groups 
Similarity searches: !detect! conservation of helical domain 
Survivin orthologs: !detected without! phosphate-binding domain