The timing of bud break is very important for the flowering and fruiting of longan. To obtain new insights into the underlying regulatory mechanism of bud break in longan, a comparative analysis was conducted in three flower induction stages of two longan varieties with opposite flowering phenotypes by using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ). In total, 3180 unique proteins were identified in 18 samples, and 1101 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified. "SX" ("Shixia"), a common longan cultivated variety that needs an appropriate period of low temperatures to accumulate energy and nutrients for flower induction, had a strong primary inflorescence, had a strong axillary inflorescence, and contained high contents of sugars, and most DAPs during the bud break process were enriched in assimilates and energy metabolism. Combined with our previous transcriptome data, it was observed that sucrose synthase 6 (SS6) and granule-bound starch synthase 1 (GBSSI) might be the key DAPs for "SX" bud break. Compared to those of "SX", the primary inflorescence, axillary inflorescence, floral primordium, bract, and prophyll of "SJ" ("Sijimi") were weaker. In addition, light, rather than a high sugar content or chilling duration, might act as the key signal for triggering bud break. In addition, catalase isozyme 1, an important enzyme in the redox cycle, and RuBisCO, a key enzyme in the Calvin cycle of photosynthetic carbon assimilation, might be the key DAPs for SJ bud break. Our results present a dynamic picture of the bud break of longan, not only revealing the temporal specific expression of key candidate genes and proteins but also providing a scientific basis for the genetic improvement of this fruit tree species.

SX: !strong primary inflorescence!
SX: !strong axillary inflorescence!
SX: !high sugar content!
SX: !chilling duration!
SJ: !weak primary inflorescence!
SJ: !weak axillary inflorescence!
SJ: !weak floral primordium!
SJ: !weak bract!
SJ: !weak prophyll!
Light: !triggering bud break!
SS6: !key DAPs for SX bud break!
GBSSI: !key DAPs for SX bud break!
Catalase isozyme 1: !key DAPs for SJ bud break!
RuBisCO: !key DAPs for SJ bud break!