Crop diversification in spatial and temporal patterns can optimize the synchronization of nutrients plant demand and availability in soils, as plant diversity and soil microbial communities are the main drivers of biogeochemical C and nutrient cycling. The introduction of multi-cropping in organic vegetable production can represent a key strategy to ensure efficient complementation mediated by soil microbiota, including beneficial mycorrhizal fungi. This study shows the effect of the introduction of multi-cropping in five European organic vegetable systems (South-West: Italy; North-West: Denmark and Belgium; North-East: Finland and Latvia) on: (i) soil physicochemical parameters; (ii) soil microbial biomass stoichiometry; (iii) crop root mycorrhization; (iv) bacterial and fungal diversity and composition in crop rhizosphere; (v) relative abundance of selected fungal pathogens species. In each site, three cropping systems were considered: (1) crop 1-monocropping; (2) crop 2-monocropping; (3) crop 1-crop 2-intercropping or strip cropping. Results showed that, just before harvest, multi-cropping can increase soil microbial biomass amount and shape microbial community toward a predominance of some bacteria or fungi phyla, in the function of soil nutrient availability. We mainly observed a selection effect of crop type on rhizosphere microbiota. Particularly, <i>Bacteroidetes</i> and <i>Mortierellomycota</i> relative abundances in rhizosphere soil resulted in suitable ecological indicators of the positive effect of plant diversity in field, the first ones attesting an improved C and P cycles in soil and the second ones a reduced soil pathogens' pressure. Plant diversity also increased the root mycorrhizal colonization between the intercropped crops that, when properly selected, can also reduce the relative abundance of potential soil-borne pathogens, with a positive effect on crop productivity in long term.

plant diversity: !increases! soil microbial biomass 
plant diversity: !shapes! microbial community 
crop type: !selects! rhizosphere microbiota 
Bacteroidetes: !attests! improved C and P cycles 
Mortierellomycota: !indicates! reduced soil pathogens' pressure 
plant diversity: !increases! root mycorrhizal colonization 
intercropped crops: !reduces! relative abundance of potential soil-borne pathogens