Lipidic metabolites play essential roles in host physiological health and growth performance, serving as the major structural and signaling components of membranes, energy storage molecules, and steroid hormones. Bamboo, as wild giant pandas' exclusive diet, is the main determinant of giant pandas' lipidome, both as a direct source and through microbiota activity. Interestingly, the consumption of bamboo has attracted little attention from a lipidomic perspective. In the current study, we outline the lipidomic atlas of different parts of bamboo. By gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), we have been able to obtain the absolute quantification of 35 fatty acids pertaining to short chain fatty acids (8), medium chain fatty acids (6), long chain fatty acids (17), and very long chain fatty acids (4), while liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (UHPLC-HRMS/MS) allowed us to obtain the relative quantification of another 1638 lipids. Among the fatty acids quantified in absolute terms, eight showed significantly distinct concentrations among different bamboo parts. Subsequently, we investigated how the giant panda's serum and fecal lipidome adapt to the most important annual change in their diet, represented by the consumption of high amounts of bamboo shoots, typical of spring, the weight-gaining season. Five fatty acids were significantly altered in feces and two in serum, respectively, due to the different levels of bamboo shoot consumption. Furthermore, significant differences of the main bacteria strains were observed in feces between the two groups at the genus level, pertaining to <i>Streptococcus</i>, <i>Leuconostoc</i>, and <i>Vagococcus.</i> Correlations between giant panda fecal microbiome and lipidome were evaluated by Pearson correlation analysis. These findings suggest that a balanced diet, important for the overall lipidomic function and giant panda health, could be reached even in this remarkable case of a single food-based diet, by administering to the giant panda's combinations of different parts of bamboo, with specific lipidome profiles.

Bamboo: !provides! Lipidic metabolites 
Lipidic metabolites: !serve as! Structural and signaling components 
GC-MS: !quantifies! 35 fatty acids 
UHPLC-HRMS/MS: !quantifies! 1638 lipids 
Bamboo parts: !show distinct concentrations of! 8 fatty acids 
Bamboo shoots: !alter! 5 fatty acids in feces, 2 in serum 
Fecal microbiome: !correlates with! Fecal lipidome