Plant adaptive strategies have been shaped during evolutionary development in the constant interaction with a plethora of environmental factors, including the presence of metals/metalloids in the environment. Among adaptive reactions against either the excess of trace elements or toxic doses of non-essential elements, their complexation with molecular endogenous ligands, including phenolics, has received increasing attention. Currently, the complexation of phenolics with metal(loid)s is a topic of intensive studies in different scientific fields. In spite of the numerous studies on their chelating capacity, the systemic analysis of phenolics as plant ligands has not been performed yet. Such a systematizing can be performed based on the modern approach of metallomics as an integral biometal science, which in turn has been differentiated into subgroups according to the nature of the bioligands. In this regard, the present review summarizes phenolics-metal(loid)s' interactions using the metallomic approach. Experimental results on the chelating activity of representative compounds from different phenolic subgroups in vitro and in vivo are systematized. General properties of phenolic ligands and specific properties of anthocyanins are revealed. The novel concept of metallophenolomics is proposed, as a ligand-oriented subgroup of metallomics, which is an integrated approach to study phenolics-metal(loid)s' complexations. The research subjects of metallophenolomics are outlined according to the methodology of metallomic studies, including mission-oriented biometal sciences (environmental sciences, food sciences and nutrition, medicine, cosmetology, coloration technologies, chemical sciences, material sciences, solar cell sciences). Metallophenolomics opens new prospects to unite multidisciplinary investigations of phenolic-metal(loid) interactions.

Phenolics: !complex with! metal(loid)s 
Metallomics: !integrates! phenolics-metal(loid)s' interactions 
Metallophenolomics: !proposed as! ligand-oriented subgroup of metallomics 
Metallophenolomics: !unites! multidisciplinary investigations