Extensive research has been conducted on plant protection unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) chemical application technology in recent years owing to its importance as a means of pest and disease control. UAV spraying in orchards faces the drawback of drift risk and can be hazardous to non-targeted crops, humans, and the environment. A detailed and systematic analysis must be performed to determine the uniformity and drift risk of plant UAV sprays. In this study, a peach orchard is sprayed with a plant-protection UAV at three different flight velocities and we evaluate the combined pesticide deposition performance of the canopy, ground loss, downwind ground drift, and airborne drift. Additionally, the droplet size and coverage rate in the canopy are calculated by using water-sensitive paper. The results demonstrate that there is significant difference in the droplet size at flight velocities of 1-3 m/s. The droplet size in the lower canopy is slightly smaller than those in the middle and upper parts. Increasing the flight velocity helps the pesticide droplets to spread and penetrate the canopy. However, it also causes a non-uniform pesticide deposition, reduced effective coverage ratio and effective density ratio. Among the three pesticides used in the experiment, imidacloprid exhibits the best deposition efficiency. The deposition amount and normalized deposition amount in the canopy were the highest at a flight velocity of 2 m/s, accompanied by a lower ground loss under the canopy. The highest near-field ground drift is observed at a velocity of 1 m/s, and the far-field airborne drift is highest at 3 m/s. Lastly, this study provides a reference for the commercial application of plant-protection UAVs.

UAV: !sprays! Peach Orchard 
Flight Velocity: !affects! Droplet Size 
Flight Velocity: !influences! Pesticide Deposition 
Imidacloprid: !exhibits! Best Deposition Efficiency 
Flight Velocity: !determines! Ground Loss 
Flight Velocity: !causes! Near-Field Ground Drift 
Flight Velocity: !produces! Far-Field Airborne Drift