The accurate extraction of wheat lodging areas can provide important technical support for post-disaster yield loss assessment and lodging-resistant wheat breeding. At present, wheat lodging assessment is facing the contradiction between timeliness and accuracy, and there is also a lack of effective lodging extraction methods. This study aims to propose a wheat lodging assessment method applicable to multiple Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) flight heights. The quadrotor UAV was used to collect high-definition images of wheat canopy at the grain filling and maturity stages, and the Unet network was evaluated and improved by introducing the Involution operator and Dense block module. The performance of the Improved_Unet was determined using the data collected from different flight heights, and the robustness of the improved network was verified with data from different years in two different geographical locations. The results of analyses show that (1) the Improved_Unet network was better than other networks (Segnet, Unet and DeeplabV3+ networks) evaluated in terms of segmentation accuracy, with the average improvement of each indicator being 3% and the maximum average improvement being 6%. The Improved_Unet network was more effective in extracting wheat lodging areas at the maturity stage. The four evaluation indicators, Precision, Dice, Recall, and Accuracy, were all the highest, which were 0.907, 0.929, 0.884, and 0.933, respectively; (2) the Improved_Unet network had the strongest robustness, and its Precision, Dice, Recall, and Accuracy reached 0.851, 0.892, 0.844, and 0.885, respectively, at the verification stage of using lodging data from other wheat production areas; and (3) the flight height had an influence on the lodging segmentation accuracy. The results of verification show that the 20-m flight height performed the best among the flight heights of 20, 40, 80 and 120 m evaluated, and the segmentation accuracy decreased with the increase of the flight height. The Precision, Dice, Recall, and Accuracy of the Improved_Unet changed from 0.907 to 0.845, from 0.929 to 0.864, from 0.884 to 0.841, and from 0.933 to 0.881, respectively. The results demonstrate the improved ability of the Improved-Unet to extract wheat lodging features. The proposed deep learning network can effectively extract the areas of wheat lodging, and the different height fusion models developed from this study can provide a more comprehensive reference for the automatic extraction of wheat lodging.

Unet: !improved by! Involution operator and Dense block module
Improved_Unet: !better than! Segnet, Unet and DeeplabV3+ networks
Improved_Unet: !strongest robustness! verified with data from different years in two different geographical locations
Flight height: !influences! lodging segmentation accuracy
Improved_Unet: !extracts! wheat lodging features