Nitrogen deprivation induces variations in fatty acid desaturation in microalgae, which determines the performance of biodiesel and the nutritional value of bioproducts. However, the detailed scenario and the underlying regulatory mechanism remain unclear. In this study, we attempt to outline these scenario and mechanisms by performing biochemical, lipidomic, and transcriptomic analyses in <i>Chlorella pyrenoidosa</i> and functional characterization of transcription factors in <i>Yarrowia lipolytica</i>. We found that early nitrogen deprivation dramatically reduced fatty acid desaturation without increasing lipid content. The contents of palmitic acid (16:0) and oleic acid (18:1) dramatically increased to 2.14 and 2.87 times that of nitrogen repletion on the second day, respectively. Lipidomic analysis showed the transfer of polyunsaturated fatty acids from phospholipids and glycolipids to triacylglycerols, and an increase in lipid species with 16:0 or 18:1 under nitrogen deprivation conditions. Upregulated stearoyl-ACP desaturase and oleyl-ACP thioesterase promoted the synthesis of 18:1, but restricted acetyl-CoA supply revealed that it was the intensive lipid turnover instead of an attenuated Kennedy pathway that played an important role in the variation in fatty acid composition under early nitrogen deprivation. Finally, two differentially expressed SQUAMOSA promoter-binding proteins (SBPs) were heterologously expressed in <i>Y. lipolytica</i>, demonstrating their role in promoting the accumulation of total fatty acid and the reduction in fatty acid desaturation. These results revealed the crucial role of lipid turnover and SBPs in determining fatty acid desaturation under early nitrogen deprivation, opening new avenues for the metabolic engineering of fatty acid desaturation in microalgae.

Nitrogen deprivation: !induces! Variations in fatty acid desaturation 
Stearoyl-ACP desaturase: !enhances! Synthesis of 18:1 
Kennedy pathway: !restricts! Acetyl-CoA supply 
Lipid turnover: !plays role in! Variation in fatty acid composition 
SQUAMOSA promoter-binding proteins: !promote! Accumulation of total fatty acid