Bud dormancy and its release are complex physiological phenomena in plants. The molecular mechanisms of bud dormancy in Liriodendron chinense are mainly unknown. Here, we studied bud dormancy and the related physiological and molecular phenomena in Liriodendron under long-day (LD) and short-day (SD). Bud burst was released faster under LD than under SD. Abscisic acid (ABA), superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and glutathione reductase (GR) activities were increased significantly under LD in Liriodendron buds. In contrast, the contents of gibberellic acid (GA3), ascorbic acid (AsA), glutathione (GSH), malondialdehyde (MDA), and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity decreased under LD but increased under SD. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were up-regulated under LD and down-regulated under SD and these changes correspondingly promoted (LD) or repressed (SD) cell division and the number and/or size of cells in the bud. Transcriptomic analysis of Liriodendron buds under different photoperiods identified 187 DEGs enriched in several pathways such as flavonoid biosynthesis and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, plant hormone and signal transduction, etc. that are associated with antioxidant enzymes, non-enzymatic antioxidants, and subsequently promote the growth of the buds. Our findings provide novel insights into regulating bud dormancy via flavonoid and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, plant hormone and signal transduction pathways, and ABA content. These physiological and biochemical traits would help detect bud dormancy in plants.

LD: !promotes! bud burst 
ABA: !increases! under LD 
SOD: !increases! under LD 
CAT: !increases! under LD 
GR: !increases! under LD 
GA3: !decreases! under LD 
AsA: !decreases! under LD 
GSH: !decreases! under LD 
MDA: !decreases! under LD 
APX: !decreases! under LD 
DEGs: !up-regulated! under LD 
DEGs: !down-regulated! under SD 
DEGs: !promote! cell division 
Flavonoid biosynthesis: !enriched! in DEGs 
Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis: !enriched! in DEGs 
Plant hormone and signal transduction: !enriched! in DEGs 
Antioxidant enzymes: !enriched! in DEGs 
Non-enzymatic antioxidants: !enriched! in DEGs 
ABA content: !regulates! bud dormancy