Wood density, as a key indicator to measure wood properties, is of weighty significance in enhancing wood utilization and modifying wood properties in sustainable forest management. Visible-near-infrared (Vis-NIR) spectroscopy provides a feasible and efficient solution for obtaining wood density by the advantages of its efficiency and non-destructiveness. However, the spectral responses are different in wood products with different moisture content conditions, and changes in external factors may cause the regression model to fail. Although some calibration transfer methods and convolutional neural network (CNN)-based deep transfer learning methods have been proposed, the generalization ability and prediction accuracy of the models still need to be improved. For the prediction problem of Vis-NIR wood density in different moisture contents, a deep transfer learning hybrid method with automatic calibration capability (Resnet1D-SVR-TrAdaBoost.R2) was proposed in this study. The disadvantage of overfitting was avoided when CNN processes small sample data, which considered the complex exterior factors in actual production to enhance feature extraction and migration between samples. Density prediction of the method was performed on a larch dataset with different moisture content conditions, and the hybrid method was found to achieve the best prediction results under the calibration samples with different target domain calibration samples and moisture contents, and the performance of models was better than that of the traditional calibration transfer and migration learning methods. In particular, the hybrid model has achieved an improvement of about 0.1 in both <i>R</i> <sup>2</sup> and root mean square error (RMSE) values compared to the support vector regression model transferred by piecewise direct standardization method (SVR+PDS), which has the best performance among traditional calibration methods. To further ascertain the generalizability of the hybrid model, the model was validated with samples collected from mixed moisture contents as the target domain. Various experiments demonstrated that the Resnet1D-SVR-TrAdaBoost.R2 model could predict larch wood density with a high generalization ability and accuracy effectively but was computation consuming. It showed the potential to be extended to predict other metrics of wood.

Gene: !affects! Wood density
Gene: !enhances! Feature extraction
Gene: !represses! Overfitting
Gene: !synthesizes! Prediction model
Gene: !improves! Performance
Gene: !predicts! Larch wood density