Along with the rapidly increasing environmental contamination by heavy metals, the exposure of plants to chromium has also magnified, resulting in a declined productivity. Hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)], the most toxic form of Cr, brings about changes in plant processes at morpho-physiological and biochemical levels. However, silicon (Si) is known to mitigate the impact of abiotic stresses in plants. Here, we demonstrate Si-mediated alleviation of Cr(VI) toxicity and its effects on root hair formation in rice seedlings. Reduced glutathione (GSH) and indole-3 acetic acid (IAA, an important auxin) were assessed for their involvement in root hair formation after the application of Si to Cr(VI)-stressed plants, and our results confirmed their crucial significance in such developmental processes. The expression analysis of genes involved in GSH biosynthesis (OsGS2) and regeneration (OsGR1), and auxin biosynthesis (OsTAA1 and OsYUCCA1) and transport (OsAUX1 and OsPIN1) corroborated their positive role in Si-mediated root hair formation in Cr(VI)-stressed rice seedlings. Moreover, the results indicated that nitric oxide (NO) seems a probable but not fundamental component in Si-mediated formation of roots in rice during exposure to Cr(VI) stress. In this study, the indispensable role of GSH and IAA, redox homeostasis of GSH and IAA biosynthesis and transport are discussed with regard to Si-mediated formation of root hairs in rice under Cr(VI) stress. The results of the study suggest that Si is a protective agent against Cr(VI) stress in rice, and the findings can be used to develop Cr(VI) stress-tolerant varieties of rice with enhanced productivity.

Si: !alleviates! Cr(VI) toxicity 
GSH: !involved in! root hair formation 
IAA: !involved in! root hair formation 
OsGS2: !synthesizes! GSH 
OsGR1: !regenerates! GSH 
OsTAA1: !synthesizes! IAA 
OsYUCCA1: !synthesizes! IAA 
OsAUX1: !transports! IAA 
OsPIN1: !transports! IAA 
NO: !probable component in! Si-mediated root hair formation