Land plants are constantly exposed to environmental stresses and have developed complicated defense systems, including DNA damage response (DDR) and DNA repair systems, to protect plant cells. In Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), the transcription factor SUPPRESSOR OF GAMMA RESPONSE1 (SOG1) plays a key role in DDR. Here, we focus on DDR in rice (Oryza sativa)-thought to be a simpler system compared with Arabidopsis due to lack of induction of the endocycle even under DNA damage stress. Rice SOG1 (OsSOG1) and SOG1-like (OsSGL) were identified as putative AtSOG1 orthologs with complete or partial conservation of the serine-glutamine motifs involved in activation via phosphorylation. In addition to OsSOG1 or OsSGL knockout mutants, OsSOG1 nonphosphorylatable mutants (OsSOG1-7A) were generated by homologous recombination-mediated gene targeting. Based on the analysis of DNA damage susceptibility and the effect on the expression of DNA repair-related genes using these mutants, we have demonstrated that OsSOG1 plays a more important role than OsSGL in controlling DDR and DNA repair. OsSOG1-regulated target genes via CTT (N)7 AAG motifs reported previously as AtSOG1 recognition sites. The loss of transcription activity of OsSOG1-7A was not complete compared with OsSOG1-knockout mutants, raising the possibility that other phosphorylation sites might be involved in, or that phosphorylation might not be always required for, the activation of OsSOG1. Furthermore, our findings have highlighted differences in SOG1-mediated DDR between rice and Arabidopsis, especially regarding the transcriptional induction of meiosis-specific recombination-related genes and the response of cell cycle-related genes, revealing rice-specific DDR mechanisms.

OsSOG1: !plays key role in! DNA damage response 
OsSOG1: !regulates! target genes 
OsSOG1: !more important than! OsSGL 
OsSOG1: !controls! DDR and DNA repair 
OsSOG1: !recognized by! CTT (N)7 AAG motifs 
OsSOG1: !activates via! phosphorylation 
Rice: !simpler system than! Arabidopsis 
Rice: !differences in! SOG1-mediated DDR