['36273579', 'In higher plants, long-distance RNA transport via the phloem is crucial for  communication between distant plant tissues to align development with stress  responses and reproduction. Several recent studies suggest that specific RNAs are  among the potential long-distance information transmitters. However, it is yet  not well understood how these RNAs enter the phloem stream, how they are  transported, and how they are released at their destination. It was proposed that  phloem RNA-binding proteins facilitate RNA translocation. In the present study,  we characterized two orthologs of the phloem-associated RNA chaperone-like  (PARCL) protein from Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica napus at functional and  structural levels. Microscale thermophoresis showed that these phloem-abundant  proteins can bind a broad spectrum of RNAs and show RNA chaperone activity in  FRET-based in vitro assays. Our SAXS experiments revealed a high degree of  disorder, typical for RNA-binding proteins. In agroinfiltrated tobacco plants,  eYFP-PARCL proteins mainly accumulated in nuclei and nucleoli and formed  cytosolic and nuclear condensates. We found that formation of these condensates  was impaired by tyrosine-to-glutamate mutations in the predicted prion-like  domain (PLD), while C-terminal serine-to-glutamate mutations did not affect  condensation but reduced RNA binding and chaperone activity. Furthermore, our  in vitro experiments confirmed phase separation of PARCL and colocalization of  RNA with the condensates, while mutation as well as phosphorylation of the PLD  reduced phase separation. Together, our results suggest that RNA binding and  condensate formation of PARCL can be regulated independently by modification of  the C-terminus and/or the PLD.', '2022 Dec', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102631', 'Kehr']

PARCL: !binds! RNA 
PARCL: !forms condensates! in nuclei and nucleoli 
PARCL: !localizes to! cytosol and nucleus 
PLD: !regulates! condensation 
PLD: !regulates! RNA binding 
Mutations: !impair! condensation 
Mutations: !reduce! RNA binding 
Phosphorylation: !reduces! phase separation