['36271861', 'Phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI) catalyzes the interconversion of  fructose-6-phosphate and glucose-6-phosphate, which impacts cell carbon metabolic  flow. Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) contains two nuclear PGI genes  respectively encoding plastidial PGI1 and cytosolic PGI (cPGI). The loss of PGI1  impairs the conversion of F6P of the Calvin-Benson cycle to G6P for the synthesis  of transitory starch in leaf chloroplasts. Since cpgi knockout mutants have not  yet been obtained, they are thought to be lethal. The cpgi lethality can be  rescued by expressing CaMV 35S promoter (p35S)-driven cPGI; however, the  complemented line is completely sterile due to pollen degeneration. Here, we  generated a cpgi mutant expressing p35S::cPGI-YFP in which YFP fluorescence in  developing anthers was undetectable specifically in the tapetum and in pollen,  which could be associated with male sterility. We also generated RNAi-cPGI  knockdown lines with strong cPGI repression in floral buds that exhibited reduced  male fertility due to the degeneration of most pollen. Histological analyses  indicated that the synthesis of intersporal callose walls was impaired, causing  microsporocytes to fail to separate haploid daughter nuclei to form tetrads,  which might be responsible for subsequent pollen degeneration. We successfully  isolated cpgi knockout mutants in the progeny of a heterozygous cpgi mutant  floral-dipped with sugar solutions. The rescued cpgi mutants exhibited diminished  young vegetative growth, reduced female fertility, and impaired intersporal  callose wall formation in a meiocyte, and, thus, male sterility. Collectively,  our data suggest that cPGI plays a vital role in carbohydrate partitioning, which  is indispensable for microsporogenesis and early embryogenesis.', '2023 Jan 2', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1093/plphys/kiac494', 'ORCID:']

PGI: !catalyzes! interconversion of F6P and G6P 
Arabidopsis: !contains! two nuclear PGI genes 
PGI1: !impairs! conversion of F6P to G6P 
cpgi knockout mutants: !thought to be! lethal 
p35S::cPGI-YFP: !expresses! cPGI 
RNAi-cPGI knockdown lines: !represses! cPGI 
cpgi mutant: !exhibits! reduced male fertility 
intersporal callose walls: !synthesizes! cPGI 
microsporocytes: !separates! haploid daughter nuclei 
cpgi mutants: !exhibit! diminished young vegetative growth