Numerous studies have shown that gluten aggregation properties directly affect the processing quality of wheat, however, the genetic basis of gluten aggregation properties were rarely reported. To explore the genetic basis of gluten aggregation properties in wheat, an association population consisted with 207 wheat genotypes were constructed for evaluating nine parameters of aggregation properties on GlutoPeak across three-year planting seasons. A total of 940 significant SNPs were detected for 9 GlutoPeak parameters through genome-wide association analysis (GWAS). Finally, these SNPs were integrated to 68 non-redundant QTL distributed on 20 chromosomes and 54 QTL was assigned as pleiotropic loci which accounting for multiple parameters of gluten aggregation property. Furthermore, the peak SNPs representing 54 QTL domonstrated additive effect on all the traits. There was a significant positive correlation between the number of favorable alleles and the phenotypic values of each parameter. Peak SNPs of two novel QTL, q3AL.2 and q4DL, which contributing to both PMT (peak maximum time) and A3 (area from the first minimum to torque 15 s before the maximum torque) parameters, were selected for KASP (Kompetitive Allele Specific PCR) markers development and the KASP markers can be used for effectively evaluating the quality of gluten aggregation properties in the association population. The rapid and efficient GlutoPeak method for gluten measurement can be used for early selection of wheat breeding. This study revealed the genetic loci related to GlutoPeak parameters in association population, which would be helpful to develop wheat elite lines with improved gluten aggregation through molecular marker-assisted breeding.

Gluten aggregation: !affects! Processing quality 
SNPs: !detected for! GlutoPeak parameters 
SNPs: !integrated to! QTL 
QTL: !assigned as! Pleiotropic loci 
Peak SNPs: !contributing to! PMT & A3 parameters 
KASP markers: !developed for! Evaluating gluten aggregation 
Molecular marker-assisted breeding: !used for! Developing wheat elite lines