Drought stress is a serious issue that affects agricultural productivity all around the world. Several researchers have reported using plant growth-promoting endophytic bacteria to enhance the drought resistance of crops. However, how endophytic bacteria and endophytic fungi are effectively stimulating plant growth under drought stress is still largely unknown. In this article, a global meta-analysis was undertaken to compare the plant growth-promoting effects of bacterial and fungal endophytes and to identify the processes by which both types of endophytes stimulate plant growth under drought stress. Moreover, this meta-analysis enlightens how plant growth promotion varies across crop types (C3 vs. C4 and monocot vs. dicot), experiment types (in vitro vs. pots vs. field), and the inoculation methods (seed vs. seedling). Specifically, this research included 75 peer-reviewed publications, 170 experiments, 20 distinct bacterial genera, and eight fungal classes. On average, both endophytic bacterial and fungal inoculation increased plant dry and fresh biomass under drought stress. The effect of endophytic bacterial inoculation on plant dry biomass, shoot dry biomass, root length, photosynthetic rate, leaf area, and gibberellins productions were at least two times greater than that of fungal inoculation. In addition, under drought stress, bacterial inoculation increased the proline content of C4 plants. Overall, the findings of this meta-analysis indicate that both endophytic bacterial and fungal inoculation of plants is beneficial under drought conditions, but the extent of benefit is higher with endophytic bacteria inoculation but it varies across crop type, experiment type, and inoculation method.

bacterial endophytes: !enhance! plant growth
fungal endophytes: !enhance! plant growth
bacterial endophytes: !greater effect than! fungal endophytes
C3 plants: !higher proline content with! bacterial inoculation
C4 plants: !higher proline content with! bacterial inoculation
monocot plants: !beneficial effects of! endophytic inoculation
dicot plants: !beneficial effects of! endophytic inoculation
in vitro experiments: !beneficial effects of! endophytic inoculation
pots experiments: !beneficial effects of! endophytic inoculation
field experiments: !beneficial effects of! endophytic inoculation
seed inoculation: !beneficial effects of! endophytic inoculation
seedling inoculation: !beneficial effects of! endophytic inoculation