Polygonaceae has a complex taxonomic history, although a few studies using plastid or nuclear DNA fragments have explored relationships within this family, intrafamilial relationships remain controversial. Here, we newly sequenced and annotated 17 plastomes representing 12 genera within Polygonaceae. Combined with previously published data, a total of 49 plastomes representing 22/46 Polygonaceae genera and 16/20 Polygonoideae genera were collected to infer the phylogeny of Polygonaceae, with an emphasis on Polygonoideae. Plastome comparisons revealed high conservation within Polygonoideae in structure and gene order. Phylogenetic analyses using both Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian methods revealed two major clades and seven tribes within Polygonoideae. BEAST and S-DIVA analyses suggested a Paleocene origin of Polygonoideae in Asia. While most genera of Polygonoideae originated and further diversified in Asia, a few genera experienced multiple long-distance dispersal events from Eurasia to North America after the Miocene, with a few dispersal events to the Southern Hemisphere also being detected. Both ancient vicariance and long-distance events have played important roles in shaping the current distribution pattern of Polygonoideae.

Polygonaceae: !has! complex taxonomic history
plastid/nuclear DNA fragments: !explore! relationships within Polygonaceae
17 plastomes: !represent! 12 genera of Polygonaceae
49 plastomes: !represent! 22/46 Polygonaceae genera and 16/20 Polygonoideae genera
plastome comparisons: !reveal! high conservation within Polygonoideae
Maximum Likelihood/Bayesian methods: !infer! phylogeny of Polygonaceae
BEAST/S-DIVA analyses: !suggest! Paleocene origin of Polygonoideae in Asia
genera of Polygonoideae: !originated and diversified! in Asia
few genera: !experienced multiple long-distance dispersal events! from Eurasia to North America after Miocene
few dispersal events: !detected! to Southern Hemisphere
vicariance/long-distance events: !shape! current distribution pattern of Polygonoideae