Weed management involving tillage and/or herbicides has generally led to a decline of plant diversity in agroecosystems, with negative impacts on ecosystem services provision. The use of plant covers has become the predominant alternative in vineyard management, with numerous studies focusing on analyzing the advantages and disadvantages of plant covers compared to the aforementioned management. Although the impacts of weed management on taxonomic diversity have been widely studied, many gaps remain on their effects on plant functional diversity. As plant functional diversity is linked to the delivery of key ecosystem services in agroecosystems, understanding these effects could enable the development of more sustainable practices. From 2008 to 2018, a long-term trial was carried out in a Mediterranean vineyard to assess different agricultural practices. In this article, we examined how weed management, as well as irrigation use, could affect plant functional diversity. Based on 10 functional traits, such as plant height, specific leaf area or seed mass, we measured different indices of functional diversity and used null models to detect processes of trait convergence and divergence. Our results revealed that weed management and irrigation use had a significant effect on plant functional diversity. Mown plots showed the highest functional richness but were functionally convergent, since mowing was a strong functional filter on most of the traits. Tillage also behaved as a functional filter on some vegetative traits, but favored the divergence of certain reproductive traits. Herbicide-treated and irrigated plots showed the highest values of functional divergence by promoting more competitive species with more divergent trait values. The effect of weed management on these community assembly processes was shaped by the use of irrigation in vineyard rows, leading to functional divergence in those vegetative traits related to resource acquisition and seed mass. These results suggest that greater functional diversity may be associated with the bias caused by higher occurrence of competitive species (e.g. <i>Convolvulus arvensis</i>, <i>Sonchus asper</i>) with contrasting values for certain traits. Therefore, since these species are considered harmful to crops, higher plant functional diversity might not be a desirable indicator in agroecosystems.

weed management: !affects! plant functional diversity 
mowing: !filters! most traits 
tillage: !filters! some vegetative traits 
herbicide-treated plots: !promotes! competitive species 
irrigation use: !shapes! weed management effect 
resource acquisition: !favors! functional divergence 
seed mass: !favors! functional divergence 
Convolvulus arvensis: !associated with! higher functional diversity