['36281762', 'Analysis of PCST1 expression characteristics and the role of PCST1 in response to  osmotic stress in Arabidopsis thaliana. The structure of PCST1 was analyzed using  Bioinformatics method. Real-time PCR, GUS tissue localization and subcellular  localization were adopted to analyze the expression pattern of PCST1 in  Arabidopsis. To validate the transgenic positive strain of PCST1 using Real-time  PCR, overexpression experiments were performed in wild type. Full-length cDNA was  cloned and connected into a binary vector with 35S promoter, and the construction  was transformed into wild type. With NaCl and mannitol treatments, the  germination rate, green leaves rate, physiological indexes were carried out and  counted in Arabidopsis with overexpression of PCST1 and T-DNA insertion mutants.  The molecular mechanism of PCST1 in response to osmotic stress in Arabidopsis was  analyzed. Based on the bioinformatic analysis, PCST1 is a hydrophobin with 403  amino acids, and the molecular weight is 45.3236 KDa. It contains only the START  (the lipid/sterol - binding StAR - related lipid transfer protein domains)  conservative domain. PCST1 possesses phosphatidylcholine binding sites and  transmembrane region. Expression pattern analysis showed that expression of PCST1  increased with time. The PCST1 widely expressed in Arabidopsis, including roots,  axils of stem leaves, flowers (sepal, conductive tissue of the petal, thrum,  anther and stigmas), and the top and basal parts of the siliquas. It mainly  localized in cell membrane. The overexpression of PCST1 enhanced the sensitivity  to osmotic stress in Arabidopsis based on the germination rate. While expression  of PCST1 decreased, and the sensitivity to osmotic stress had no obvious change  in Arabidopsis. Its molecular mechanism study showed, that PCST1 response to  osmotic stress resistance by regulating the proline, betaine synthesis, as well  as the expression of key genes SOS, NCED, CIPK. PCST1 is composed of 403 amino  acids. The START conservative domain, a transmembrane structure, the phosphatidyl  choline binding sites are contained in PCST1. It is localized in cytoplasmic  membrane. The PCST1 widely expressed in the root, leaf, flower and siliquas. NaCl  and mannitol suppressed the expression of PCST1 and PCST1 can negatively control  action of Arabidopsis in the osmotic stress. PCST1 regulates the synthetic  pathway of proline, betaine and the expression of SOS, NCED and CIPK in response  to the osmotic stress resistance.', '2022 Dec 31', 'Plant Signal Behav', '10.1080/15592324.2022.2134675', 'Wang']

PCST1: !comprises of! 403 amino acids 
PCST1: !contains! START conservative domain, transmembrane structure, phosphatidylcholine binding sites 
PCST1: !localizes to! cytoplasmic membrane 
PCST1: !widely expressed in! root, leaf, flower and siliquas 
NaCl/mannitol: !suppresses! expression of PCST1 
PCST1: !negatively controls! action of Arabidopsis in osmotic stress 
PCST1: !regulates! synthetic pathway of proline, betaine and expression of SOS, NCED and CIPK