['36282917', 'Light signals perceived by a group of photoreceptors have profound effects on the  physiology, growth, and development of plants. The red/far-red light-absorbing  phytochromes (phys) modulate these aspects by intricately regulating gene  expression at multiple levels. Here, we report the identification and functional  characterization of an RNA-binding splicing factor, SWAP1  (SUPPRESSOR-OF-WHITE-APRICOT/SURP RNA-BINDING DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN1).  Loss-of-function swap1-1 mutant is hyposensitive to red light and exhibits a day  length-independent early flowering phenotype. SWAP1 physically interacts with two  other splicing factors, (SFPS) SPLICING FACTOR FOR PHYTOCHROME SIGNALING and  (RRC1) REDUCED RED LIGHT RESPONSES IN CRY1CRY2 BACKGROUND 1 in a  light-independent manner and forms a ternary complex. In addition, SWAP1  physically interacts with photoactivated phyB and colocalizes with nuclear phyB  photobodies. Phenotypic analyses show that the swap1sfps, swap1rrc1, and sfpsrrc1  double mutants display hypocotyl lengths similar to that of the respective single  mutants under red light, suggesting that they function in the same genetic  pathway. The swap1sfps double and swap1sfpsrrc1 triple mutants display  pleiotropic phenotypes, including sterility at the adult stage. Deep RNA  sequencing (RNA-seq) analyses show that SWAP1 regulates the gene expression and  pre-messenger RNA (mRNA) alternative splicing of a large number of genes,  including those involved in plant responses to light signaling. A comparative  analysis of alternative splicing among single, double, and triple mutants showed  that all three splicing factors coordinately regulate the alternative splicing of  a subset of genes. Our study uncovered the function of a splicing factor that  modulates light-regulated alternative splicing by interacting with photoactivated  phyB and other splicing factors.', '2022 Nov', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.2214565119', 'ORCID:']

phytochromes: !modulate! physiology, growth, and development
SWAP1: !interacts with! SFPS & RRC1
SWAP1: !interacts with! photoactivated phyB
SWAP1: !regulates! gene expression & pre-mRNA alternative splicing
SFPS, RRC1, SWAP1: !coordinately regulate! alternative splicing