As one of the vital crops globally, sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum L.) has been one of model crops for conducting metabolome research. Although many studies have focused on understanding bioactive components in specific sugarcane tissues, crucial questions have been left unanswered about the response of metabolites to niche differentiation such as different sugarcane tissues (leaf, stem and root), and soil regions (rhizosphere and bulk) under silicon (Si) amended soils. Here, nontargeted metabolite profiling method was leveraged to assess the similarities and differences in the abundance and community composition of metabolites in the different sugarcane and soil compartments. Identify the compartment-specific expression patterns of metabolites, and their association with cane agronomic traits and edaphic factors. We also investigated the response of sugarcane agronomic traits and edaphic factors to Si amended soil. We found that Si fertilizer exhibited the advantages of overwhelmingly promoting the height and theoretical production of cane, and profoundly increased soil Si content by 24.8 and 27.0%, while soil available potassium (AK) was enhanced by 3.07 and 2.67 folds in the bulk and rhizosphere soils, respectively. It was also noticed that available phosphorus (AP) in the rhizosphere soil tremendously increased by 105.5%. We detected 339 metabolites in 30 samples using LC-MS/MS analyses, 161 of which were classified and annotated, including organooxygen compounds (19.9%), carboxylic acids and derivatives (15.5%), fatty acyls (15.5%), flavonoids (4.4%), phenols (4.4%), and benzene and substituted derivatives (3.7%). In addition, the total percentages covered by these core metabolites in each compartment ranged from 94.0% (bulk soil) to 93.4% (rhizosphere soil), followed by 87.4% (leaf), 81.0% (root) and 80.5% (stem), suggesting that these bioactive compounds may have migrated from the belowground tissues and gradually filtered in various aboveground niches of the plant. We also observed that the variations and enrichment of metabolites abundance and community were compartment-specific. Furthermore, some key bioactive compounds were markedly associated with plant growth parameters and soil edaphic. Taken together, we hypothesized that Si utilization can exhibit the advantage of enhancing edaphic factors and cane agronomic traits, and variations in metabolites community are tissue-specific.

Gene: !affects! Metabolite abundance
Metabolite: !localizes to! Sugarcane tissues
Si fertilizer: !enhances! Soil Si content
Metabolites: !interacts with! Plant growth parameters
Metabolites: !synthesizes! Bioactive compounds