Incessant development and introduction of novel cultivars with improved floral attributes are vital in the dynamic ornamental industry. Chrysanthemum (<i>Chrysanthemum morifolium</i>) is a highly favored ornamental plant, ranking second globally in the cut flower trade, after rose. Development of new chrysanthemum cultivars with improved and innovative modifications in ornamental attributes, including floral color, shape, plant architecture, flowering time, enhanced shelf life, and biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, is a major goal in chrysanthemum breeding. Despite being an economically important ornamental plant, the application of conventional and molecular breeding approaches to various key traits of chrysanthemum is hindered owing to its genomic complexity, heterozygosity, and limited gene pool availability. Although classical breeding of chrysanthemum has resulted in the development of several hundreds of cultivars with various morphological variations, the genetic and transcriptional control of various important ornamental traits remains unclear. The coveted blue colored flowers of chrysanthemums cannot be achieved through conventional breeding and mutation breeding due to technical limitations. However, blue-hued flower has been developed by genetic engineering, and transgenic molecular breeding has been successfully employed, leading to substantial progress in improving various traits. The recent availability of whole-genome sequences of chrysanthemum offers a platform to extensively employ MAS to identify a large number of markers for QTL mapping, and GWAS to dissect the genetic control of complex traits. The combination of NGS, multi-omic platforms, and genome editing technologies has provided a tremendous scope to decipher the molecular and regulatory mechanisms. However, the application and integration of these technologies remain inadequate for chrysanthemum. This review, therefore, details the significance of floral attributes, describes the efforts of recent advancements, and highlights the possibilities for future application towards the improvement of crucial ornamental traits in the globally popular chrysanthemum plant.

Chrysanthemum: !ranks second! globally in cut flower trade
Conventional breeding: !develops! various morphological variations
Genetic engineering: !develops! blue-hued flowers
NGS: !identifies! markers for QTL mapping
Multi-omic platforms: !dissects! genetic control of complex traits
Genome editing technologies: !provides scope to! decipher molecular and regulatory mechanisms