The stable genetic transformation of soybean is time-consuming and inefficient. As a simple and practical alternative method, hairy root transformation mediated by <i>Agrobacterium rhizogenes</i> is widely applied in studying root-specific processes, nodulation, biochemical and molecular functions of genes of interest, gene editing efficiency of CRISPR/Cas9, and biological reactors and producers. Therefore, many laboratories have developed unique protocols to obtain hairy roots in composite plants composed of transgenic roots and wild-type shoots. However, these protocols still suffer from the shortcomings of low efficiency and time, space, and cost consumption. To address this issue, we developed a new protocol efficient regeneration and transformation of hairy roots (eR&T) in soybean, by integrating and optimizing the main current methods to achieve high efficiency in both hairy root regeneration and transformation within a shorter period and using less space. By this eR&T method, we obtained 100% regeneration of hairy roots for all explants, with an average 63.7% of transformation frequency, which promoted the simultaneous and comparative analysis of the function of several genes. The eR&T was experimentally verified <i>Promoter:GUS</i> reporters, protein subcellular localization, and CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing experiments. Employing this approach, we identified several novel potential regulators of nodulation, and nucleoporins of the Nup107-160 sub-complex, which showed development-dependent and tissue-dependent expression patterns, indicating their important roles in nodulation in soybean. Thus, the new eR&T method is an efficient and economical approach for investigating not only root and nodule biology, but also gene function.

Agrobacterium rhizogenes: !mediates! hairy root transformation 
hairy root transformation: !promotes! analysis of gene function 
eR&T method: !achieves! high efficiency in regeneration and transformation 
Promoter:GUS reporters: !experimentally verify! eR&T method 
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing experiments: !experimentally verify! eR&T method 
nodulation: !regulated by! potential regulators 
Nup107-160 sub-complex: !involved in! nodulation