The photoprotective role of anthocyanin remains controversial. In this study, we explored the effects of anthocyanin on photosynthesis and photoprotection using transgenic 'Galaxy Gala' apple plants overexpressing <i>MdMYB10</i> under high light stress. The overexpression of <i>MdMYB10</i> dramatically enhanced leaf anthocyanin accumulation, allowing more visible light to be absorbed, particularly in the green region. However, through post-transcriptional regulation, anthocyanin accumulation lowered leaf photosynthesis in both photochemical reaction and CO<sub>2</sub> fixation capacities. Anthocyanin accumulation also led to a decreased de-epoxidation state of the xanthophyll cycle and antioxidant capacities, but this is most likely a response to the light-shielding effect of anthocyanin, as indicated by a higher chlorophyll concentration and lower chlorophyll a/b ratio. Under laboratory conditions when detached leaves lost carbon fixation capacity due to the limitation of CO<sub>2</sub> supply, the photoinhibition of detached transgenic red leaves was less severe under strong white, green, or blue light, but it became more severe in response to strong red light compared with that of the wild type. In field conditions when photosynthesis was performed normally in both green and transgenic red leaves, the degree of photoinhibition was comparable between transgenic red leaves and wild type leaves, but it was less severe in transgenic young shoot bark compared with the wild type. Taken together, these data show that anthocyanin protects plants from high light stress by absorbing excessive visible light despite reducing photosynthesis.

MdMYB10: !overexpresses! anthocyanin
anthocyanin: !absorbs! visible light
visible light: !shields! plants
anthocyanin: !reduces! photosynthesis
xanthophyll cycle: !decreases de-epoxidation state! due to light-shielding effect
antioxidant capacities: !decrease! due to light-shielding effect
chlorophyll concentration: !increases! due to light-shielding effect
chlorophyll a/b ratio: !decreases! due to light-shielding effect
transgenic red leaves: !less severe photoinhibition! under strong white, green, or blue light
transgenic red leaves: !more severe photoinhibition! under strong red light
wild type leaves: !comparable degree of photoinhibition! with transgenic red leaves