The ecological and economic importance of forest trees is evident and their survival is necessary to provide the raw materials needed for wood and paper industries, to preserve the diversity of associated animal and plant species, to protect water and soil, and to regulate climate. Forest trees are threatened by anthropogenic factors and biotic and abiotic stresses. Various diseases, including those caused by fungal pathogens, are one of the main threats to forest trees that lead to their dieback. Genomics and transcriptomics studies using next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods can help reveal the architecture of resistance to various diseases and exploit natural genetic diversity to select elite genotypes with high resistance to diseases. In the last two decades, QTL mapping studies led to the identification of QTLs related to disease resistance traits and gene families and transcription factors involved in them, including NB-LRR, WRKY, bZIP and MYB. On the other hand, due to the limitation of recombination events in traditional QTL mapping in families derived from bi-parental crosses, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) that are based on linkage disequilibrium (LD) in unstructured populations overcame these limitations and were able to narrow down QTLs to single genes through genotyping of many individuals using high-throughput markers. Association and QTL mapping studies, by identifying markers closely linked to the target trait, are the prerequisite for marker-assisted selection (MAS) and reduce the breeding period in perennial forest trees. The genomic selection (GS) method uses the information on all markers across the whole genome, regardless of their significance for development of a predictive model for the performance of individuals in relation to a specific trait. GS studies also increase gain per unit of time and dramatically increase the speed of breeding programs. This review article is focused on the progress achieved in the field of dissecting forest tree disease resistance architecture through GWAS and QTL mapping studies. Finally, the merit of methods such as GS in accelerating forest tree breeding programs is also discussed.

NB-LRR: !involved in! disease resistance
WRKY: !involved in! disease resistance
bZIP: !involved in! disease resistance
MYB: !involved in! disease resistance
QTL mapping: !identifies! markers linked to target trait
GWAS: !overcomes limitations of! QTL mapping
MAS: !reduces! breeding period
GS: !accelerates! breeding programs