Multicellular organisms, such as plants, are characterized by highly specialized and tightly regulated cell populations, establishing specific morphological structures and executing distinct functions. Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) describe condition-specific interactions of transcription factors (TFs) regulating the expression of target genes, underpinning these specific functions. As efficient and validated methods to identify cell-type-specific GRNs from single-cell data in plants are lacking, limiting our understanding of the organization of specific cell types in both model species and crops, we developed MINI-EX (Motif-Informed Network Inference based on single-cell EXpression data), an integrative approach to infer cell-type-specific networks in plants. MINI-EX uses single-cell transcriptomic data to define expression-based networks and integrates TF motif information to filter the inferred regulons, resulting in networks with increased accuracy. Next, regulons are assigned to different cell types, leveraging cell-specific expression, and candidate regulators are prioritized using network centrality measures, functional annotations, and expression specificity. This embedded prioritization strategy offers a unique and efficient means to unravel signaling cascades in specific cell types controlling a biological process of interest. We demonstrate the stability of MINI-EX toward input data sets with low number of cells and its robustness toward missing data, and show that it infers state-of-the-art networks with a better performance compared with other related single-cell network tools. MINI-EX successfully identifies key regulators controlling root development in Arabidopsis and rice, leaf development in Arabidopsis, and ear development in maize, enhancing our understanding of cell-type-specific regulation and unraveling the roles of different regulators controlling the development of specific cell types in plants.

Gene: !regulates! Transcription Factor 
Transcription Factor: !regulates! Gene 
Gene: !localizes to! Cell Type 
Cell Type: !controls! Biological Process 
MINI-EX: !infers! Network 
Network: !prioritizes! Candidate Regulators 
Candidate Regulators: !controls! Development