Mountains of the world host a significant portion of all terrestrial biodiversity, and the region of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau (QTP) stands as one of the most remarkable mountain regions on Earth.  Because many explosive radiations occurred there, the QTP is a natural laboratory which is ideal to investigate patterns and processes linked to speciation and diversification. Indeed, understanding how closely related and sympatric species diverged is vital to explore drivers fostering speciation, a topic only rarely investigated in the QTP. By combining genomic and environmental data, we explored the speciation process among three closely related and sympatric species, Gentiana hexaphylla, G. lawrencei and G. veitchiorum in the QTP region. Combining genome sizes and cytological data, our results showed that G. hexaphylla and G. veitchiorum are diploid, whereas G. lawrencei is tetraploid. Genetic clustering and phylogenetic reconstruction based on genomic SNPs indicated a clear divergence among the three species. Bayesian clustering, migrant, and D-statistic analyses all showed an obvious signature of hybridization among the three species, in particular between G. lawrencei and both G. hexaphylla and G. veitchiorum in almost all populations. Environmental variables related to precipitation and particularly temperature showed significant differences among the three gentians, and in fact a redundancy analysis confirmed that temperature and precipitation were the major climatic factors explaining the genetic differentiation among the three species. Our study suggested that ancient hybridization, polyploidization, geological isolation and the evolution of different climatic preferences were all likely to be involved in the divergence of the three Gentiana species, as may be the case for many other taxa in the QTP region.

Gentiana hexaphylla: !diverged from! G. lawrencei
G. lawrencei: !hybridized with! G. hexaphylla
G. lawrencei: !hybridized with! G. veitchiorum
G. lawrencei: !polyploidized to! tetraploid
G. hexaphylla: !evolved different! climatic preferences
Temperature: !explains! genetic differentiation
Precipitation: !explains! genetic differentiation