HaNAC3 is a transcriptional activator located in the nucleus that may be involved in the response to high temperature, high salt and drought stresses as well as phytohormone IAA and ABA treatments. Our study demonstrated that HaNAC3 increased the tolerance of transgenic tobacco to abiotic stress and was involved in the regulation of a range of downstream genes and metabolic pathways. This also indicates the potential application of HaNAC3 as a plant tolerance gene. NAC transcription factors play a key role in plant growth and development and plant responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. However, the biological functions of NAC transcription factors in the desert plant Haloxylon ammodendron are still poorly understood. In this study, the NAC transcription factor HaNAC3 was isolated and cloned from a typical desert plant H. ammodendron, and its possible biological functions were investigated. Bioinformatics analysis showed that HaNAC3 has the unique N-terminal NAC structural domain of NAC transcription factor. Quantitative real-time fluorescence analysis showed that HaNAC3 was able to participate in the response to simulated drought, high temperature, high salt, and phytohormone IAA and ABA treatments, and was very sensitive to simulated high temperature and phytohormone ABA treatments. Subcellular localization analysis showed that the GFP-HaNAC3 fusion protein was localized in the nucleus of tobacco epidermal cells. The transcriptional self-activation assay showed that HaNAC3 had transcriptional self-activation activity, and the truncation assay confirmed that the transcriptional activation activity was located at the C-terminus. HaNAC3 gene was expressed exogenously in wild-type Nicotiana benthamiana, and the physiological function of HaNAC3 was verified by simulating drought and other abiotic stresses. The results indicated that transgenic tobacco had better resistance to abiotic stresses than wild-type B. fuminata. Further transcriptome analysis showed that HaNAC3 was involved in the regulation of a range of downstream resistance genes, wax biosynthesis and other metabolic pathways. These results suggest that HaNAC3 may have a stress resistance role in H. ammodendron and has potential applications in plant molecular breeding.

HaNAC3: !localizes to! nucleus 
HaNAC3: !enhances! tolerance of transgenic tobacco 
HaNAC3: !responds to! high temperature, high salt, drought, IAA and ABA treatments 
HaNAC3: !regulates! downstream genes and metabolic pathways 
HaNAC3: !synthesizes! GFP-HaNAC3 fusion protein 
HaNAC3: !activates! transcriptional self-activation activity 
HaNAC3: !enhances! resistance to abiotic stresses 
HaNAC3: !regulates! resistance genes, wax biosynthesis and other metabolic pathways