This study aimed to screen different winter wheat genotypes at the onset of metabolic changes induced by water deficit to comprehend possible adaptive features of photosynthetic apparatus function and structure to physiological drought. The drought treatment was the most influential variable affecting plant growth and relative water content, and genotype variability determined with what intensity varieties of winter wheat seedlings responded to water deficit. PEG-induced drought, as expected, changed phenomenological energy fluxes and the efficiency with which an electron is transferred to final PSI acceptors. Based on the effect size, fluorescence parameters were grouped to represent photochemical parameters, that is, the donor and acceptor side of PSII (PC1); the thermal phase of the photosynthetic process, or the electron flow around PSI, and the chain of electrons between PSII and PSI (PC2); and phenomenological energy fluxes per cross-section (PC3). Furthermore, four distinct clusters of genotypes were discerned based on their response to imposed physiological drought, and integrated analysis enabled an explanation of their reactions' specificity. The most reliable JIP-test parameters for detecting and comparing the drought impact among tested genotypes were the variable fluorescence at K, L, I step, and PI<sub>TOT</sub>. To conclude, developing and improving screening methods for identifying and evaluating functional relationships of relevant characteristics that are useful for acclimation, acclimatization, and adaptation to different types of drought stress can contribute to the progress in breeding research of winter wheat drought-tolerant lines.

water deficit: !affects! plant growth 
genotype: !determines! intensity of response 
PEG-induced drought: !changes! energy fluxes 
fluorescence parameters: !grouped to represent! photochemical parameters 
four distinct clusters of genotypes: !discerned based on! response to imposed physiological drought 
JIP-test parameters: !most reliable for! detecting and comparing drought impact