We summarise recent advancements to achieve higher homologous recombination based gene targeting efficiency in different animals and plants. The genome editing has revolutionized the agriculture and human therapeutic sectors by its ability to create precise, stable and predictable mutations in the genome. It depends upon targeted double-strand breaks induction by the engineered endonucleases, which then gets repaired by highly conserved endogenous DNA repair mechanisms. The repairing could be done either through non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homology-directed repair (HDR) pathways. The HDR-based editing can be applied for precise gene targeting such as insertion of a new gene, gene replacement and altering of the regulatory sequence of a gene to control the existing protein expression. However, HDR-mediated editing is considered challenging because of lower efficiency in higher eukaryotes, thus, preventing its widespread application. This article reviews the recent progress of HDR-mediated editing and discusses novel strategies such as cell cycle synchronization, modulation of DNA damage repair factors, engineering of Cas protein favoring HDR and CRISPR-Cas reagents delivery methods to improve efficiency for generating knock-in events in both plants and animals. Further, multiplexing of described methods may be promising towards achieving higher donor template-assisted homologous recombination efficiency at the target locus.

Endonuclease: !induces! Double-strand breaks 
DNA repair mechanisms: !repair! Double-strand breaks 
Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ): !repairs! Double-strand breaks 
Homology-directed repair (HDR): !repairs! Double-strand breaks 
HDR: !applied for! Gene targeting 
Cell cycle synchronization: !improves! HDR-mediated editing efficiency 
Modulation of DNA damage repair factors: !improves! HDR-mediated editing efficiency 
Engineering of Cas protein: !favors! HDR 
CRISPR-Cas reagents delivery methods: !improve! Efficiency for generating knock-in events 
Multiplexing of described methods: !promising towards! Achieving higher donor template-assisted homologous recombination efficiency