Polypodiales suborder Dennstaedtiineae contain a single family Dennstaedtiaceae, eleven genera, and about 270 species, and include some groups that were previously placed in Dennstaedtiaceae, Hypolepidaceae, Monachosoraceae, and Pteridaceae. The classification and phylogenetic relationships among these eleven genera have been poorly understood. To explore the deep relationships within suborder Dennstaedtiineae and estimate the early diversification of this morphologically heterogeneous group, we analyzed complete plastomes of 57 samples representing all eleven genera of suborder Dennstaedtiineae using maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference. The phylogenetic relationships of all the lineages in the bracken fern family Dennstaedtiaceae were well resolved with strong support values. All six genera of Hypolepidoideae were recovered as forming a monophyletic group with full support, and Pteridium was fully supported as sister to all the other genera in Hypolepidoideae. Dennstaedtioideae (Dennstaedtia s.l.) fell into four clades with full support: the Microlepia clade, the northern Dennstaedtia clade, the Dennstaedtia globulifera clade, and the Dennstaedtia s.s. clade. Monachosorum was strongly resolved as sister to all the remaining genera of suborder Dennstaedtiineae. Based on the well resolved relationships among genera, the divergence between Monachosorum and other groups of suborder Dennstaedtiineae was estimated to have occurred in the Early Cretaceous, and all extant genera (and clades) in Dennstaedtiineae, were inferred to have diversified since the Late Oligocene. This study supports reinstating a previously published family Monachosoraceae as a segregate from Dennstaedtiaceae, based on unique morphological evidence, the shady habitat, and the deep evolutionary divergence from its closest relatives.

Polypodiales: !contains! Dennstaedtiineae 
Dennstaedtiineae: !includes! Dennstaedtiaceae 
Dennstaedtiaceae: !comprises of! 11 genera 
plastomes: !analyzed using! maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference 
Hypolepidoideae: !forms! monophyletic group 
Pteridium: !sister to! all other genera in Hypolepidoideae 
Dennstaedtioideae: !divided into! four clades 
Monachosorum: !sister to! all remaining genera of suborder Dennstaedtiineae 
Monachosoraceae: !reinstated as! segregate from Dennstaedtiaceae