Provitamin A biofortification and increased dry matter content are important breeding targets in cassava improvement programs worldwide. Biofortified varieties contribute to the alleviation of provitamin A deficiency, a leading cause of preventable blindness common among pre-school children and pregnant women in developing countries particularly Africa. Dry matter content is a major component of dry yield and thus underlies overall variety performance and acceptability by growers, processors, and consumers. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers linked to these traits have recently been discovered through several genome-wide association studies but have not been deployed for routine marker-assisted selection (MAS). This is due to the lack of useful information on markers' performances in diverse genetic backgrounds. To overcome this bottleneck, technical and biological validation of the loci associated with increased carotenoid content and dry matter content were carried out using populations independent of the marker discovery population. In the present study, seven previously identified markers for these traits were converted to a robust set of uniplex allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays and validated in two independent pre-breeding and breeding populations. These assays were efficient in discriminating marker genotypic classes and had an average call rate greater than 98%. A high correlation was observed between the predicted and observed carotenoid content as inferred by root yellowness intensity in the breeding (r = 0.92) and pre-breeding (r = 0.95) populations. On the other hand, dry matter content-markers had moderately low predictive accuracy in both populations (r< 0.40) due to the more quantitative nature of the trait. This work confirmed the markers' effectiveness in multiple backgrounds, therefore, further strengthening their value in cassava biofortification to ensure nutritional security as well as dry matter content productivity. Our study provides a framework to guide future marker validation, thus leading to the more routine use of markers in MAS in cassava improvement programs.

SNP: !linked to! provitamin A biofortification and increased dry matter content
markers: !converted to! uniplex allele-specific PCR assays
assays: !discriminate! marker genotypic classes
predicted carotenoid content: !correlated with! observed carotenoid content
dry matter content-markers: !had low predictive accuracy! in both populations