['36334585', 'The investigation of the caleosin CLO7 in relation to heterotrimeric G-protein  signalling in Arabidopsis showed that the gene plays a role in seed germination  and embryo viability. The caleosin CLO7 belongs to a multi-gene family of  calcium-binding proteins which are characterized by single EF-hand motifs. Other  members of the caleosin gene family have been shown to affect transpiration and  seed germination as well as play a role in both abiotic and biotic stress  responses. The proteins are associated with lipid droplets/oil bodies and some  members of the gene family have been shown to have peroxygenase activity. Members  of the gene family have also been shown to interact with the alpha subunit of the  heterotrimeric G protein complex. In this study, we further expand on the  diversity of physiological responses in which members of this gene family play  regulatory roles. Utilizing BiFC and Y2H protein-protein interaction assays, CLO7  is identified as an interactor of the heterotrimeric G protein alpha subunit, GPA1.  The full-length CLO7 is shown to interact with both the wild-type GPA1 and its  constitutively active form, GPA1(QL), at the plasma membrane. Point mutations to  critical amino acids for calcium binding in the EF-hand of CLO7 indicate that the  interaction with GPA1 is calcium-dependent and that the interaction with GPA1(QL)  is enhanced by calcium. Protein-protein interaction assays also show that CLO7  interacts with Pirin1, a member of the cupin gene superfamily and a known  downstream effector of GPA1, and this interaction is calcium-dependent. The  N-terminal portion of CLO7 is responsible for these interactions. GFP-tagged CLO7  protein localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and to lipid bodies.  Characterization of the clo7 mutant line has shown that CLO7 is implicated in the  abscisic acid (ABA) and mannitol-mediated inhibition of seed germination, with  the clo7 mutant displaying higher germination rates in response to osmotic stress  and ABA hormone treatment. These results provide insight into the role of CLO7 in  seed germination in response to abiotic stress as well as its interaction with  GPA1 and Pirin1. CLO7 also plays a role in embryo viability with the clo7gpa1  double mutant displaying embryo lethality, and therefore the double mutant cannot  be recovered.', '2022 Dec', 'J Plant Physiol', '10.1016/j.jplph.2022.153841', 'Gulick']

CLO7: !affects! Seed germination 
CLO7: !interacts with! GPA1 
CLO7: !interacts with! Pirin1 
CLO7: !enhances! Interaction with GPA1(QL) 
CLO7: !localizes to! ER and lipid bodies 
CLO7: !represses! Germination in response to ABA and mannitol 
CLO7: !synthesizes! Embryo lethality in clo7gpa1 double mutant