Lysin motif receptor-like kinases (LysM-RLKs) are a plant-specific receptor protein family that sense components from soil microorganisms, regulating innate immunity and symbiosis. Every plant species possesses multiple LysM-RLKs in order to interact with a variety of soil microorganisms; however, most receptors have not been characterized yet. Therefore, we tried to identify LysM-RLKs from diverse plant species and proposed a new classification to indicate their evolution and characteristics, as well as to predict new functions. In this study, we have attempted to explore and update LysM-RLKs in Lotus japonicus using the latest genome sequencing and divided 20 LysM-RLKs into 11 clades based on homolog identity and phylogenetic analysis. We further identified 193 LysM-RLKs from 16 Spermatophyta species including L. japonicus and divided these receptors into 14 clades and one out-group special receptor based on the classification of L. japonicus LysM-RLKs. All plant species not only have clade I receptors such as Nod factor or chitin receptors but also have clade III receptors where most of the receptors are uncharacterized. We also identified dicotyledon- and monocotyledon-specific clades and predicted evolutionary trends in LysM-RLKs. In addition, we found a strong correlation between plant species that did not possess clade II receptors and those that lost symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. A clade II receptor in L. japonicus Lys8 was predicted to express during arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. Our proposed new inventory classification suggests the evolutionary pattern of LysM-RLKs and might help in elucidating novel receptor functions in various plant species.

LysM-RLKs: !sense! components from soil microorganisms 
LysM-RLKs: !divided into! 11 clades 
LysM-RLKs: !divided into! 14 clades and one out-group special receptor 
LysM-RLKs: !correlated with! plant species that lost symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi 
Lys8: !expressed during! arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis