Physcomitrium patens provides an evolutionary link between green algae and vascular plants. Although the genome of P. patens includes orthologs of all the core lignin biosynthetic enzymes, the occurrence of lignin in moss is very controversial. Besides, little information is available about the lignin enzymes in moss to date. For example, cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) is a crucial enzyme that catalyzes the last step of the lignin biosynthetic pathway, suggesting an ideal way to study the evolutionary process. By investigating the functions of CAD in evolution, this study will elucidate the evolutionary roles of lignin-like in the early stage of land colonization. CAD multigene family in P. patens is composed of four genes. The PpCADs contain a conserved glycine-rich domain to catalyze NADPH-dependent reduction to their corresponding alcohols, indicating that PpCADs have the potential to synthesize monolignols by bioinformatics analysis. Even though PpCAD1 could produce lignin in theory, no conventional monomer was detected in the cell wall or cytoplasm of PpCAD1_OE plants. However, the phenylpropanoids were promoted in PpCAD1_OE transformants to modify gametophore architecture and development, making the distribution of phyllids more scarcity and the moss colony more giant, possibly due to the enhanced expression of the AUX-IAA family. The transcripts of at least one gene encoding the enzyme in the lignin biosynthetic pathway were increased in PpCAD1_OE plants. In addition, the PpCAD1_OE gametophore inhibited the Botrytis cinerea assault mainly by enhanced phenylpropanoids in the cell wall instead of influencing transcripts of defense genes pathogenesis-related 10 (PR10) and nonexpresser of PR genes 1 (NPR1). Likewise, ectopic expression of PpCAD1 in Arabidopsis led to a significant increase in lignin content, exhibiting chunky roots, robust seedlings, advanced flowering, and efficient resistance against pathogens. PpCAD occurs in more than one copy, suggesting functional divergence in the ancestral plant. PpCAD1 catalyzes monolignol biosynthesis and has homologous functions with vascular plants. Despite no detected conventional monolignol, the increased phenylpropanoids in the PpCAD1_OE gametophore, possibly intermediate metabolites in the lignin pathway, had conserved functions during the evolution of terrestrial plants. The results inferred that the lignin enzyme of the early non-vascular plant played roles in stem elongation and resistance against pathogens of P. patens during the conquest of land.

PpCAD1: !catalyzes! monolignol biosynthesis 
PpCAD1_OE: !promotes! phenylpropanoids 
PpCAD1_OE: !inhibits! Botrytis cinerea assault 
PpCAD1: !increases! lignin content 
PpCAD1: !enhances! stem elongation 
PpCAD1: !resists! pathogens