Organelles contribute to plant growth <i>via</i> their movements and interactions, which ensure efficient metabolic flow and help plants adapt to environmental stress. Live-cell imaging of the interactions of organelles has been performed in yeast, plant, and animal cells. However, high-throughput quantitative methods are needed to simultaneously analyze the interactions of many organelles in living plant cells. Here, we developed a semi-automatic high-throughput method to quantitatively evaluate the interactions between peroxisomes and chloroplasts using a distance transformation algorithm and high-resolution 3D fluorescent images taken by confocal laser scanning microscopy. Using this method, we measured the 3D distance between the center of peroxisome and chloroplast surface in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. We then compared the distances between these organelles in leaf mesophyll cells under light and dark conditions. This distance was shorter in the light than in the dark, which is in agreement with the findings of previous studies. We used our method to evaluate peroxisome-chloroplast (plastid) interactions in different cell types in the light and dark, including guard, stem, and root cells. Like in mesophyll cells, the distance between the peroxisome and chloroplast was shorter in the light in guard and stem cells, but not in root cells, suggesting that photosynthetic plastids (chloroplasts) play important roles in these interactions. When leaf mesophyll cells were incubated under high-intensity light, the frequency of shorter distances between peroxisomes and chloroplasts significantly increased. Our high-throughput, semi-automatic method represents a powerful tool for evaluating peroxisome-chloroplast interactions in different types of plant cells under various environmental conditions.

Organelles: !contribute to! Plant growth 
Peroxisomes: !interact with! Chloroplasts 
Light: !shortens distance between! Peroxisomes and Chloroplasts 
Dark: !increases distance between! Peroxisomes and Chloroplasts 
High-intensity Light: !further shortens distance between! Peroxisomes and Chloroplasts