Somatic embryogenesis (SE), or embryo development from in vitro cultured vegetative explants, can be induced in Arabidopsis by the synthetic auxin 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) or by overexpression of specific transcription factors, such as AT-HOOK MOTIF NUCLEAR LOCALIZED 15 (AHL15). Here, we explored the role of endogenous auxin [indole-3-acetic acid (IAA)] during 2,4-D and AHL15-induced SE. Using the pWOX2:NLS-YFP reporter, we identified three distinct developmental stages for 2,4-D and AHL15-induced SE in Arabidopsis, with these being (i) acquisition of embryo identity; (ii) formation of pro-embryos; and (iii) somatic embryo patterning and development. The acquisition of embryo identity coincided with enhanced expression of the indole-3-pyruvic acid auxin biosynthesis YUCCA genes, resulting in an enhanced pDR5:GFP-reported auxin response in the embryo-forming tissues. Chemical inhibition of the indole-3-pyruvic acid pathway did not affect the acquisition of embryo identity, but significantly reduced or completely inhibited the formation of pro-embryos. Co-application of IAA with auxin biosynthesis inhibitors in the AHL15-induced SE system rescued differentiated somatic embryo formation, confirming that increased IAA levels are important during the last two stages of SE. Our analyses also showed that polar auxin transport, with AUXIN/LIKE-AUX influx and PIN-FORMED1 efflux carriers as important drivers, is required for the transition of embryonic cells to proembryos and, later, for correct cell fate specification and differentiation. Taken together, our results indicate that endogenous IAA biosynthesis and its polar transport are not required for the acquisition of embryo identity, but rather to maintain embryonic cell identity and for the formation of multicellular proembryos and their development into histodifferentiated embryos.

AHL15: !induces! Somatic embryogenesis 
2,4-D: !induces! Somatic embryogenesis 
YUCCA genes: !enhance expression of! IAA 
IAA: !required for! Formation of pro-embryos 
Polar auxin transport: !required for! Transition of embryonic cells to proembryos 
Polar auxin transport: !required for! Cell fate specification and differentiation