NLRscape is a webserver that curates a collection of over 80 000 plant protein sequences identified in UniProtKB to contain NOD-like receptor signatures, and hosts in addition a number of tools aimed at the exploration of the complex sequence landscape of this class of plant proteins. Each entry gathers sequence information, domain and motif annotations from multiple third-party sources but also in-house advanced annotations aimed at addressing caveats of the existing broad-based annotations. NLRscape provides a top-down perspective of the NLR sequence landscape but also services for assisting a bottom-up approach starting from a given input sequence. Sequences are clustered by their domain organization layout, global homology and taxonomic spread-in order to allow analysis of how particular traits of an NLR family are scattered within the plant kingdom. Tools are provided for users to locate their own protein of interest in the overall NLR landscape, generate custom clusters centered around it and perform a large number of sequence and structural analyses using included interactive online instruments. Amongst these, we mention: taxonomy distribution plots, homology cluster graphs, identity matrices and interactive MSA synchronizing secondary structure and motif predictions. NLRscape can be found at: https://nlrscape.biochim.ro/.

NLRscape: !curates! 80 000 plant protein sequences 
NLRscape: !hosts! tools 
tools: !aimed at! exploration of NLR sequence landscape 
entry: !gathers! sequence information, domain and motif annotations 
NLRscape: !provides! top-down perspective 
NLRscape: !services for! bottom-up approach 
sequences: !clustered by! domain organization layout, global homology and taxonomic spread 
tools: !locate! protein of interest 
tools: !generate! custom clusters 
tools: !perform! sequence and structural analyses 
tools: !include! taxonomy distribution plots, homology cluster graphs, identity matrices and interactive MSA synchronizing secondary structure and motif predictions