Cultivated soybean (<i>Glycine max</i> (L.)), the world's most important legume crop, has high-to-moderate salt sensitivity. Being the frontier for sensing and controlling solute transport, membrane proteins could be involved in cell signaling, osmoregulation, and stress-sensing mechanisms, but their roles in abiotic stresses are still largely unknown. By analyzing salt-induced membrane proteomic changes in the roots and leaves of salt-sensitive soybean cultivar (C08) seedlings germinated under NaCl, we detected 972 membrane proteins, with those present in both leaves and roots annotated as receptor kinases, calcium-sensing proteins, abscisic acid receptors, cation and anion channel proteins, proton pumps, amide and peptide transporters, and vesicle transport-related proteins etc. Endocytosis, linoleic acid metabolism, and fatty acid biosynthesis pathway-related proteins were enriched in roots whereas phagosome, spliceosome and soluble NSF attachment protein receptor (SNARE) interaction-related proteins were enriched in leaves. Using label-free quantitation, 129 differentially expressed membrane proteins were found in both tissues upon NaCl treatment. Additionally, the 140 NaCl-induced proteins identified in roots and 57 in leaves are vesicle-, mitochondrial-, and chloroplast-associated membrane proteins and those with functions related to ion transport, protein transport, ATP hydrolysis, protein folding, and receptor kinases, etc. Our proteomic results were verified against corresponding gene expression patterns from published C08 RNA-seq data, demonstrating the importance of solute transport and sensing in salt stress responses.

Receptor kinases: !localize to! Roots and Leaves 
Calcium-sensing proteins: !localize to! Roots and Leaves 
Abscisic acid receptors: !localize to! Roots and Leaves 
Cation and anion channel proteins: !localize to! Roots and Leaves 
Proton pumps: !localize to! Roots and Leaves 
Amide and peptide transporters: !localize to! Roots and Leaves 
Vesicle transport-related proteins: !localize to! Roots and Leaves 
Endocytosis: !enriched in! Roots 
Linoleic acid metabolism: !enriched in! Roots 
Fatty acid biosynthesis pathway-related proteins: !enriched in! Roots 
Phagosome: !enriched in! Leaves 
Spliceosome: !enriched in! Leaves 
Soluble NSF attachment protein receptor (SNARE) interaction-related proteins: !enriched in! Leaves 
NaCl-induced proteins: !localize to! Roots and Leaves 
Vesicle-associated membrane proteins: !enhance! NaCl-induced proteins 
Mitochondrial-associated membrane proteins: !