To address the low Ca-induced growth inhibition of tomato plants, the mitigation effect of exogenous Si on tomato seedlings under low-Ca stress was investigated using different application methods. We specifically analyzed the effects of root application or foliar spraying of 1 mM Si on growth conditions, leaf photosynthetic properties, stomatal status, chlorophyll content, chlorophyll fluorescence, ATP activity and content, Calvin cycle-related enzymatic activity, and gene expression in tomato seedlings under low vs. adequate calcium conditions. We found that the low-Ca environment significantly affected (reduced) these parameters, resulting in growth limitation. Surprisingly, the application of 1 mM Si significantly increased plant height, stem diameter, and biomass accumulation, protected photosynthetic pigments, improved gas exchange, promoted ATP production, enhanced the activity of Calvin cycle key enzymes and expression of related genes, and ensured efficient photosynthesis to occur in plants under low-Ca conditions. Interestingly, when the same amount of Si was applied, the beneficial effects of Si were more pronounced under low-Ca conditions that under adequate Ca. We speculate that Si might promote the absorption and transport of calcium in plants. The effects of Si also differed depending on the application method; foliar spraying was better in alleviating photosynthetic inhibition in plants under low-Ca stress, whereas root application of Si significantly promoted root growth and development. Enhancing the photosynthetic capacity by foliar Si application is an effective strategy for ameliorating the growth inhibition of plants under low-Ca stress.

Si: !enhances! Photosynthetic capacity
Si: !promotes! ATP production
Si: !increases! Plant height, stem diameter, biomass accumulation
Si: !protects! Photosynthetic pigments
Si: !improves! Gas exchange
Si: !enhances! Activity of Calvin cycle key enzymes
Si: !promotes! Root growth and development
Low-Ca: !reduces! Growth conditions, leaf photosynthetic properties, stomatal status, chlorophyll content, chlorophyll fluorescence, ATP activity and content, Calvin cycle-related enzymatic activity, gene expression