The domestication of wild rice occurred together with genomic variation, including the synonymous nucleotide substitutions that result in synonymous codon usage bias (SCUB). SCUB mirrors the evolutionary specialization of plants, but its characteristics during domestication were not yet addressed. Here, we found cytosine- and guanidine-ending (NNC and NNG) synonymous codons (SCs) were more pronounced than adenosine- and thymine-ending SCs (NNA and NNT) in both wild and cultivated species of Asian and African rice. The ratios of NNC/G to NNA/T codons gradually decreased following the rise in the number of introns, and the preference for NNA/T codons became more obvious in genes with more introns in cultivated rice when compared with those in wild rice. SCUB frequencies were heterogeneous across the exons, with a higher preference for NNA/T in internal exons than in terminal exons. The preference for NNA/T in internal but not terminal exons was more predominant in cultivated rice than in wild rice, with the difference between wild and cultivated rice becoming more remarkable with the rise in exon numbers. The difference in the ratios of codon combinations representing DNA methylation-mediated conversion from cytosine to thymine between wild and cultivated rice coincided with their difference in SCUB frequencies, suggesting that SCUB reveals the possible association between genetic and epigenetic variation during the domestication of rice. Similar patterns of SCUB shift in Asian and African rice indicate that genomic variation occurs in the same non-random manner. SCUB representing non-neutral synonymous mutations can provide insight into the mechanism of genomic variation in domestication and can be used for the genetic dissection of agricultural traits in rice and other crops.

SCUB: !mirrors! Evolutionary Specialization 
SCUB: !reveals! Association between Genetic and Epigenetic Variation 
NNC/G: !decreases! with Rise in Introns 
NNA/T: !preferred! in Internal Exons 
Wild Rice: !has higher! NNC/G Ratio 
Cultivated Rice: !has higher! NNA/T Ratio 
Asian/African Rice: !have similar! SCUB Shifts