Nanmu (<i>Phoebe zhennan</i>) is an extremely valuable tree plant that is the main source of famous "golden-thread nanmu" wood. The potential metabolites and gene regulation mechanisms involved in golden thread formation are poorly understood, even though the color change from sapwood to heartwood has been investigated in several tree plants. Here, five radial tissues from sapwood to heartwood were compared via integrative metabolomic and transcriptomic analysis to reveal the secondary metabolites and molecular mechanisms involved in golden thread formation. During heartwood formation, gradual starch grain loss is accompanied by the cell lumen deposition of lipids and color-related extractives. Extractives of 20 phenylpropanoids accumulated in heartwood, including cinnamic acids and derivatives, coumarin acid derivatives, and flavonoids, which were identified as being closely related to the golden thread. Phenylpropanoids co-occurring with abundant accumulated metabolites of prenol lipids, fatty acyls, steroids, and steroid derivatives may greatly contribute to the characteristics of golden thread formation. Additionally, the expression of nine genes whose products catalyze phenylpropanoid and flavonoids biosynthesis was upregulated in the transition zone, then accumulated and used to color the heartwood. The expression levels of transcription factors (e.g., MYB, bHLH, and WRKY) that act as the major regulatory factors in the synthesis and deposition of phenylpropanoid and flavonoids responsible for golden thread formation were also higher than in sapwood. Our results not only explain golden thread formation in nanmu, but also broaden current knowledge of special wood color formation mechanisms. This work provides a framework for future research focused on improving wood color.

Starch grain: !loss accompanies! cell lumen deposition of lipids and color-related extractives
Phenylpropanoids: !accumulate in! heartwood
Prenol lipids, fatty acyls, steroids, steroid derivatives: !co-occur with! phenylpropanoids
Nine genes: !catalyze! phenylpropanoid and flavonoids biosynthesis
MYB, bHLH, WRKY transcription factors: !regulate! synthesis and deposition of phenylpropanoid and flavonoids