Drought is the major limiting factor that directly or indirectly inhibits the growth and reduces the productivity of sorghum (<i>Sorghum bicolor</i> (L.) Moench). As the main vegetative organ of sorghum, the response mechanism of the leaf to drought stress at the proteomic level has not been clarified. In the present study, nano-scale liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) technology was used to compare the changes in the protein expression profile of the leaves of drought-sensitive (S4 and S4-1) and drought-resistant (T33 and T14) sorghum varieties at the seedling stage under 25% PEG-6000 treatment for 24 h. A total of 3927 proteins were accurately quantitated and 46, 36, 35, and 102 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were obtained in the S4, S4-1, T14, and T33 varieties, respectively. Four proteins were randomly selected for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assays, and the results verified the reliability of the mass spectrometry (MS) results. The response mechanism of the drought-sensitive sorghum leaves to drought was attributed to the upregulation of proteins involved in the tyrosine metabolism pathway with defense functions. Drought-resistant sorghum leaves respond to drought by promoting the TCA cycle, enhancing sphingolipid biosynthesis, interfering with triterpenoid metabolite synthesis, and influencing aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis. The 17 screened important candidate proteins related to drought stress were verified by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), the results of which were consistent with the results of the proteomic analysis. This study lays the foundation for revealing the drought-resistance mechanism of sorghum at the protein level. These findings will help us cultivate and improve new drought-resistant sorghum varieties.

drought: !inhibits! growth 
drought-sensitive sorghum: !upregulates proteins! tyrosine metabolism pathway 
drought-resistant sorghum: !promotes! TCA cycle 
drought-resistant sorghum: !enhances! sphingolipid biosynthesis 
drought-resistant sorghum: !interferes with! triterpenoid metabolite synthesis 
drought-resistant sorghum: !influences! aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis