Rice is the world's second largest food crop and accelerated global climate change due to the intensification of human activities has a huge impact on rice. Research on the evolution of different rice ecotypes is essential for enhancing the adaptation of rice to the unpredictable environments. The sequencing data of 868 cultivated and 140 wild rice accessions were used to study the domestication history and signatures of adaptation in the distinct rice ecotypes genome. The different populations had formed distinct rice ecotypes by phylogenetic analyses and were domesticated independently in the two subspecies of rice, especially deepwater and upland rice. The domestication history of distinct rice ecotypes was confirmed and the four predicted admixture events mainly involved gene flow between wild rice and cultivated rice. Importantly, we identified numerous selective sweeps that have occurred during the domestication of different rice ecotypes and one candidate gene (LOC_Os11g21804) for deepwater based on transcriptomic evidence. In addition, many regions of genomic differentiation between the different rice ecotypes were identified. Furthermore, the main reason for the increase in genetic diversity in the ecotypes of xian (indica) rice was the high proportion of alternative allele frequency in new mutations. Genome-wide association analysis revealed 28 QTLs associated with flood tolerance which contained 12 related cloned genes, and 20 candidate genes within 13 deepwater QTLs were identified by transcriptomic and haplotype analyses. These results enhanced our understanding of domestication history in different rice ecotypes and provided valuable insights for genetic improvement and breeding of rice in the current changing environments.

Rice: !domesticated independently! in two subspecies
Gene Flow: !occurred between! wild rice and cultivated rice
Selective Sweeps: !occurred during! domestication of different rice ecotypes
LOC_Os11g21804: !candidate gene for! deepwater
Genetic Diversity: !increased in! xian (indica) rice
QTLs: !associated with! flood tolerance
Cloned Genes: !related to! 12 QTLs
Candidate Genes: !identified within! 13 deepwater QTLs