Soil salinization and alkalization are widespread environmental problems that limit grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) growth and yield. However, little is known about the response of grapevine to alkali stress. This study investigated the differences in physiological characteristics, chloroplast structure, transcriptome, and metabolome in grapevine plants under salt stress and alkali stress. We found that grapevine plants under salt stress and alkali stress showed leaf chlorosis, a decline in photosynthetic capacity, a decrease in chlorophyll content and Rubisco activity, an imbalance of Na<sup>+</sup> and K<sup>+</sup>, and damaged chloroplast ultrastructure. Fv/Fm decreased under salt stress and alkali stress. NPQ increased under salt stress whereas decreased under alkali stress. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment showed the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) induced by salt stress and alkali stress were involved in different biological processes and have varied molecular functions. The expression of stress genes involved in the ABA and MAPK signaling pathways was markedly altered by salt stress and alkali stress. The genes encoding ion transporter (AKT1, HKT1, NHX1, NHX2, TPC1A, TPC1B) were up-regulated under salt stress and alkali stress. Down-regulation in the expression of numerous genes in the 'Porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism', 'Photosynthesis-antenna proteins', and 'Photosynthesis' pathways were observed under alkali stress. Many genes in the 'Carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms' pathway in salt stress and alkali stress were down-regulated. Metabolome showed that 431 and 378 differentially accumulated metabolites (DAMs) were identified in salt stress and alkali stress, respectively. L-Glutamic acid and 5-Aminolevulinate involved in chlorophyll synthesis decreased under salt stress and alkali stress. The abundance of 19 DAMs under salt stress related to photosynthesis decreased. The abundance of 16 organic acids in salt stress and 22 in alkali stress increased respectively. Our findings suggested that alkali stress had more adverse effects on grapevine leaves, chloroplast structure, ion balance, and photosynthesis than salt stress. Transcriptional and metabolic profiling showed that there were significant differences in the effects of salt stress and alkali stress on the expression of key genes and the abundance of pivotal metabolites in grapevine plants.

Salt stress: !affects! Photosynthesis 
Salt stress: !alters! Expression of stress genes 
Alkali stress: !affects! Photosynthesis 
Alkali stress: !alters! Expression of stress genes 
Gene: !enhances! ABA signaling pathway 
Gene: !represses! Carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms 
Metabolome: !alters! Abundance of metabolites 
Metabolome: !decreases! Chlorophyll synthesis