The extreme adaptation potential of the generalist herbivore Tetranychus urticae (the two-spotted spider mite) to pesticides as well as diverse host plants has been associated with clade-specific gene expansions in known detoxifying enzyme families, and with extensive and rapid transcriptional responses. However, how this broad transcriptional potential is regulated remains largely unknown. Using a parental/F1 design in which four inbred strains were crossed to a common inbred strain, we assessed the genetic basis and inheritance of gene expression variation in T. urticae. Mirroring known phenotypic variation in the progenitor strains of the inbreds, we confirmed that the inbred strains we created were genetically distinct, varied markedly in pesticide resistance, and also captured variation in host plant fitness as is commonly observed in this species. By examining differences in gene expression between parents and allele-specific expression in F1s, we found that variation in RNA abundance was more often explained in trans as compared to cis, with the former associated with dominance in inheritance. Strikingly, in a gene ontology analysis, detoxification genes of the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (CYP) family, as well as dioxygenases (DOGs) acquired from horizontal gene transfer from fungi, were specifically enriched at the extremes of trans-driven up- and downregulation. In particular, multiple CYPs and DOGs with broad substrate-specificities for pesticides or plant specialized compounds were exceptionally highly upregulated as a result of trans-regulatory variation, or in some cases synergism of cis and trans, in the most multi-pesticide resistant strains. Collectively, our findings highlight the potential importance of trans-driven expression variation in genes associated with xenobiotic metabolism and host plant use for rapid adaptation in T. urticae, and also suggests modular control of these genes, a regulatory architecture that might ameliorate negative pleiotropic effects.

T. urticae: !adapts to! pesticides/host plants
CYP/DOG families: !expanded in! T. urticae
trans-regulation: !explains! gene expression variation
CYP/DOGs: !upregulated by! trans-regulatory variation