['36372880', 'BACKGROUND: Plants are continuously challenged with biotic stress from  environmental pathogens, and precise regulation of defense responses is critical  for plant survival. Defense systems require considerable amounts of energy and  resources, impairing plant growth, and plant hormones controlling transcriptional  regulation play essential roles in establishing the appropriate balance between  defense response to pathogens and growth. Chromatin regulators modulating gene  transcription are broadly involved in regulating stress-responsive genes.  However, which chromatin factors are involved in coordinating hormone signaling  and immune responses in plants, and their functional mechanisms, remains unclear.  Here, we identified a role of bromodomain-containing protein GTE4 in negatively  regulating defense responses in Arabidopsis thaliana. RESULTS: GTE4 mainly  functions as activator of gene expression upon infection with Pseudomonas  syringe. Genome-wide profiling of GTE4 occupancy shows that GTE4 tends to bind to  active genes, including ribosome biogenesis related genes and maintains their  high expression levels during pathogen infection. However, GTE4 is also able to  repress gene expression. GTE4 binds to and represses jasmonate biosynthesis gene  OPR3. Disruption of GTE4 results in overaccumulation of jasmonic acid (JA) and  enhanced JA-responsive gene expression. Unexpectedly, over-accumulated JA content  in gte4 mutant is coupled with downregulation of JA-mediated immune defense genes  and upregulation of salicylic acid (SA)-mediated immune defense genes, and  enhanced resistance to Pseudomonas, likely through a noncanonical pathway.  CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we identified a new role of the chromatin factor GTE4 as  negative regulator of plant immune response through inhibition of JA  biosynthesis, which in turn noncanonically activates the defense system against  Pseudomonas. These findings provide new knowledge of chromatic regulation of  plant hormone signaling during defense responses.', '2022 Nov 13', 'BMC Biol', '10.1186/s12915-022-01454-5', 'ORCID:']

GTE4: !binds to! active genes
GTE4: !represses! OPR3
GTE4: !enhances! SA-mediated immune defense genes
GTE4: !downregulates! JA-mediated immune defense genes
OPR3: !synthesizes! JA
JA: !activates! defense system