The study presents results of research on the evolution of plastid genomes in Stipa L. which is a large genus of the Poaceae family, comprising species diverse in terms of geographic distribution, growing under highly variated habitat conditions. Complete plastome sequences of 43 taxa from Stipeae and Ampelodesmae tribes were analyzed for the variability of the coding regions against the background of phylogenetic relationships within the genus Stipa. The research hypothesis put forward in our research was that some of coding regions are affected by a selection pressure differentiated between individual phylogenetic lines of Stipa, potentially reducing the phylogenetic informativeness of these CDS. The study aimed to answer the question, which genes evolve in Stipa most rapidly and what kind of changes in the properties of encoded amino acids this entails. Another goal of this research was to find out whether individual genes are affected by positive selection and finally, whether selective pressure is uniform within the genus or does it vary between particular evolutionary lines within the genus. Results of our study proved the presence of selective pressure in 11 genes: ccsA, matK, ndhC, ndhF, ndhK, rbcL, rpoA rpoC1, rpoC2, rps8 and rps11. For the first time the effect of positive selection on the rps8, rps11, and ndhK genes was documented in grasses. The varied pace of evolution, different intensity and effects of selective pressure have been demonstrated between particular phylogenetic lines of the genus tested. Positive selection in plastid genome in Stipa mostly affects photosynthetic genes. The potential strongest adaptive pressure was observed in the rbcL gene, especially in the oldest evolutionary group comprising Central Asian high-mountain species: S. basiplumosa, S. klimesii, S. penicillata and S. purpurea, where adaptive pressure probably affected the amino acids directly related to the efficiency of CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation.

ccsA: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
matK: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
ndhC: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
ndhF: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
ndhK: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
rbcL: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
rpoA: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
rpoC1: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
rpoC2: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
rps8: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
rps11: !affects! Photosynthetic genes
Stipa L.: !contains! 43 taxa
Stipeae: !contains! 43 taxa
Ampelodesmae: !contains! 43 taxa
Selection pressure: !affects! 11 genes
Positive selection: !affects! 11 genes
rbcL gene: !strongest adaptive pressure! Central Asian high-mountain species