Dendrobium officinale Kimura et Migo, which contains rich polysaccharides, flavonoids and alkaloids, is a Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) with important economic benefits, while various pathogens have brought huge losses to its industrialization. NBS gene family is the largest class of plant disease resistance (R) genes, proteins of which are widely distributed in the upstream and downstream of the plant immune systems and are responsible for receiving infection signals and regulating gene expression respectively. It is of great significance for the subsequent disease resistance breeding of D. officinale to identify NBS genes by using the newly published high-quality chromosome-level D. officinale genome. In this study, a total of 655 NBS genes were uncovered from the genomes of D. officinale, D. nobile, D. chrysotoxum, V. planifolia, A. shenzhenica, P. equestris and A. thaliana. The phylogenetic results of CNL-type protein sequences showed that orchid NBS-LRR genes have significantly degenerated on branches a and b. The Dendrobium NBS gene homology analysis showed that the Dendrobium NBS genes have two obvious characteristics: type changing and NB-ARC domain degeneration. Because the NBS-LRR genes have both NB-ARC and LRR domains, 22 D. officinale NBS-LRR genes were used for subsequent analyses, such as gene structures, conserved motifs, cis-elements and functional annotation analyses. All these results suggested that D. officinale NBS-LRR genes take part in the ETI system, plant hormone signal transduction pathway and Ras signaling pathway. Finally, there were 1,677 DEGs identified from the salicylic acid (SA) treatment transcriptome data of D. officinale. Among them, six NBS-LRR genes (Dof013264, Dof020566, Dof019188, Dof019191, Dof020138 and Dof020707) were significantly up-regulated. However, only Dof020138 was closely related to other pathways from the results of WGCNA, such as pathogen identification pathways, MAPK signaling pathways, plant hormone signal transduction pathways, biosynthetic pathways and energy metabolism pathways. Our results revealed that the NBS gene degenerations are common in the genus Dendrobium, which is the main reason for the diversity of NBS genes, and the NBS-LRR genes generally take part in D. officinale ETI system and signal transduction pathways. In addition, the D. officinale NBS-LRR gene Dof020138, which may have an important breeding value, is indirectly activated by SA in the ETI system.

NBS-LRR genes: !take part in! ETI system 
NBS-LRR genes: !take part in! plant hormone signal transduction pathway 
NBS-LRR genes: !take part in! Ras signaling pathway 
Dof020138: !indirectly activated by! SA 
Dof020138: !related to! pathogen identification pathways 
Dof020138: !related to! MAPK signaling pathways 
Dof020138: !related to! biosynthetic pathways 
Dof020138: !related to! energy metabolism pathways