Drought poses a serious threat to plant growth. Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) have great potential to improve plant nutrition, yield, and drought tolerance. <i>Sphingomonas</i> is an important microbiota genus that is extensively distributed in the plant or rhizosphere. However, the knowledge of its plant growth-promoting function in dry regions is extremely limited. In this study, we investigated the effects of PGPB <i>Sphingomonas</i> sp. Hbc-6 on maize under normal conditions and drought stress. We found that Hbc-6 increased the biomass of maize under normal conditions and drought stress. For instance, the root fresh weight and shoot dry weight of inoculated maize increased by 39.1% and 34.8% respectively compared with non-inoculated plant, while they increased by 61.3% and 96.3% respectively under drought conditions. Hbc-6 also promoted seed germination, maintained stomatal morphology and increased chlorophyll content so as to enhance photosynthesis of plants. Hbc-6 increased antioxidant enzyme (catalase, superoxide, peroxidase) activities and osmoregulation substances (proline, soluble sugar) and up-regulated the level of beneficial metabolites (resveratrol, etc.). Moreover, Hbc-6 reshaped the maize rhizosphere bacterial community, increased its richness and diversity, and made the rhizosphere bacterial community more complex to resist stress; Hbc-6 could also recruit more potentially rhizosphere beneficial bacteria which might promote plant growth together with Hbc-6 both under normal and drought stress. In short, Hbc-6 increased maize biomass and drought tolerance through the above ways. Our findings lay a foundation for exploring the complex mechanisms of interactions between <i>Sphingomonas</i> and plants, and it is important that <i>Sphingomonas</i> sp. Hbc-6 can be used as a potential biofertilizer in agricultural production, which will assist finding new solutions for improving the growth and yield of crops in arid areas.

Hbc-6: !increases! Maize biomass
Hbc-6: !maintains! Stomatal morphology
Hbc-6: !enhances! Photosynthesis
Hbc-6: !increases! Antioxidant enzyme activities
Hbc-6: !increases! Osmoregulation substances
Hbc-6: !up-regulates! Beneficial metabolites
Hbc-6: !reshapes! Rhizosphere bacterial community
Hbc-6: !increases! Richness and diversity of rhizosphere bacterial community
Hbc-6: !recruits! Potentially rhizosphere beneficial bacteria