Forage nutrient storages can determine livestock size and husbandry development. There is insufficient research on the response of forage nutrient storages to grazing and related driving mechanisms in alpine grasslands, especially on the Tibetan Plateau. This study conducted a grazing experiment in three alpine grassland sites along an elevation gradient (two warm-season pastures and one cold-season pasture; two alpine steppe meadow sites and one alpine meadow) of Northern Tibet. Different types of alpine grassland ecosystems, at least for forage nutrient storages, may have different responses to grazing. Warm-season grazing significantly reduced crude protein (CP) storage, acid detergent fiber (ADF) storage, and neutral detergent fiber (NDF) storage of high-quality forage by 53.29, 63.82, and 63.26%, respectively, but cold-season grazing did not significantly alter the CP, ADF and NDF storages of high-quality forage. Warm-season grazing significantly reduced CP, ADF, NDF, crude ash (Ash), ether extract (EE) and water-soluble carbohydrate (WSC) storages of the plant community by 46.61, 62.47, 55.96, 64.94, 60.34, and 52.68%, and forbs by 62.33, 77.50, 73.69, 65.05, 57.75, and 62.44% in the alpine meadow site but not the alpine steppe meadow site, respectively. Plant species and phylogenetic diversity had different relationships with forage nutrient storages. The elevation distribution of forage nutrient storages under fencing conditions were different from those under grazing conditions. Therefore, cold-season grazing can have lower negative effects on forage nutrient storages than warm-season grazing. Combined plant species with phylogenetic diversity and composition can be better in predicting forage nutrient storages. Grazing can restructure the elevation distribution of forage nutrient storages in alpine grasslands.

Grazing: !reduces! CP storage
Grazing: !reduces! ADF storage
Grazing: !reduces! NDF storage
Grazing: !reduces! Ash storage
Grazing: !reduces! EE storage
Grazing: !reduces! WSC storage
Plant species: !influences! forage nutrient storages
Phylogenetic diversity: !influences! forage nutrient storages
Grazing: !restructures! elevation distribution of forage nutrient storages