Transmitting tissue cells of Luehea divaricata present a thick middle lamella and prominent convex lens-shaped thickenings of the cell wall that act as reservoir of energy for pollen tube growth. Luehea Milld. is a Neotropical genus with 18 species. This paper reports the study of the structure and the ultrastructure of the stigma and the style of Luehea divaricata Milld. using bright-field microscope and transmission electron microscope. Multiseriate papillae are observed in the stigma. The papillae cells are large with a content that stains intensively and the sub-stigmatic tissue resembles the style's transmitting tissue. L. divaricata has a closed style with an epidermis that presents raised stomata and multicellular trichomes. Numerous organelles and a large nucleus are present in the dense cytoplasm of the transmitting tissue cells. A relevant feature is that the cells of this tissue in the species studied present a very thick middle lamella with two zones of different electron density in the angle of contact between cells, and convex lens-shaped thickenings of the cell wall are prominent mainly also in these angles of contact. The growth of the pollen tube is initiated on the stigmatic papillae surface and continues growing in the middle lamella of the sub-stigmatic tissue and the transmitting tissue, mainly at the contact angle between cells. The present work is the first contribution to the knowledge of structure and ultrastructure of the stigma and style in the genus Luehea, as well as to the subfamily Grewioideae (Malvaceae).

Stigma: !presents! Multiseriate papillae 
Papillae cells: !contain! Content that stains intensively 
Sub-stigmatic tissue: !resembles! Style's transmitting tissue 
Style: !has! Closed epidermis with raised stomata and multicellular trichomes 
Transmitting tissue cells: !present! Thick middle lamella and convex lens-shaped thickenings of the cell wall 
Pollen tube: !initiates growth on! Stigmatic papillae surface 
Middle lamella: !facilitates! Pollen tube growth