Around the globe, salinity is one of the serious environmental stresses which negatively affect rapid seed germination, uniform seedling establishment and plant developments restricting sustainable agricultural productivity. In recent years, the concepts of sustainable agriculture and cleaner production strategy have emphasized the introduction of greener agrochemicals using biocompatible and natural sources to maximize crop yield with minimum ecotoxicological effects. Over the last decade, the emergence of nanotechnology as a forefront of interdisciplinary science has introduced nanomaterials as fast-acting plant growth-promoting agents. Herein, we report the preparation of nanocomposite using chitosan and green tea (CS-GTE NC) as an ecofriendly nanopriming agent to elicit salt stress tolerance through priming imprints. The CS-GTE NC-primed (0.02, 0.04 and 0.06%), hydroprimed and non-primed (control) wheat seeds were germinated under normal and salt stress (150 mM NaCl) conditions. The seedlings developed from aforesaid seeds were used for physiological, biochemical and germination studies. The priming treatments increased protein contents (10-12%), photosynthetic pigments (Chl a (4-6%), Chl b (34-36%), Total Chl (7-14%) and upregulated the machinery of antioxidants (CAT (26-42%), POD (22-43%)) in wheat seedlings under stress conditions. It also reduced MDA contents (65-75%) and regulated ROS production resulting in improved membrane stability. The priming-mediated alterations in biochemical attributes resulted in improved final germination (20-22%), vigor (4-11%) and germination index (6-13%) under both conditions. It reduced mean germination time significantly, establishing the stress-insulating role of the nanocomposite. The improvement of germination parameters validated the stimulation of priming memory in composite-treated seeds. Pre-treatment of seeds with nanocomposite enables them to counter salinity at the seedling development stage by means of priming memory warranting sustainable plant growth and high crop productivity.

CS-GTE NC: !enhances! Protein content
CS-GTE NC: !enhances! Photosynthetic pigments
CS-GTE NC: !enhances! Antioxidants
CS-GTE NC: !reduces! MDA content
CS-GTE NC: !regulates! ROS production
CS-GTE NC: !improves! Final germination
CS-GTE NC: !improves! Vigor
CS-GTE NC: !improves! Germination index
CS-GTE NC: !reduces! Mean germination time