Soloist is a member of a distinct and small subfamily within the AP2/ERF transcriptional factor family that play important roles in plant biotic and abiotic stress responses. There are limited studies of Soloist genes and their functions are poorly understood. We characterized the abiotic and biotic stress tolerance function of the ScSoloist gene (designated as ScAPD1-like) from the desert moss Syntrichia caninervis. ScAPD1-like responded to multiple abiotic, biotic stresses and plant hormone treatments. ScAPD1-like protein located to the nucleus and bound to several DNA elements. Overexpression of ScAPD1-like in Arabidopsis did not alter abiotic stress resistance or inhibit Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Pst) DC3000 infection. However, overexpression of ScAPD1-like significantly increased the resistance of transgenic Arabidopsis and S. caninervis to Verticillium dahliae infection, decreased reactive oxygen species accumulation and improved reactive oxygen species scavenging activity. ScAPD1-like overexpression plants altered the abundance of transcripts for lignin synthesis and promoted lignin accumulation in Arabidopsis. ScAPD1-like directly bind to RAV1, AC elements, and TATA-box in the promoters of AtPAL1 and AtC4H genes, respectively, in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative polymerase chain reaction assays demonstrated ScAPD1-like directly bound to PAL and C4H genes promoters in Arabidopsis and their homologs in S. caninervis. In S. caninervis, ScAPD1-like overexpression and RNAi directly regulated the abundance of ScPAL and ScC4H transcripts and modified the metabolites of phenylpropanoid pathway. We provide insight into the function of Soloist in plant defense mechanisms that likely occurs through activation of the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway. ScAPD1-like is a promising candidate gene for breeding strategies to improve resistance to Verticillium wilt.

ScAPD1-like: !responds to! abiotic, biotic stresses and plant hormone treatments
ScAPD1-like: !localizes to! nucleus
ScAPD1-like: !binds to! DNA elements
ScAPD1-like: !enhances! resistance to Verticillium dahliae infection
ScAPD1-like: !decreases! reactive oxygen species accumulation
ScAPD1-like: !promotes! lignin accumulation
ScAPD1-like: !binds to! RAV1, AC elements, TATA-box
ScAPD1-like: !regulates! abundance of ScPAL and ScC4H transcripts
ScAPD1-like: !modifies! metabolites of phenylpropanoid pathway