Pine wilt disease (PWD) is a destructive disease that endangers pine trees, resulting in the wilting, with yellowing and browning of the needles, and eventually the death of the trees. Previous studies showed that the Avr9/Cf-9 rapidly elicited (PmACRE1) gene was downregulated by Bursaphelenchus xylophilus infection, suggesting a correlation between PmACRE1 expression and pine tolerance. Here, we used the expression of PmACRE1 in Arabidopsis thaliana to evaluate the role of PmACRE1 in the regulation of host defence against B. xylophilus infection. Our results showed that the transformation of PmACRE1 into A. thaliana enhanced plant resistance to the pine wood nematode (PWN); that is, the leaves of the transgenic line remained healthy for a longer period than those of the blank vector group. Ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity and total phenolic acid and total flavonoid contents were higher in the transgenic line than in the control line. Widely targeted metabolomics analysis of the global secondary metabolites in the transgenic line and the vector control line showed that the contents of 30 compounds were significantly different between these two lines; specifically, the levels of crotaline, neohesperidin, nobiletin, vestitol, and 11 other compounds were significantly increased in the transgenic line. The studies also showed that the ACRE1 protein interacted with serine hydroxymethyltransferase, catalase domain-containing protein, myrosinase, dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase, ketol-acid reductoisomerase, geranylgeranyl diphosphate reductase, S-adenosylmethionine synthase, glutamine synthetase, and others to comprehensively regulate plant resistance. Taken together, these results indicate that PmACRE1 has a potential role in the regulation of plant defence against PWNs.

PmACRE1: !enhances! Plant resistance 
PmACRE1: !increases! APX activity 
PmACRE1: !increases! Total phenolic acid and flavonoid content 
PmACRE1: !interacts with! Serine hydroxymethyltransferase 
PmACRE1: !interacts with! Catalase domain-containing protein 
PmACRE1: !interacts with! Myrosinase 
PmACRE1: !interacts with! Dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase 
PmACRE1: !interacts with! Ketol-acid reductoisomerase 
PmACRE1: !interacts with! Geranylgeranyl diphosphate reductase 
PmACRE1: !interacts with! S-adenosylmethionine synthase 
PmACRE1: !interacts with! Glutamine synthetase