Expression of rice malate synthase (OsMS), one of the two key genes in the glyoxylate cycle, is highly upregulated under salt stress. In this study, we aimed to investigate the role of OsMS in salt stress responses using the Arabidopsis T-DNA insertional mutant line of malate synthase (AtMS), an OsMS orthologous gene, for ectopic expression. Germination of the Atms mutant under salt stress was lower than that of Arabidopsis Col-0 wildtype (WT); furthermore, the two Atms mutant lines ectopically expressing OsMS reversed the salt-sensitive phenotype. Atms mutants salt-treated for 3 days exhibited higher electrolyte leakage, higher Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> ratio, lower expression of stress-responsive genes, and lower soluble sugar content than WT and the two OsMS-expressing Atms mutant lines. Consistently, Atms mutants salt-treated for 3 days followed by a 5-day recovery period displayed greater fresh-weight reduction. Notably, leaf greenness and chlorophyll and total carotenoid contents were higher in the Atms mutant lines than in the WT under stress. OsMS-expressing Atms mutants exhibited a change in pigment content closer to that of WT. During dark-induced senescence, an Atms mutant, Aticl, mutant (the other key gene in the glyoxylate cycle), and three double mutant lines of Atms and Aticl exhibited lower decreases in leaf greenness than the WT and OsMS-expressing Atms mutant lines. Furthermore, SAG12 expression levels in the Atms mutant, Aticl mutant, and three double mutant lines were lower than those in OsMS-expressing Atms mutant lines. Altogether, our data indicate that OsMS likely plays a key role in salt stress responses, possibly through the induction of leaf senescence.

OsMS: !upregulates! salt stress responses
Atms mutant: !exhibits! lower germination under salt stress
Atms mutant: !displays! higher electrolyte leakage
Atms mutant: !has! lower expression of stress-responsive genes
Atms mutant: !presents! lower soluble sugar content
Atms mutant: !exhibits! greater fresh-weight reduction
Atms mutant: !shows! lower leaf greenness
Atms mutant: !possesses! lower chlorophyll and carotenoid contents
Aticl mutant: !exhibits! lower decreases in leaf greenness
SAG12: !expresses! lower levels in Atms, Aticl mutants, and double mutants