<i>Andrographis paniculata</i>, commonly known as kalmegh is among the most popular medicinal herbs in Southeast Asia. It is widely cultivated for medicinal purposes. The bioactive molecule, Andrographolide accumulated in herb leaves has immense therapeutic and economic potential. However, comprehensive information regarding genetic diversity is very limited in this species. The present study assessed genetic diversity between and within the six populations (ecotypes) of twenty-four kalmegh accessions using multiple datasets (agro-morphological traits, phytochemical traits, and genic markers). This is the established report where EST-SSR (Expressed sequence tags-Simple Sequence Repeat) markers have been used to unlock genetic variation in kalmegh. Here, we identified and developed ninety-one metabolic pathway-specific EST-SSR markers. Finally, 32 random EST-SSR primer pairs were selected for genetic diversity assessment. Multivariate analysis to unveil the agro-morphological, phytochemical and genotypic variability was helpful in discriminating various germplasms studied in the present study. Among all the morphological discriptors used in present study, days to fifty percent flowering and dry herb yield were found as potential selection index for AP genetic improvement. Hierarchical cluster analysis built with agro-morphological data identified three major groups. However, corresponding analysis with phytochemical and molecular data generated two clear-cut groups among the studied individuals. Moreover, the grouping of individuals into different clusters using multiple datasets was geographically independent, and also showed inconsistency in grouping among agromorphological, phytochemical and molecular dataset based clusters. However, joint analysis using agro-morphological, phytochemical and genotypic information generated two genetic groups, which could be a valuable resource for identifying complementary crossing panels in the kalmegh breeding program. The accessions AP7, AP13, AP5, AP3 belong to cluster I and accessions AP17, AP18 belong to cluster II could be utilized as potential donors for high dry herb yield and andrographolide content, respectively in different selective breeding programs of AP. Thus, our results provided useful information about the overall genetic diversity and variation in economic traits useful for initiating selective breeding programs for contrasting traits of interest and maximizing genetic gain in kalmegh.

Andrographis paniculata: !accumulates! Andrographolide 
EST-SSR markers: !unlock! Genetic variation 
Agro-morphological traits: !discriminate! Germplasms 
Days to fifty percent flowering: !potential selection index for! AP genetic improvement 
Agro-morphological data: !identify! Three major groups 
Phytochemical and molecular data: !generate! Two clear-cut groups 
Multiple datasets: !group! Individuals geographically independently 
Agro-morphological, phytochemical and genotypic information: !generate! Two genetic groups 
Accessions AP7, AP13, AP5, AP3: !potential donors for! High dry herb yield 
Accessions AP17, AP18: !potential donors for! Andrographolide content