Reactive carbonyl species (RCS) such as methylglyoxal (MGO) and glyoxal (GO) are highly reactive, unwanted side-products of cellular metabolism maintained at harmless intracellular levels by specific scavenging mechanisms.MGO and GO are metabolized through the glyoxalase (GLX) system, which consists of two enzymes acting in sequence, GLXI and GLXII. While plant genomes encode a number of different GLX isoforms, their specific functions and how they arose during evolution are unclear. Here, we used Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) as a model species to investigate the evolutionary history of GLXI and GLXII in plants and whether the GLX system can protect plant cells from the toxicity of RCS other than MGO and GO. We show that plants possess two GLX systems of different evolutionary origins and with distinct structural and functional properties. The first system is shared by all eukaryotes, scavenges MGO and GO, especially during seedling establishment, and features Zn2+-type GLXI proteins with a metal cofactor preference that were present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor. GLXI and GLXII of the second system, featuring Ni2+-type GLXI, were acquired by the last common ancestor of Viridiplantae through horizontal gene transfer from proteobacteria and can together metabolize keto-D-glucose (KDG, glucosone), a glucose-derived RCS, to D-gluconate. When plants displaying loss-of-function of a Viridiplantae-specific GLXI were grown in KDG, D-gluconate levels were reduced to 10%-15% of those in the wild type, while KDG levels showed an increase of 48%-67%. In contrast to bacterial GLXI homologs, which are active as dimers, plant Ni2+-type GLXI proteins contain a domain duplication, are active as monomers, and have a modified second active site. The acquisition and neofunctionalization of a structurally, biochemically, and functionally distinct GLX system indicates that Viridiplantae are under strong selection to detoxify diverse RCS.

GLXI: !scavenges! MGO and GO 
GLXI: !metabolizes! KDG 
GLXII: !acts in sequence with! GLXI 
Viridiplantae: !acquired! GLX system 
Viridiplantae: !neofunctionalized! GLX system 
KDG: !increased! in plants with loss-of-function of GLXI 
D-gluconate: !reduced! in plants with loss-of-function of GLXI