Soil biosolarization (SBS) is an alternative technique for soil pest control to standard techniques such as soil fumigation and soil solarization (SS). By using both solar heating and fermentation of organic amendments, faster and more effective control of soilborne pathogens can be achieved. A circular economy may be created by using the residues of a given crop as organic amendments to biosolarize fields that produce that crop, which is termed circular soil biosolarization (CSBS). In this study, CSBS was employed by biosolarizing soil with amended tomato pomace (TP) residues and examining its impact on tomato cropping under conditions of abiotic stresses, specifically high salinity and nitrogen deficiency. The results showed that in the absence of abiotic stress, CSBS can benefit plant physiological performance, growth and yield relative to SS. Moreover, CSBS significantly mitigated the impacts of abiotic stress conditions. The results also showed that CSBS impacted the soil microbiome and plant metabolome. <i>Mycoplana</i> and <i>Kaistobacter</i> genera were found to be positively correlated with benefits to tomato plants health under abiotic stress conditions. Conversely, the relative abundance of the orders RB41, MND1, and the family Ellin6075 and were negatively correlated with tomato plants health. Moreover, several metabolites were significantly affected in plants grown in SS- and CSBS-treated soils under abiotic stress conditions. The metabolite xylonic acid isomer was found to be significantly negatively correlated with tomato plants health performance across all treatments. These findings improve understanding of the interactions between CSBS, soil ecology, and crop physiology under abiotic stress conditions.

Mycoplana: !positively correlated with! tomato plants health
Kaistobacter: !positively correlated with! tomato plants health
RB41: !negatively correlated with! tomato plants health
MND1: !negatively correlated with! tomato plants health
Ellin6075: !negatively correlated with! tomato plants health
xylonic acid isomer: !negatively correlated with! tomato plants health