Genotyping platforms are important for genetic research and molecular breeding. In this study, a low-density genotyping platform containing 5.5K SNP markers was successfully developed in maize using genotyping by target sequencing (GBTS) technology with capture-in-solution. Two maize populations (Pop1 and Pop2) were used to validate the GBTS panel for genetic and molecular breeding studies. Pop1 comprised 942 hybrids derived from 250 inbred lines and four testers, and Pop2 contained 540 hybrids which were generated from 123 new-developed inbred lines and eight testers. The genetic analyses showed that the average polymorphic information content and genetic diversity values ranged from 0.27 to 0.38 in both populations using all filtered genotyping data. The mean missing rate was 1.23% across populations. The Structure and UPGMA tree analyses revealed similar genetic divergences (76-89%) in both populations. Genomic prediction analyses showed that the prediction accuracy of reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) was slightly lower than that of genomic best linear unbiased prediction (GBLUP) and three Bayesian methods for general combining ability of grain yield per plant and three yield-related traits in both populations, whereas RKHS with additive effects showed superior advantages over the other four methods in Pop1. In Pop1, the GBLUP and three Bayesian methods with additive-dominance model improved the prediction accuracies by 4.89-134.52% for the four traits in comparison to the additive model. In Pop2, the inclusion of dominance did not improve the accuracy in most cases. In general, low accuracies (0.33-0.43) were achieved for general combing ability of the four traits in Pop1, whereas moderate-to-high accuracies (0.52-0.65) were observed in Pop2. For hybrid performance prediction, the accuracies were moderate to high (0.51-0.75) for the four traits in both populations using the additive-dominance model. This study suggests a reliable genotyping platform that can be implemented in genomic selection-assisted breeding to accelerate maize new cultivar development and improvement.

Genotyping platforms: !developed in! maize 
GBTS panel: !validated for! genetic and molecular breeding studies 
Polymorphic information content: !ranged from! 0.27 to 0.38 
Missing rate: !averaged! 1.23% 
Structure and UPGMA tree analyses: !revealed! genetic divergences of 76-89% 
RKHS: !showed lower accuracy than! GBLUP and three Bayesian methods 
Additive-dominance model: !improved prediction accuracies by! 4.89-134.52% 
Hybrid performance prediction: !achieved moderate to high accuracies of! 0.51-0.75