Increased soil salinity is one of the main concerns in agriculture and food production, and it negatively affects plant growth and crop productivity. In order to mitigate the adverse effects of salinity stress, plant biostimulants (PBs) have been indicated as a promising approach. Indeed, these products have a beneficial effect on plants by acting on primary and secondary metabolism and by inducing the accumulation of protective molecules against oxidative stress. In this context, the present work is aimed at comparatively investigating the effects of microbial (i.e., <i>Azospirillum brasilense</i>) and plant-derived biostimulants in alleviating salt stress in tomato plants by adopting a multidisciplinary approach. To do so, the morphological and biochemical effects were assessed by analyzing the biomass accumulation and root characteristics, the activity of antioxidant enzymes and osmotic stress protection. Furthermore, modifications in the metabolomic profiles of both leaves and root exudates were also investigated by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography/quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC/QTOF-MS). According to the results, biomass accumulation decreased under high salinity. However, the treatment with <i>A. brasilense</i> considerably improved root architecture and increased root biomass by 156% and 118% in non-saline and saline conditions, respectively. The antioxidant enzymes and proline production were enhanced in salinity stress at different levels according to the biostimulant applied. Moreover, the metabolomic analyses pointed out a wide set of processes being affected by salinity and biostimulant interactions. Crucial compounds belonging to secondary metabolism (phenylpropanoids, alkaloids and other N-containing metabolites, and membrane lipids) and phytohormones (brassinosteroids, cytokinins and methylsalicylate) showed the most pronounced modulation. Overall, our results suggest a better performance of <i>A. brasilense</i> in alleviating high salinity than the vegetal-derived protein hydrolysates herein evaluated.

Biostimulants: !alleviate! Salt Stress
A. brasilense: !improves! Root Architecture
Biostimulants: !enhance! Antioxidant Enzymes
Biostimulants: !modulate! Secondary Metabolism
Biostimulants: !increase! Proline Production
Biostimulants: !affect! Phytohormones