<i>Phoebe hui</i> is an extremely valuable tree that is the main source of the fragrant golden-thread nanmu wood. Although the fragrance of wood has been investigated in several trees, the potential substances and gene regulation mechanisms that are involved in fragrance formation are poorly understood. Here, three radial tissues, sapwood (SW), heartwood (HW), and the transition zone (TZ) in between them, were compared via integrative physiological, volatile-metabolomic, and transcriptomic analyses to identify the key metabolites and regulatory mechanisms involved in fragrance formation. During heartwood formation, gradual starch grain loss was accompanied by the deposition of lipids and extractives in the cell lumen. Extracts of terpenoids were synthesized and accumulated in the heartwood, including monoterpenoids (limonene and p-cymene) and sesquiterpenes (cubebene and guaiadiene); these were identified as being closely related to the special fragrance of the wood. Additionally, the expression of transcripts showed that the genes related to primary metabolism were specifically upregulated in the SW, whereas genes annotated in terpenoid biosynthesis were specifically upregulated in the HW. Therefore, we speculated that terpenoid biosynthesis occurs in situ in the HW via the HW formation model of Type-III (<i>Santalum</i>) using the precursors that were produced by primary metabolism in the SW. The expression levels of transcription factors (e.g., MYB, WRKY, and C2H2) acted as the major regulatory factors in the synthesis of terpenoids. Our results explain the special fragrance in <i>P. hui</i> and broaden the current knowledge of the regulatory mechanisms of fragrance formation. This work provides a framework for future research that is focused on improving wood quality and value.

Starch grain: !loss accompanies! lipid/extractive deposition
Primary metabolism: !upregulated in! sapwood
Terpenoid biosynthesis: !upregulated in! heartwood
Terpenoids: !synthesized and accumulated in! heartwood
Transcription factors: !regulate! terpenoid synthesis