The lipidome comprises the total content of molecular species of each lipid class, and is measured using the analytical techniques of lipidomics. Many liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) methods have previously been described to characterize the lipidome. However, many lipidomic approaches may not fully uncover the subtleties of lipid molecular species, such as the full fatty acid (FA) composition of certain lipid classes. Here, we describe a stepwise targeted lipidomics approach to characterize the polar and non-polar lipid classes using complementary LC-MS methods. Our "polar" method measures 260 molecular species across 12 polar lipid classes, and is performed using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) on a NH2 column to separate lipid classes by their headgroup. Our "non-polar" method measures 254 molecular species across three non-polar lipid classes, separating molecular species on their FA characteristics by reverse phase (RP) chromatography on a C30 column. Five different extraction methods were compared, with an MTBE-based extraction chosen for the final lipidomics workflow. A state-of-the-art strategy to determine and relatively quantify the FA composition of triacylglycerols is also described. This lipidomics workflow was applied to developing, mature, and germinated pennycress seeds/seedlings and found unexpected changes among several lipid molecular species. During development, diacylglycerols predominantly contained long chain length FAs, which contrasted with the very long chain FAs of triacylglycerols in mature seeds. Potential metabolic explanations are discussed. The lack of very long chain fatty acids in diacylglycerols of germinating seeds may indicate very long chain FAs, such as erucic acid, are preferentially channeled into beta-oxidation for energy production.

Lipidome: !measured using! LC-MS 
HILIC: !separates! lipid classes 
RP: !separates! molecular species 
MTBE: !chosen for! lipidomics workflow 
FA composition: !determined by! targeted lipidomics 
diacylglycerols: !contain! long chain length FAs 
triacylglycerols: !contain! very long chain FAs 
germinating seeds: !lack! very long chain FAs