Seed color is a vital quality determinant of flax, significant for consumers' acceptability, and determines the commercial values of seeds. Also, seed color as a phenotypic marker may be a convenient way to select the plants with desired traits. This study assessed a diversity panel representing 144 flax genotypes from diverse geographical origins for the existence of genetic variability for luminosity (L*) and chromaticity (a* and b*) seed color parameters, seed yield, and quality traits over two years. The genetic variance was significant for seed color parameters, demonstrating the presence of significant genetic variability, which provides a resource to objectively evaluate and select flax genotypes based on seed color according to the market demand. High heritability combined with the high genotypic coefficient of variation observed for seed yield, oil, and protein content suggested a better genetic gain upon selecting these traits. Seed yield, seed quality traits, and phenological traits showed significant negative correlation with L* and b* parameters and positive correlation with a* suggesting that the seeds' dark background and brown color can serve as marker characters to prescreen early-flowering, high-yielding and oil and protein-rich genotypes. Interestingly 48 brown-seeded genotypes were identified as early-flowering with short height, large seeds, high thousand seed weight, and capsule diameter. In addition, 34 genotypes were characterized by light-colored yellow seeds, large seeds, late-flowering with shorter height, and high branch numbers. Our results highlighted that North America and Australia-belonged genotypes were lighter yellow-seeded than the ones from other continents. Flax genotypes from South America and Asia were high-yielding, while genotypes from North America were low-yielding genotypes. Moreover, darker brown-seeded genotypes have prevailed in the South American continent.

L*: !correlates with! seed yield
a*: !correlates with! seed yield
b*: !correlates with! seed yield
seed color: !determines! commercial values
seed color: !selects! plants with desired traits
seed yield: !heritable! genetic gain
dark background: !serves as marker for! early-flowering
brown color: !serves as marker for! high-yielding
North America: !characterized by! light yellow seeds
Australia: !characterized by! light yellow seeds
South America: !characterized by! dark brown seeds
Asia: !characterized by! high-yielding genotypes