Salicylic acid (SA) is a major plant hormone that mediates the defence pathway against pathogens. SA accumulates in highly variable amounts depending on the plant-pathogen system, and several enzyme activities participate in the restoration of its levels. Gentisic acid (GA) is the product of the 5-hydroxylation of SA, which is catalysed by S5H, an enzyme activity regarded as a major player in SA homeostasis. GA accumulates at high levels in tomato plants infected by Citrus Exocortis Viroid (CEVd), and to a lesser extend upon Pseudomonas syringae DC3000 pv. tomato (Pst) infection. We have studied the induction of tomato SlS5H gene by different pathogens, and its expression correlates with the accumulation of GA. Transient over-expression of SlS5H in Nicotiana benthamiana confirmed that SA is processed by SlS5H in vivo. SlS5H-silenced tomato plants were generated, displaying a smaller size and early senescence, together with hypersusceptibility to the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis cinerea. In contrast, these transgenic lines exhibited an increased defence response and resistance to both CEVd and Pst infections. Alternative SA processing appears to occur for each specific pathogenic interaction to cope with SA levels. In SlS5H-silenced plants infected with CEVd, glycosylated SA was the most discriminant metabolite found. Instead, in Pst-infected transgenic plants, SA appeared to be rerouted to other phenolics such as feruloyldopamine, feruloylquinic acid, feruloylgalactarate and 2-hydroxyglutarate. Using SlS5H-silenced plants as a tool to unbalance SA levels, we have studied the re-routing of SA upon CEVd and Pst infections and found that, despite the common origin and role for SA in plant pathogenesis, there appear to be different pathogen-specific, alternate homeostasis pathways.

SlS5H: !catalyses! SA 5-hydroxylation 
GA: !accumulates in! tomato plants infected by CEVd 
SlS5H: !induces! SlS5H gene 
SlS5H: !confirms! SA processing in vivo 
SlS5H-silenced plants: !display! smaller size and early senescence 
SlS5H-silenced plants: !exhibit! increased defence response and resistance to CEVd and Pst infections 
CEVd-infected SlS5H-silenced plants: !produce! glycosylated SA 
Pst-infected SlS5H-silenced plants: !reroute! SA to other phenolics