Foxtail millet (Setaria italica L.) is a millet species with high tolerance to stressful environments. Plant non-specific lipid transfer proteins (nsLTPs) are a kind of small, basic proteins involved in many biological processes. So far, the genome of S. italica has been fully sequenced, and a comprehensive understanding of the evolution and expression of the nsLTP family is still lacking in foxtail millet. Forty-five nsLTP genes were identified in S. italica and clustered into 5 subfamilies except three single genes (SinsLTP38, SinsLTP7, and SinsLTP44). The proportion of SinsLTPs was different in each subfamily, and members within the same subgroup shared conserved exon-intron structures. Besides, 5 SinsLTP duplication events were investigated. Both tandem and segmental duplication contributed to nsLTP expansion in S. italica, and the duplicated SinsLTPs had mainly undergone purifying selection pressure, which suggested that the function of the duplicated SinsLTPs might not diverge much. Moreover, we identified the nsLTP members in 5 other monocots, and 41, 13, 10, 4, and 1 orthologous gene pairs were identified between S. italica and S. viridis, S. bicolor, Z. mays, O. sativa, and B. distachyon, respectively. The functional divergence within the nsLTP orthologous genes might be limited. In addition, the tissue-specific expression patterns of the SinsLTPs were investigated, and the expression profiles of the SinsLTPs in response to abiotic stress were analyzed, all the 10 selected SinsLTPs were responsive to drought, salt, and cold stress. Among the selected SinsLTPs, 2 paired duplicated genes shared almost equivalent expression profiles, suggesting that these duplicated genes might retain some essential functions during subsequent evolution. The present study provided the first systematic analysis for the phylogenetic classification, conserved domain and gene structure, expansion pattern, and expression profile of the nsLTP family in S. italica. These findings could pave a way for further comparative genomic and evolution analysis of nsLTP family in foxtail millet and related monocots, and lay the foundation for the functional analysis of the nsLTPs in S. italica.

S. italica: !has! 45 nsLTP genes 
nsLTPs: !involved in! many biological processes 
S. italica: !has! 5 subfamilies of nsLTPs 
SinsLTPs: !expanded by! tandem and segmental duplication 
SinsLTPs: !underwent! purifying selection pressure 
S. italica: !has! 41 orthologous gene pairs with S. viridis 
S. italica: !has! 13 orthologous gene pairs with S. bicolor 
S. italica: !has! 10 orthologous gene pairs with Z. mays 
S. italica: !has! 4 orthologous gene pairs with O. sativa 
S. italica: !has! 1 orthologous gene pair with B. distachyon 
SinsLTPs: !respond to! drought, salt, and cold stress 
duplicated SinsLTPs: !retain! essential functions