Plant breeders have indirectly selected for variation at circadian-associated loci in many of the world's major crops, when breeding to increase yield and improve crop performance. Using an eight-parent Multiparent Advanced Generation Inter-Cross (MAGIC) population, we investigated how variation in circadian clock-associated genes contributes to the regulation of heading date in UK and European winter wheat (Triticum aestivum) varieties. We identified homoeologues of EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) as candidates for the Earliness per se (Eps) D1 and B1 loci under field conditions. We then confirmed a single-nucleotide polymorphism within the coding region of TaELF3-B1 as a candidate polymorphism underlying the Eps-B1 locus. We found that a reported deletion at the Eps-D1 locus encompassing TaELF3-D1 is, instead, an allele that lies within an introgression region containing an inversion relative to the Chinese Spring D genome. Using Triticum turgidum cv. Kronos carrying loss-of-function alleles of TtELF3, we showed that ELF3 regulates heading, with loss of a single ELF3 homoeologue sufficient to alter heading date. These studies demonstrated that ELF3 forms part of the circadian oscillator; however, the loss of all homoeologues was required to affect circadian rhythms. Similarly, loss of functional LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX) in T. aestivum, an orthologue of a protein partner of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ELF3, severely disrupted circadian rhythms. ELF3 and LUX transcripts are not co-expressed at dusk, suggesting that the structure of the wheat circadian oscillator might differ from that of Arabidopsis. Our demonstration that alterations to ELF3 homoeologues can affect heading date separately from effects on the circadian oscillator suggests a role for ELF3 in cereal photoperiodic responses that could be selected for without pleiotropic deleterious alterations to circadian rhythms.

Plant breeders: !selected for! variation at circadian-associated loci
EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3): !candidate for! Earliness per se (Eps) D1 and B1 loci
TaELF3-B1: !candidate polymorphism underlying! Eps-B1 locus
Triticum turgidum cv. Kronos: !carries loss-of-function alleles of! TtELF3
ELF3: !regulates! heading date
LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX): !orthologue of! Arabidopsis ELF3
ELF3 and LUX transcripts: !not co-expressed at! dusk