Intracellular movement is an important step for the initial spread of virus in plants during infection. This process requires virus-encoded movement proteins (MPs) and their interaction with host factors. Despite the large number of known host factors involved in the movement of different viruses, little is known about host proteins that interact with one of the MPs encoded by potexviruses, the triple-gene-block protein 3 (TGBp3). The main obstacle lies in the relatively low expression level of potexviral TGBp3 in hosts and the weak or transient nature of interactions. Here, we used TurboID-based proximity labeling to identify the network of proteins directly or indirectly interacting with the TGBp3 of a potexvirus, Bamboo mosaic virus (BaMV). Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) luminal-binding protein 4 and calreticulin 3 of Nicotiana benthamiana (NbBiP4 and NbCRT3, respectively) associated with the functional TGBp3-containing BaMV movement complexes, but not the movement-defective mutant, TGBp3M. Fluorescent microscopy revealed that TGBp3 colocalizes with NbBiP4 or NbCRT3 and the complexes move together along ER networks to cell periphery in N. benthamiana. Loss- and gain-of-function experiments revealed that NbBiP4 or NbCRT3 is required for the efficient spread and accumulation of BaMV in infected leaves. In addition, overexpression of NbBiP4 or NbCRT3 enhanced the targeting of BaMV TGBp1 to plasmodesmata (PD), indicating that NbBiP4 and NbCRT3 interact with TGBp3 to promote the intracellular transport of virion cargo to PD that facilitates virus cell-to-cell movement. Our findings revealed additional roles for NbBiP4 and NbCRT3 in BaMV intracellular movement through ER networks or ER-derived vesicles to PD, which enhances the spread of BaMV in N. benthamiana.

TGBp3: !interacts with! NbBiP4
TGBp3: !interacts with! NbCRT3
NbBiP4: !colocalizes with! TGBp3
NbCRT3: !colocalizes with! TGBp3
NbBiP4: !required for! BaMV spread
NbCRT3: !required for! BaMV spread
NbBiP4: !enhances! BaMV targeting to PD
NbCRT3: !enhances! BaMV targeting to PD