Under global climate changes, understanding climate variables that are most associated with environmental kinships can contribute to improving the success of hybrid selection, mainly in environments with high climate variations. The main goal of this study is to integrate envirotyping techniques and multi-trait selection for mean performance and the stability of maize genotypes growing in the Huanghuaihai plain in China. A panel of 26 maize hybrids growing in 10 locations in two crop seasons was evaluated for 9 traits. Considering 20 years of climate information and 19 environmental covariables, we identified four mega-environments (ME) in the Huanghuaihai plain which grouped locations that share similar long-term weather patterns. All the studied traits were significantly affected by the genotype × mega-environment × year interaction, suggesting that evaluating maize stability using single-year, multi-environment trials may provide misleading recommendations. Counterintuitively, the highest yields were not observed in the locations with higher accumulated rainfall, leading to the hypothesis that lower vapor pressure deficit, minimum temperatures, and high relative humidity are climate variables that -under no water restriction- reduce plant transpiration and consequently the yield. Utilizing the multi-trait mean performance and stability index (MTMPS) prominent hybrids with satisfactory mean performance and stability across cultivation years were identified. G23 and G25 were selected within three out of the four mega-environments, being considered the most stable and widely adapted hybrids from the panel. The G5 showed satisfactory yield and stability across contrasting years in the drier, warmer, and with higher vapor pressure deficit mega-environment, which included locations in the Hubei province. Overall, this study opens the door to a more systematic and dynamic characterization of the environment to better understand the genotype-by-environment interaction in multi-environment trials.

genotype: !affects! Traits 
mega-environment: !groups! Locations 
vapor pressure deficit: !reduces! Plant transpiration 
minimum temperatures: !reduces! Plant transpiration 
relative humidity: !reduces! Plant transpiration 
MTMPS: !identifies! Prominent hybrids 
G23/G25: !selected in! Three mega-environments 
G5: !selected in! Drier, warmer mega-environment