Spur, a structure capable of producing and storing nectar, not only plays a vital role in the pollination process but also promotes the rapid diversification of some plant lineages, which is considered a key innovation in plants. Spur is the focus of many studies, such as evolution and ecological hypothesis, but the current understanding of spur development is limited. High-throughput sequencing of Impatiens uliginosa was carried out to study the molecular mechanism of its spur development, which is believed to provide some insights into the spur development of Impatiens. Transcriptomic sequencing and analysis were performed on spurs and limbs of I. uliginosa at three developmental stages. A total of 47.83 Gb of clean data were obtained, and 49,716 unigene genes were assembled. After comparison with NR, Swiss-Prot, Pfam, COG, GO and KEGG databases, a total of 27,686 genes were annotated successfully. Through comparative analysis, 19,356 differentially expressed genes were found and enriched into 208 GO terms and 146 KEGG pathways, among which plant hormone signal transduction was the most significantly enriched pathway. One thousand thirty-two transcription factors were identified, which belonged to 33 TF families such as MYB, bHLH and TCP. Twenty candidate genes that may be involved in spur development were screened and verified by qPCR, such as SBP, IAA and ABP. Transcriptome data of different developmental stages of spurs were obtained, and a series of candidate genes related to spur development were identified. The importance of genes related to cell cycle, cell division, cell elongation and hormones in spur development was clarified. This study provided valuable information and resources for understanding the molecular mechanism of spur development in Impatiens.

Gene: !affects! Spur development
Gene: !localizes to! Impatiens uliginosa
Gene: !interacts with! Plant hormone signal transduction
Gene: !enhances! Cell cycle
Gene: !represses! Cell division
Gene: !synthesizes! Cell elongation