Seed Myco-priming based on consortium of entomopathogenic fungi is very effective seed treatment against Ostrinia furnacalis herbivory. Maize regulates defense responses against herbivory by the production of defense-related enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants, phytohormones, and their corresponding genes. Jasmonic acid (JA) plays a key role in plant-entomopathogenic fungi-herbivore interaction. To understand how a consortium of the entomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana and Trichoderma asperellum induce changes in the response of maize to herbivory and increase the crop yield, 2-year field experiment, antioxidant enzymes, leaf transcriptome, and phytohormone were performed. Fungal inoculation enhanced the production of antioxidant enzymes and JA signaling pathway more than the normal herbivory. The comparison between single inoculated, consortium inoculated, and non-inoculated plants resulted in distinct transcriptome profiles representing a considerable difference in expression of antioxidant- and JA- responsive genes identified through Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and expression analysis, respectively. Seed priming with a consortium of B. bassiana and T. asperellum significantly enhanced the expression of genes involved in antioxidants production and JA biosynthesis cascade, with the highest expression recorded at 24-h post O. furnacalis larval infestation. They reduced the larval nutritional indices and survival up to 87% and enhancing crop yield and gross return up to 82-96% over the year 2018 and 2019. From our results we suggest that a consortium of B. bassiana and T. asperellum can be used synergistically against O. furnacalis in maize under field condition and can mediate antioxidants- and JA- associated maize defense response by boosting up the expression of their responsive genes, thereby enhancing crop yield.

Fungal inoculation: !enhances! Production of antioxidant enzymes
Fungal inoculation: !enhances! JA signaling pathway
Comparison between single/consortium/non-inoculated plants: !results in! Distinct transcriptome profiles
Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA): !identifies! Expression of antioxidant- and JA- responsive genes
Seed priming with consortium: !significantly enhances! Expression of genes involved in antioxidants production and JA biosynthesis cascade
Consortium: !reduces! Larval nutritional indices and survival
Consortium: !enhances! Crop yield and gross return