Jasmonate (JA) has been found to be a relevant hormone in floral development in numerous species, but its function in cucurbit floral development and sex determination is unknown. Crosstalk between JA and ethylene (ET) in the differential regulation of male and female floral development was investigated by using the novel JA-deficient mutant lox3a, and the ET-deficient and -insensitive mutants, aco1a and etr2b, respectively, of Cucurbita pepo. The lox3a mutation suppresses male and female flower opening and induces the development of parthenocarpic fruit. A bulked-segregant analysis coupled with whole genome sequencing and fine mapping approach allowed the identification of lox3a mutation in CpLOX3A, a LIPOXYGENASE gene involved in JA biosynthesis. The reduced JA content and expression of JA-signalling genes in male and female flowers of lox3a, and the rescue of lox3a phenotype by external application of methyl jasmonate (MeJA), demonstrated that JA controls petal elongation and flower opening, as well as fruit abortion in the absence of fertilization. JA also rescued the phenotype of ET mutants aco1a and etr2b, which are both specifically defective in female flower opening and fruit abortion. ET, the sex determining hormone of cucurbits, is induced in female flowers towards anthesis, activating JA production and promoting the aperture of the female flower, and the abortion of the unfertilized ovary. Given the close association between flower closure and parthenocarpic fruit development, we propose that flower opening can act as a switch that triggers fruit set and development in fertilized ovaries, but may alternatively induce the abortion of the unfertilized ovary. Both ET and JA from mature and senescent petals can serve as remote signals that determine the alternative development of the ovary and fruit.

Jasmonate (JA): !affects! Petal elongation and flower opening 
JA: !synthesizes! CpLOX3A 
JA: !rescues! lox3a phenotype 
JA: !rescues! aco1a and etr2b phenotypes 
Ethylene (ET): !induces! JA production 
ET: !activates! JA production 
ET: !determines! Alternative development of ovary and fruit