Biological invasion is a complex process associated with propagule pressure, dispersal ability, environmental constraints, and human interventions, which leave genetic signatures. The population genetics of an invasive species thus provides invaluable insights into the patterns of invasion. Burcucumber, one of the most detrimental weeds for soybean production in US, has recently colonized Korea and rapidly spread posing a great threat to the natural ecosystem. We aim to infer the determinants of the rapid burcucumber invasion by examining the genetic diversity, demography, and spread pattern with advanced genomic tools. We employed 2,696 genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphisms to assess the level of diversity and the spatial pattern associated with the landscape factors and to infer the demographic changes of 24 populations (364 genotypes) across four major river basins with the east coastal streams in South Korea. Through the approximate Bayesian computation, we inferred the likely invasion scenario of burcucumber in Korea. The landscape genetics approach adopting the circuit theory and MaxEnt model was applied to determine the landscape contributors. Our data suggested that most populations have experienced population bottlenecks, which led to lowered within-population genetic diversity and inflated population divergences. Burcucumber colonization in Korea has strongly been affected by demographic bottlenecks and multiple introductions, whereas environmental factors were not the primary determinant of the invasion. Our work highlighted the significance of preventing secondary introductions, particularly for aggressive weedy plants such as the burcucumber.

propagule pressure: !affects! Burcucumber invasion
dispersal ability: !affects! Burcucumber invasion
environmental constraints: !affects! Burcucumber invasion
human interventions: !affects! Burcucumber invasion
genetic diversity: !informs! Invasion pattern
demography: !informs! Invasion pattern
spread pattern: !informs! Invasion pattern
SNPs: !assess! Diversity level
river basins: !contain! 24 populations
ABC: !infer! Invasion scenario
circuit theory: !determine! Landscape contributors
MaxEnt model: !determine! Landscape contributors
population bottlenecks: !lower! Within-population genetic diversity
population bottlenecks: !inflate! Population divergences
environmental factors: !not primary determinant! Of invasion