Zhengdan 958 (ZD958) is the summer maize variety with the widest planting area in Huang-Huai-Hai plain in the past 20 years. Understanding the agronomic characteristics of maize and its adaptability to climatic factors is of great significance for breeding maize varieties with high yield and stability. In this study, the experimental data of 33 experimental stations from 2005 to 2015 were analyzed to clarify the effects of different agronomic traits on yield and the correlation between agronomic traits, and to understand the effects of different climatic factors on summer maize yield and agronomic traits. The results showed that the average yield of ZD958 was 9.20 t ha<sup>-1</sup>, and the yield variation coefficient was 13.41%. There was a certainly negative correlation between high yield and high stability. Plant heights, ear heights, double ear rate, ear length, ear rows, line grain number, grain number per ear, ear diameter, cob diameter, and 1000 grains weight were significantly positive correlation with maize yield. Solar radiation before and after silking were significantly positive correlation with maize yield. Path analysis showed that changes in agronomic traits accounted for 54% of the yield variation, and changes in climate factors accounted for 26% of the yield variation. Our study showed that higher plant height, ear height, grain number per ear and 1000-grain weight, lower lodging rate, pour the discount rate and shorter bald tip long were the main reasons for high yield. Among the climatic factors, solar radiation and the lowest temperature have significant effects on the yield.

ZD958: !yields! 9.20 t ha<sup>-1</sup>
plant height: !correlates with! yield
ear height: !correlates with! yield
double ear rate: !correlates with! yield
ear length: !correlates with! yield
ear rows: !correlates with! yield
line grain number: !correlates with! yield
grain number per ear: !correlates with! yield
ear diameter: !correlates with! yield
cob diameter: !correlates with! yield
1000 grains weight: !correlates with! yield
solar radiation before silking: !correlates with! yield
solar radiation after silking: !correlates with! yield
agronomic traits: !account for! 54% of yield variation
climate factors: !account for! 26% of yield variation
lodging rate: !inversely correlates with! yield
pour the discount rate: !inversely correlates with! yield
bald tip long: !inversely correlates with! yield
solar radiation: !affects! yield
lowest temperature: !affects