Ginseng is an important medicinal plant benefiting human health for thousands of years. Root disease is the main cause of ginseng yield loss. It is difficult to detect ginseng root disease by manual observation on the changes of leaves, as it takes a long time until symptoms appear on leaves after the infection on roots. In order to detect root diseases at early stages and limit their further spread, an efficient and non-destructive testing (NDT) method is urgently needed. Hyperspectral remote sensing technology was performed in this study to discern whether ginseng roots were diseased. Hyperspectral reflectance of leaves at 325-1,075 nm were collected from the ginsengs with no symptoms on leaves at visual. These spectra were divided into healthy and diseased groups according to the symptoms on roots after harvest. The hyperspectral data were used to construct machine learning classification models including random forest, extreme random tree (ET), adaptive boosting and gradient boosting decision tree respectively to identify diseased ginsengs, while calculating the vegetation indices and analyzing the region of specific spectral bands. The precision rates of the ET model preprocessed by savitzky golay method for the identification of healthy and diseased ginsengs reached 99% and 98%, respectively. Combined with the preliminary analysis of band importance, vegetation indices and physiological characteristics, 690-726 nm was screened out as a specific band for early detection of ginseng root diseases. Therefore, underground root diseases can be effectively detected at an early stage by leaf hyperspectral reflectance. The NDT method for early detection of ginsengs root diseases is proposed in this study. The method is helpful in the prevention and control of root diseases of ginsengs to prevent the reduction of ginseng yield.

Hyperspectral: !detects! Root Disease 
Machine Learning: !identifies! Diseased Ginsengs 
Vegetation Indices: !analyzes! Region of Specific Spectral Bands 
ET Model: !reaches! Precision Rates of 99% and 98% 
690-726 nm: !screens out as! Specific Band for Early Detection