Fructokinase (FRK) activates fructose through phosphorylation, which sends the activated fructose into primary metabolism and regulates fructose signaling capabilities in plants. The apple (Malus × domestica) FRK gene MdFRK2 shows especially high affinity to fructose, and its overexpression decreases fructose levels in the leaves of young plants. However, in the current study of mature plants, fruits of transgenic apple trees overexpressing MdFRK2 accumulated a higher level of fructose than wild-type (WT) fruits (at both young and mature stages). Transgenic apple trees with high mRNA MdFRK2 expression showed no significant differences in MdFRK2 protein abundance or FRK enzyme activity compared to WT in mature leaves, young fruits, and mature fruits. Immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry analysis identified an skp1, cullin, F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin ligase, calcyclin-binding protein (CacyBP), that interacted with MdFRK2. RNA-sequencing analysis provided evidence for ubiquitin-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of MdFRK2 protein for the maintenance of fructose homeostasis in mature leaves and fruits. Further analyses suggested an MdCacyBP-MdFRK2 regulatory module, in which MdCacyBP interacts with and ubiquitinates MdFRK2 to facilitate its degradation by the 26S proteasome, thus decreasing the FRK enzyme activity to elevate fructose concentration in transgenic apple trees. This result uncovered an important mechanism underlying plant fructose homeostasis in different organs through regulating the MdFRK2 protein level via ubiquitination and degradation. Our study provides usable data for the future improvement of apple flavor and expands our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying plant fructose content and signaling regulation.

Fructokinase (FRK): !activates! fructose
MdFRK2: !decreases! fructose levels in leaves of young plants
MdFRK2: !increases! fructose levels in fruits of mature plants
SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase: !interacts with! MdFRK2
MdCacyBP: !interacts with! MdFRK2
MdCacyBP: !ubiquitinates! MdFRK2
MdCacyBP-MdFRK2: !regulates! fructose homeostasis