A potential solution for recycling and reusing the massively produced sewage water (SW) is to irrigate certain plants instead of highly cost recycling treatment. Although the extensive and irrational application of SW may cause environmental pollution thus, continual monitoring of the redox status of the receiver plant and the feedback on its growth under application becomes an emergent instance. The impact of SW, along with well water (WW) irrigation of medicinal plant, Datura innoxia, was monitored by some physio-biochemical indices. The SW application amplified the growth, yield, minerals uptake, and quality of D. innoxia plants compared to the WW irrigated plants. The total chlorophyll, carotenoid, non-enzymatic antioxidants, viz. anthocyanin, flavonoids, phenolic compounds, and total alkaloids increased by 85, 38, 81, 50, 19, and 37%, respectively, above WW irrigated plants. The experiment terminated in enhanced leaf content of N, P, and K by 43, 118, and 48%, respectively. Moreover, stimulation of carbon and nitrogen metabolites in terms of proteins, soluble sugars, nitrate reductase (NR) activity, and nitric oxide (NO) content showed significant earliness in flowering time. The SW application improved not only Datura plants' quality but also soil quality. After four weeks of irrigation, the WW irrigated plants encountered nutrient deficiency-induced stress evidenced by the high level of proline, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and MDA as well as high enzyme capabilities. Application of SW for irrigation of D. innoxia plant showed the improvement of secondary metabolites regulating enzyme phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL), restored proline content, and cell redox status reflecting high optimal condition for efficient cellular metabolism and performance along the experiment duration. These evidences approved the benefits of practicing SW to improve the yield and quality of D. innoxia and the feasibility of generalization on multipurpose plants grown in poor soil.

SW: !improves! D. innoxia plants
SW: !amplifies! growth
SW: !increases! minerals uptake
SW: !enhances! leaf content of N, P, K
SW: !stimulates! carbon and nitrogen metabolites
SW: !restores! proline content
SW: !regulates! enzyme PAL
WW: !induces! nutrient deficiency-induced stress
WW: !causes! high level of proline, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, MDA