['36464707', 'BACKGROUND: N-3-oxo-tetradecanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (oxo-C14-HSL) is one of  the N-acyl homoserine lactones (AHL) that mediate quorum sensing in Gram-negative  bacteria. In addition to bacterial communication, AHL are involved in  interactions with eukaryotes. Short-chain AHL are easily taken up by plants and  transported over long distances. They promote root elongation and growth. Plants  typically do not uptake hydrophobic long sidechain AHL such as oxo-C14-HSL,  although they prime plants for enhanced resistance to biotic and abiotic stress.  Many studies have focused on priming effects of oxo-C14-HSL for enhanced plant  resistance to stress. However, specific plant factors mediating oxo-C14-HSL  responses in plants remain unexplored. Here, we identify the Arabidopsis protein  ALI1 as a mediator of oxo-C14-HSL-induced priming in plants. RESULTS: We compared  oxo-C14-HSL-induced priming between wild-type Arabidopsis Col-0 and an  oxo-C14-HSL insensitive mutant ali1. The function of the candidate protein ALI1  was assessed through biochemical, genetic, and physiological approaches to  investigate if the loss of the ALI1 gene resulted in subsequent loss of AHL  priming. Through different assays, including MAP kinase activity assay, gene  expression and transcriptome analysis, and pathogenicity assays, we revealed a  loss of AHL priming in ali1. This phenomenon was reverted by the reintroduction  of ALI1 into ali1. We also investigated the interaction between ALI1 protein and  oxo-C14-HSL using biochemical and biophysical assays. Although biophysical assays  did not reveal an interaction between oxo-C14-HSL and ALI1, a pull-down assay and  an indirect method employing biosensor E. coli LuxCDABE support such interaction.  We expressed fluorescently tagged ALI1 in tobacco leaves to assess the  localization of ALI1 and demonstrate that ALI1 colocalizes with the plasma  membrane, tonoplast, and endoplasmic reticulum. CONCLUSIONS: These results  suggest that the candidate protein ALI1 is indispensable for  oxo-C14-HSL-dependent priming for enhanced resistance in Arabidopsis and that the  ALI1 protein may interact with oxo-C14-HSL. Furthermore, ALI1 protein is  localized in the cell periphery. Our findings advance the understanding of  interactions between plants and bacteria and provide an avenue to explore desired  outcomes such as enhanced stress resistance, which is useful for sustainable crop  protection.', '2022 Dec 5', 'BMC Biol', '10.1186/s12915-022-01464-3', 'ORCID:']

oxo-C14-HSL: !interacts with! ALI1
ALI1: !mediates! oxo-C14-HSL-induced priming
ALI1: !localizes to! plasma membrane, tonoplast, endoplasmic reticulum
oxo-C14-HSL: !enhances! plant resistance to stress