Oomycete pathogens secrete numerous effectors to manipulate plant immunity and promote infection. However, relatively few effector types have been well characterized. In this study, members of an FYVE domain-containing protein family that are highly expanded in oomycetes were systematically identified, and one secreted protein, PsFYVE1, was selected for further study. PsFYVE1 enhanced Phytophthora capsici infection in Nicotiana benthamiana and was necessary for Phytophthora sojae virulence. The FYVE domain of PsFYVE1 had PI3P-binding activity that depended on four conserved amino acid residues. Furthermore, PsFYVE1 targeted RNA-binding proteins RZ-1A/1B/1C in N. benthamiana and soybean (Glycine max), and silencing of NbRZ-1A/1B/1C genes attenuated plant immunity. NbRZ-1A was associated with the spliceosome complex that included three important components, glycine-rich RNA-binding protein 7 (NbGRP7), glycine-rich RNA-binding protein 8 (NbGRP8), and a specific component of the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex (NbU1-70K). Notably, PsFYVE1 disrupted NbRZ-1A-NbGRP7 interaction. RNA-seq and subsequent experimental analysis demonstrated that PsFYVE1 and NbRZ-1A not only modulated pre-mRNA alternative splicing (AS) of the necrotic spotted lesions 1 (NbNSL1) gene, but also co-regulated transcription of hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA shikimate/quinate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase (NbHCT), ethylene insensitive 2 (NbEIN2), and sucrose synthase 4 (NbSUS4) genes, which participate in plant immunity. Collectively, these findings indicate that the FYVE domain-containing protein family includes potential uncharacterized effector types and also highlight that plant pathogen effectors can regulate plant immunity-related genes at both AS and transcription levels to promote disease.

PsFYVE1: !enhances! Phytophthora capsici infection
PsFYVE1: !targets! RNA-binding proteins RZ-1A/1B/1C
PsFYVE1: !disrupts! NbRZ-1A-NbGRP7 interaction
PsFYVE1: !modulates! pre-mRNA alternative splicing
PsFYVE1: !co-regulates! transcription of immunity-related genes