Drought is one of the main causes of losses in forage crop yield and animal production. Medicago ruthenica (L.) cv. Zhilixing is a high-yielding alfalfa cultivar also known for its high tolerance to drought. We analyzed the transcriptome profile of this cultivar throughout drought stress and recovery and we were able to describe its phased response through the expression profiles of overlapping gene networks and drought-specific genes. The ABA and auxin signal transduction pathways are overlapping pathways in response to drought and drought recovery in forage crops. Medicago ruthenica (L.) cv. Zhilixing adopts different strategies at different degrees of drought stress. On the 9th day of drought, transcriptional regulations related to osmoregulation are enhanced mainly through increased activities of carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, while photosynthetic activities were reduced to slow down growth. With drought prolonging, on the 12th day of drought, the synthesis of proline and other stored organic substances was suppressed in general. After recovery, Medicago ruthenica synthesizes flavonoids through the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway to remove accumulated ROS and repair the oxidative damage from water stress. In addition, the regulation of circadian rhythm seems to accelerate the drought recovery process. Medicago ruthenica adapts to drought by regulating the osmoregulatory system and photosynthesis, which appears to involve the ABA and auxin signaling pathways as key regulators. Furthermore, the synthesis of flavonoids and the regulation of the circadian rhythm can accelerate the recovery process. These results enriched our knowledge of molecular responses to drought and drought recovery in Medicago ruthenica and provide useful information for the development of new legume forage grass varieties with improved adaptability to drought stress.

ABA: !regulates! Osmoregulation
Auxin: !regulates! Osmoregulation
Carbohydrate metabolism: !enhances! Osmoregulation
Amino acid metabolism: !enhances! Osmoregulation
Photosynthesis: !reduces! Growth
Proline synthesis: !suppresses! General synthesis
Flavonoid biosynthesis pathway: !synthesizes! Flavonoids
Circadian rhythm: !regulates! Drought recovery