Leaf color mutants are ideal materials to study pigment metabolism and photosynthesis. Leaf color variations are mainly affected by chlorophylls (Chls) and carotenoid contents and chloroplast development in higher plants. However, the regulation of chlorophyll metabolism remains poorly understood in many plant species. The chloroplast signal-recognition particle system is responsible for the insertion of the light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b proteins (LHCPs) to thylakoid membranes, which controls the chloroplast development as well as the regulation of Chls biosynthesis post-translationally in higher plants. In this study, the yellow leaf cucumber mutant, named yl, was found in an EMS-induced mutant library, which exhibited a significantly reduced chlorophyll content, abnormal chloroplast ultrastructure and decreased photosynthetic capacity. Genetic analysis demonstrated that the phenotype of yl was controlled by a recessive nuclear gene. Using BSA-seq technology combined with the map-based cloning method, we narrowed the locus to a 100 kb interval in chromosome 3. Linkage analysis and allelism test validated the candidate SNP residing in CsaV3_3G009150 encoding one homolog of chloroplast signal-recognition particle (cpSRP) receptor in Arabidopsis, cpFtsY, could be responsible for the yellow leaf phenotype of yl. The relative expression of CscpFtsY was significantly down-regulated in different organs except for the stem, of yl compared with that in the wild type (WT). Subcellular localization result showed that CscpFtsY located in the chloroplasts of mesophyll cells. The yl mutant displayed Chls-deficient, impaired chloroplast ultrastructure with intermittent grana stacks and significantly decreased photosynthetic capacity. The isolation of CscpFtsY in cucumber could accelerate the progress on chloroplast development by cpSRP-dependant LHCP delivery system and regulation of Chls biosynthesis in a post-translational way.

Leaf color mutants: !affects! Pigment metabolism 
Chlorophylls: !controls! Chloroplast development 
Chloroplast signal-recognition particle system: !responsible for! Insertion of light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b proteins 
CsaV3_3G009150: !encodes! Homolog of chloroplast signal-recognition particle receptor 
CscpFtsY: !localizes to! Chloroplasts 
CscpFtsY: !represses! Chlorophyll content 
CscpFtsY: !impairs! Chloroplast ultrastructure 
CscpFtsY: !decreases! Photosynthetic capacity