Cyclic electron transport (CET) around photosystem I (PSI) acidifies the thylakoid lumen and downregulates electron transport at the cytochrome b6f complex. This photosynthetic control is essential for oxidizing special pair chlorophylls (P700) of PSI for PSI photoprotection. In addition, CET depending on the PROTON GRADIENT REGULATION 5 (PGR5) protein oxidizes P700 by moving a pool of electrons from the acceptor side of PSI to the plastoquinone pool. This model of the acceptor-side regulation was proposed on the basis of the phenotype of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) pgr5-1 mutant expressing Chlamydomonas (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) plastid terminal oxidase (CrPTOX2). In this study, we extended the research including the Arabidopsis chlororespiratory reduction 2-2 (crr2-2) mutant defective in another CET pathway depending on the chloroplast NADH dehydrogenase-like (NDH) complex. Although the introduction of CrPTOX2 did not complement the defect in the acceptor-side regulation by PGR5, the function of the NDH complex was complemented except for its reverse reaction during the induction of photosynthesis. We evaluated the impact of CrPTOX2 under fluctuating light intensity in the wild-type, pgr5-1 and crr2-2 backgrounds. In the high-light period, both PGR5- and NDH-dependent CET were involved in the induction of photosynthetic control whereas PGR5-dependent CET preferentially contributed to the acceptor-side regulation. On the contrary, the NDH complex probably contributed to the acceptor-side regulation in the low-light but not in the high-light period. We evaluated the sensitivity of PSI to fluctuating light and clarified that acceptor-side regulation was necessary for PSI photoprotection by oxidizing P700 under high light.

PGR5: !oxidizes! P700 
CrPTOX2: !introduced to! pgr5-1 mutant 
CrPTOX2: !did not complement! acceptor-side regulation 
NDH complex: !complemented! crr2-2 mutant 
PGR5-dependent CET: !involved in! induction of photosynthetic control 
NDH complex: !contributed to! acceptor-side regulation 
acceptor-side regulation: !necessary for! PSI photoprotection