GRAS genes formed one of the important transcription factor gene families in plants, had been identified in several plant species. The family genes were involved in plant growth, development, and stress resistance. However, the comparative analysis of GRAS genes in Rosaceae species was insufficient. In this study, a total of 333 GRAS genes were identified in six Rosaceae species, including 51 in strawberry (Fragaria vesca), 78 in apple (Malus domestica), 41 in black raspberry (Rubus occidentalis), 59 in European pear (Pyrus communis), 56 in Chinese rose (Rosa chinensis), and 48 in peach (Prunus persica). Motif analysis showed the VHIID domain, SAW motif, LR I region, and PFYRE motif were considerably conserved in the six Rosaceae species. All GRAS genes were divided into 10 subgroups according to phylogenetic analysis. A total of 15 species-specific duplicated clades and 3 lineage-specific duplicated clades were identified in six Rosaceae species. Chromosomal localization presented the uneven distribution of GRAS genes in six Rosaceae species. Duplication events contributed to the expression of the GRAS genes, and Ka/Ks analysis suggested the purification selection as a major force during the evolution process in six Rosaceae species. Cis-acting elements and GO analysis revealed that most of the GRAS genes were associated with various environmental stress in six Rosaceae species. Coexpression network analysis showed the mutual regulatory relationship between GRAS and bZIP genes, suggesting the ability of the GRAS gene to regulate abiotic stress in woodland strawberry. The expression pattern elucidated the transcriptional levels of FvGRAS genes in various tissues and the drought and salt stress in woodland strawberry, which were verified by RT-qPCR analysis. The evolution and functional analysis of GRAS genes provided insights into the further understanding of GRAS genes on the abiotic stress of Rosaceae species.

GRAS genes: !involved in! plant growth, development, and stress resistance
GRAS genes: !conserved in! six Rosaceae species
GRAS genes: !divided into! 10 subgroups
GRAS genes: !unevenly distributed on! chromosomes
GRAS genes: !influenced by! duplication events
GRAS genes: !associated with! environmental stress
GRAS genes: !regulate! bZIP genes
GRAS genes: !expressed in! various tissues
GRAS genes: !respond to! drought and salt stress