Downy mildew of foxtail millet, which is caused by the biotrophic oomycete Sclerospora graminicola (Sacc.) Schroeter, is one of the most disruptive diseases. The foxtail millet-S. graminicola interaction is largely unexplored. Transcriptome sequencing technology can help to reveal the interaction mechanism between foxtail millet and its pathogens. Transmission electron microscopy observations of leaves infected with S. graminicola showed that the structures of organelles in the host cells gradually became deformed and damaged, or even disappeared from the 3- to 7-leaf stages. However, organelles in the leaves of resistant variety were rarely damaged. Moreover, the activities of seven cell wall degrading enzymes in resistant and susceptible varieties were also quite different after pathogen induction and most of enzymes activities were significantly higher in the susceptible variety JG21 than in the resistant variety G1 at all stages. Subsequently, we compared the transcriptional profiles between the G1 and JG21 in response to S. graminicola infection at 3-, 5-, and 7-leaf stages using RNA-Seq technology. A total of 473 and 1433 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the resistant and susceptible varieties, respectively. The pathway analysis of the DEGs showed that the highly enriched categories were related to glutathione metabolism, plant hormone signalling, phenylalanine metabolism, and cutin, suberin and wax biosynthesis. Some defence-related genes were also revealed in the DEGs, including leucine-rich protein kinase, Ser/Thr protein kinase, peroxidase, cell wall degrading enzymes, laccases and auxin response genes. Our results also confirmed the linkage of transcriptomic data with qRT-PCR data. In particular, LRR protein kinase encoded by Seita.8G131800, Ser/Thr protein kinase encoded by Seita.2G024900 and Seita. 2G024800, which have played an essential resistant role during the infection by S. graminicola. Transcriptome sequencing revealed that host resistance to S. graminicola was likely due to the activation of defence-related genes, such as leucine-rich protein kinase and Ser/Thr protein kinase. Our study identified pathways and genes that contribute to the understanding of the interaction between foxtail millet and S. graminicola at the transcriptomic level. The results will help us better understand the resistance mechanism of foxtail millet against S. graminicola.

Organelles: !damaged in! susceptible variety
Enzymes: !higher activity in! susceptible variety
DEGs: !identified in! resistant and susceptible varieties
Glutathione metabolism: !related to! DEGs
Plant hormone signalling: !related to! DEGs
Phenylalanine metabolism: !related to! DEGs
Cutin, suberin and wax biosynthesis: !related to! DEGs
Leucine-rich protein kinase: !encoded by! Seita.8G131800
Ser/Thr protein kinase: !encoded by! Seita.2G024900 & Seita.2G024800
Host resistance: !activated by! defence-related genes