Pomegranate (Punica granatum) flowers are classified as bisexual flowers and functional male flowers. Functional male flowers have sterile pistils that show abnormal ovule development. In previous studies, we identified INNER NO OUTER (INO), CRABS CLAW (CRC), and BELL1 (BEL1), which were specifically expressed in bisexual and functional male flowers. However, the functions of ovule identity genes and the mechanism underlying ovule sterility in pomegranate remain unknown. Here, we found that the integument primordia formed and then ceased developing in the ovules of functional male flowers with a vertical diameter of 8.1-13.0 mm. Megaspore mother cells were observed in bisexual flowers when the vertical diameters of flowers were 10.1-13.0 mm, but not in functional male flowers. We analyzed the expression patterns of ovule-related genes in pomegranate ovule sterility and found that PgCRC mRNA was highly expressed at a critical stage of ovule development in bisexual flowers. Ectopic expression of PgCRC and PgINO was sufficient to increase seed number in transgenic lines. PgCRC partially complemented the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) crc mutant, and PgINO successfully rescued the seeds set in the Arabidopsis ino mutant. The results of yeast two-hybrid assays, bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays, and genetic data analyses showed that PgCRC and PgINO directly interact with PgBEL1. Our results also showed that PgCRC and PgINO could not interact directly with MADS-box proteins and that PgBEL1 interacted with SEPALLATA proteins. We report the function of PgCRC and PgINO in ovule and seed development and show that PgCRC and PgINO interact with PgBEL1. Thus, our results provide understanding of the genetic regulatory networks underlying ovule development in pomegranate.

PgCRC: !interacts with! PgBEL1
PgINO: !interacts with! PgBEL1
PgCRC: !enhances! seed number
PgINO: !enhances! seed number
PgCRC: !complements! Arabidopsis crc mutant
PgINO: !rescues! Arabidopsis ino mutant
PgCRC: !synthesizes! ovule development
PgINO: !synthesizes! ovule development