To explore the molecular mechanisms of the antifungal compound phenazine-1-carboxamide (PCN) inhibits <i>Rhizoctonia solani</i> and discover potential targets of action, we performed an integrated analysis of transcriptome and metabolome in <i>R. solani</i> mycelium by whether PCN treating or not. A total of 511 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between the PCN treatment and control groups. The fluorescence-based quantitative PCR (qPCR) got the accordant results of the gene expression trends for ten randomly selected DEGs. The Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis revealed that fatty acid metabolic process, fatty acid oxidation, and lipid oxidation were among the most enriched in the biological process category, while integral component of membrane, plasma membrane, and extracellular region were among the most enriched in the cellular component category and oxidoreductase activity, cofactor binding, and coenzyme binding were among the most enriched in the molecular function category. KEGG enrichment analysis revealed the most prominently enriched metabolic pathways included ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, nitrogen metabolism, aminobenzoate degradation. The DEGs related functions of cellular structures, cell membrane functions, cellular nutrition, vacuole-mitochondrion membrane contact site and ATPase activity, pH, anti-oxidation, were downregulated. A total of 466 differential metabolites were found between the PCN treatment and control groups after PCN treatment. KEGG enrichment found purine, arachidonic acid, and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathways were mainly affected. Further results proved PCN decreased the mycelial biomass and protein content of <i>R. solani</i>, and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity reduced while peroxidase (POD) and cytochrome P450 activities increased. The molecule docking indicted that NADPH nitrite reductase, ATP-binding cassette transporter, alpha/beta hydrolase family domain-containing protein, and NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase maybe the particular target of PCN. In conclusion, the mechanisms <i>via</i> which PCN inhibits <i>R. solani</i> AG1IA may be related to cell wall damage, cell membrane impairment, intracellular nutrient imbalance, disturbed antioxidant system, and altered intracellular pH, which laid foundation for the further new compound designing to improve antifungal efficacy.

Gene: !affects! Expression 
Expression: !regulates! Metabolism 
Metabolism: !alters! Cellular Structures 
Cellular Structures: !impairs! Cell Membrane 
Cell Membrane: !disrupts! Nutrient Balance 
Nutrient Balance: !disturbs! Antioxidant System 
Antioxidant System: !changes! Intracellular pH 
PCN: !inhibits! R. solani 
Target: !binds to! PCN