Cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) is an important multiuse crop grown for economic and energy purposes. Its vegetative organs are storage roots, in which the main storage material is starch. The accumulation characteristics of starch in cassava roots can directly affect the yield, starch content and maturation of cassava storage roots. In this study, we used a cassava sexual tetraploid (ST), which showed early maturation heterosis in previous work, as the main test material. We analyzed the sucrose metabolism and starch accumulation characteristics of the ST and its parents from the leaf "source" to the storage root "sink" during different developmental stages and explored the regulatory mechanisms of ST storage root early maturation by combining the transcriptome data of the storage roots during the expansion period. The results showed that the trends in sucrose, glucose and fructose contents in the ST leaves were similar to those of the two parents during different stages of development, but the trends in the ST storage roots were significantly different from those of their parents, which showed high sucrose utilization rates during the early stage of development and decreased utilization capacity in the late developmental stage. Transcriptome data showed that the genes that were expressed differentially between ST and its parents were mainly involved in the degradation and utilization of sucrose in the storage roots, and four key enzyme genes were significantly upregulated (Invertase MeNINV8/MeVINV3, Sucrose synthase MeSuSy2, Hexokinase MeHXK2), while the expressions of key enzyme genes involved in starch synthesis were not significantly different. The results revealed that the pattern of sucrose degradation and utilization in the cassava ST was different from that of its parents and promoted early maturation in its tuberous roots. Starch accumulation in the ST from sucrose mainly occurred during the early expansion stage of the storage roots, and the starch content during this period was higher than that of both parents, mainly due to the regulation of invertase and hexokinase activities during sucrose metabolism. This study provides a basis for further genetic improvements to cassava traits and for breeding varieties that mature early and are adapted well to provide starch supply requirements.

Invertase: !enhances! Early maturation
Sucrose synthase: !enhances! Early maturation
Hexokinase: !enhances! Early maturation
Invertase: !promotes! Starch accumulation
Hexokinase: !promotes! Starch accumulation