All biological functions evolve by fixing beneficial mutations and removing deleterious ones. Therefore, continuously fixing and removing the same essential function to separately diverge monophyletic gene families sounds improbable. Yet, here we report that brassinosteroid insensitive1 kinase inhibitor1 (BKI1)/membrane-associated kinase regulators (MAKRs) regulating a diverse function evolved into BKI1 and MAKR families from a common ancestor by respectively enhancing and losing ability to bind brassinosteroid receptor brassinosteroid insensitive1 (BRI1). The BKI1 family includes BKI1, MAKR1/BKI1-like (BKL) 1, and BKL2, while the MAKR family contains MAKR2-6. Seedless plants contain only BKL2. In seed plants, MAKR1/BKL1 and MAKR3, duplicates of BKL2, gained and lost the ability to bind BRI1, respectively. In angiosperms, BKL2 lost the ability to bind BRI1 to generate MAKR2, while BKI1 and MAKR6 were duplicates of MAKR1/BKL1 and MAKR3, respectively. In dicots, MAKR4 and MAKR5 were duplicates of MAKR3 and MAKR2, respectively. Importantly, BKI1 localized in the plasma membrane, but BKL2 localized to the nuclei while MAKR1/BKL1 localized throughout the whole cell. Importantly, BKI1 strongly and MAKR1/BKL1 weakly inhibited plant growth, but BKL2 and the MAKR family did not inhibit plant growth. Functional study of the chimeras of their N- and C-termini showed that only the BKI1 family was partially reconstructable, supporting stepwise evolution by a seesaw mechanism between their C- and N-termini to alternately gain an ability to bind and inhibit BRI1, respectively. Nevertheless, the C-terminal BRI1-interacting motif best defines the divergence of BKI1/MAKRs. Therefore, BKI1 and MAKR families evolved by gradually gaining and losing the same function, respectively, extremizing divergent evolution and adding insights into gene (BKI1/MAKR) duplication and divergence.

BKI1: !enhances! BRI1 binding
MAKRs: !loses! BRI1 binding
BKI1: !localizes to! plasma membrane
BKL2: !localizes to! nuclei
MAKR1/BKL1: !localizes to! whole cell
BKI1: !inhibits! plant growth
BKL2: !does not inhibit! plant growth
MAKR family: !does not inhibit! plant growth