Diazotrophic bacteria isolated from the rhizosphere of a wild wheat ancestor, grown from its refuge area in the Fertile Crescent, were found to be efficient Plant Growth-Promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR), upon interaction with an elite wheat cultivar. In nitrogen-starved plants, they increased the amount of nitrogen in the seed crop (per plant) by about twofold. A bacterial growth medium was developed to investigate the effects of bacterial exudates on root development in the elite cultivar, and to analyze the exo-metabolomes and exo-proteomes. Altered root development was observed, with distinct responses depending on the strain, for instance, with respect to root hair development. A first conclusion from these results is that the ability of wheat to establish effective beneficial interactions with PGPRs does not appear to have undergone systematic deep reprogramming during domestication. Exo-metabolome analysis revealed a complex set of secondary metabolites, including nutrient ion chelators, cyclopeptides that could act as phytohormone mimetics, and quorum sensing molecules having inter-kingdom signaling properties. The exo-proteome-comprised strain-specific enzymes, and structural proteins belonging to outer-membrane vesicles, are likely to sequester metabolites in their lumen. Thus, the methodological processes we have developed to collect and analyze bacterial exudates have revealed that PGPRs constitutively exude a highly complex set of metabolites; this is likely to allow numerous mechanisms to simultaneously contribute to plant growth promotion, and thereby to also broaden the spectra of plant genotypes (species and accessions/cultivars) with which beneficial interactions can occur.

Diazotrophic bacteria: !interact with! elite wheat cultivar 
Bacteria: !increase! nitrogen in seed crop 
Bacterial exudates: !alter! root development 
Exo-metabolome: !contain! nutrient ion chelators, cyclopeptides, quorum sensing molecules 
Exo-proteome: !comprise! strain-specific enzymes, structural proteins 
Metabolites: !allow! plant growth promotion 
PGPRs: !broaden! spectra of plant genotypes