Orchids have evolved various strategies that aim to ensure their reproduction success. These may include the production of rewards for pollinators, or on the contrary, deception. Specific sets of features such as flower morphology, color, nectar, and odor presence (or lack thereof) are considered to determine suitability for pollination by different groups of animals. Stingless bees are thought to be the primary pollinators of the orchids of the Neotropical subtribe Maxillariinae. However, almost black flowered Brasiliorchis schunkeana at first glance presents floral adaptations that may suggest another pollination syndrome-sapromyophily. A few traces of secretion were noticed on the glabrous lip callus and lip apex built by conical to villiform papillae (SEM analysis). Histochemical studies revealed huge amounts of lipids in the epidermis, subepidermis, and some parenchyma cells (SBB test) with various stages of lipids accumulation between cells. Further TEM analysis showed a heterogeneous (lipoid and phenolic) nature of secretion. The dense osmiophilic cytoplasm contained organelles (RER, free ribosomes, dictyosomes, plastids with plastoglobuli, nucleus) and vesicles migrating to plasmalemma. The vesicles, osmiophilic globules, and flocculent material were visible in periplasmic space. The central vacuole possessed osmiophilic phenolic content and flocculent material. GC-MS analysis revealed in floral extract the presence of 7,9-di-tert-butyl-1-oxaspiro(4,5)deca-6,9-diene-2,8-dione (77.06%) and 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-benzoquinone (16.65%). Both compounds are known for their biological activity. The juxtaposition of results led us to the conclusion that the labellar tissue produces lipoid and phenolic material, which is responsible for the glossiness and rotten herring scent. This type of secretion could be classified as a phenolic resin. The chemical analysis revealed the presence of five semiochemicals that are known to be attractants for some Diptera, which together with the rest of the results constitutes a strong premise that representatives of this order could be potential pollinators of B. schunkeana. Field observations however are still needed to confirm this pollination syndrome.

B. schunkeana: !produces! lipoid and phenolic material 
lipoid and phenolic material: !attracts! Diptera 
Diptera: !potential pollinators of! B. schunkeana 
SEM analysis: !revealed! traces of secretion 
Histochemical studies: !showed! huge amounts of lipids 
TEM analysis: !showed! heterogeneous nature of secretion 
GC-MS analysis: !revealed! presence of semiochemicals