Gluten proteins are the major storage protein fraction in the mature wheat grain. They are restricted to the starchy endosperm, which defines the viscoelastic properties of wheat dough. The synthesis of these storage proteins is controlled by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is directed into the vacuole via the Golgi apparatus. In the present study, transcriptome analysis was used to explore the potential mechanism within critical stages of grain development of wheat cultivar "Shaannong 33" and its sister line used as the control (CK). Samples were collected at 10 DPA (days after anthesis), 14 DPA, 20 DPA, and 30 DPA for transcriptomic analysis. The comparative transcriptome analysis identified that a total of 18,875 genes were differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between grains of four groups "T10 vs. CK10, T14 vs. CK14, T20 vs. CK20, and T30 vs. CK30", including 2824 up-regulated and 5423 down-regulated genes in T30 vs. CK30. Further, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment highlighted the maximum number of genes regulating protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) during grain enlargement stages (10-20 DPA). In addition, KEGG database analysis reported 1362 and 788 DEGs involved in translation, ribosomal structure, biogenesis, flavonoid biosynthesis pathway and intracellular trafficking, secretion, and vesicular transport through protein processing within ER pathway (ko04141). Notably, consistent with the higher expression of intercellular storage protein trafficking genes at the initial 10 DPA, there was relatively low expression at later stages. Expression levels of nine randomly selected genes were verified by qRT-PCR, which were consistent with the transcriptome data. These data suggested that the initial stages of "cell division" played a significant role in protein quality control within the ER, thus maintaining the protein quality characteristics at grain maturity. Furthermore, our data suggested that the protein synthesis, folding, and trafficking pathways directed by a different number of genes during the grain enlargement stage contributed to the observed high-quality characteristics of gluten protein in Shaannong 33 (<i>Triticum aestivum</i> L.).

Gene: !affects! Protein processing 
Gene: !synthesizes! Storage proteins 
Gene: !localizes to! Endoplasmic reticulum 
Gene: !interacts with! Golgi apparatus 
Gene: !enhances! Translation 
Gene: !represses! Intracellular trafficking 
Gene: !synthesizes! Flavonoid biosynthesis pathway