Genotype by environment interaction (GEI) is a phenomenon that occurs in heterogeneous environments that slows breeding progress by preventing the selection of superior cultivars for breeding and commercialization. Therefore, the objectives of this study were to find out how GEI impacts soybean output and to identify the most adapted and stable genotypes. Moreover, to look at the possibility of other mega environments for testing in the future. The experiments were grown for two years in a four-replicated randomized block design at each environment. Over the course of several harvests, yield components, days to flowering, days to maturity, plant height, the number of pods per plants, the number of seeds per plant, hundred seed weight and grain yield per hectare were evaluated in the main for 2018 and 2019.To analyze the stability performance of the genotypes, general linear method, GGE and Additive main effect and multiplicative interaction effects analysis (AMMI) and ASV rank analysis were applied. The GGE biplot revealed that the GGE biplots explained 74.29% of the total variation distributed as,56.69% and 17.62% of sum of squares between principal component PC1 and PC2, respectively whereas, AMMI model, the first two interaction principal component axes (IPCA1 and IPCA2) explained 47.74% and 26.62% of the variation due to GEI, respectively, exposed genotypes identified the five as best performer. The results from the four distinct stability statistics AMMI biplot (G8, G2, G1, G11), ASV (G1, G11; (GSI; G9, G1, G11) and (GGE: G2, G8, G9) are taken into account together with the genotypes` grand mean. The genotypes JM-CLK/CRFD-15-SD (G8) and 5002T (G1), which rank among the best and have the highest seed output, are suitable for hybridization as a parent and commercial production. Therefore, genotypes JM-CLK/CRFD-15-SD (G8) and 5002T(G1) have the highest seed output were among the best and thus could be recommended for release as a new soybean varieties cultivation across.

Genotype: !affects! Environment 
Environment: !impacts! Soybean Output 
Genotype: !localizes to! Mega Environments 
Genotype: !interacts with! Yield Components 
Genotype: !enhances! Stability Performance 
Genotype: !represses! Breeding Progress 
Genotype: !synthesizes! Hybridization