At present, there are excessive fertilizer use and poor uniformity of fertilizer discharge in corn fertilizer planter. The key difficulty is that accurate perception and control of fertilizer amount has not been solved. Aiming at the above problems, a set of accurate perception and control system applied to corn fertilization planter was studied. According to the difference in dielectric properties between fertilizer and air, a sensor for online detection of fertilizer amount based on capacitance method was designed. And the relationship model of mass flow rate for N, P, K fertilizer and capacitance output was established. In order to reduce the influence of pulsation on fertilization flow, a high-precision fertilizer flow control system for fertilization planter based on the fertilizer flow feedback and PID control method was designed. The validated results showed that the maximum measurement error between the relationship model and capacitance output was 3.75%. As the temperature rises from room temperature to 55°C, the differential capacitance change rate of the sensor was less than 3%. The steady-state error of fertilizer discharge was less than 2%. The field experiment of the accurate perception and control system for corn fertilization amount show that the electric drive fertilization system has good consistency, the maximum and average variation coefficient of fertilization were 3.74%, 1.6%, respectively, and the variable control accuracy was greater than 97%. The control accuracy of the grain spacing control by electric drive seed metering was 98%. Therefore, the precision fertilization control system in this study can realize high-precision and on-demand fertilization. It is of great significance to realize the intelligence and precision for corn fertilization planter.

Sensor: !detects! Fertilizer
Model: !relates to! Capacitance Output
PID Control: !regulates! Fertilizer Flow
Sensor: !responds to! Temperature
Control System: !controls! Fertilizer Discharge
Control System: !controls! Grain Spacing