Deep learning has witnessed a significant improvement in recent years to recognize plant diseases by observing their corresponding images. To have a decent performance, current deep learning models tend to require a large-scale dataset. However, collecting a dataset is expensive and time-consuming. Hence, the limited data is one of the main challenges to getting the desired recognition accuracy. Although transfer learning is heavily discussed and verified as an effective and efficient method to mitigate the challenge, most proposed methods focus on one or two specific datasets. In this paper, we propose a novel transfer learning strategy to have a high performance for <i>versatile plant disease recognition</i>, on multiple plant disease datasets. Our transfer learning strategy differs from the current popular one due to the following factors. First, PlantCLEF2022, a large-scale dataset related to plants with 2,885,052 images and 80,000 classes, is utilized to pre-train a model. Second, we adopt a vision transformer (ViT) model, instead of a convolution neural network. Third, the ViT model undergoes transfer learning twice to save computations. Fourth, the model is first pre-trained in ImageNet with a self-supervised loss function and with a supervised loss function in PlantCLEF2022. We apply our method to 12 plant disease datasets and the experimental results suggest that our method surpasses the popular one by a clear margin for different dataset settings. Specifically, our proposed method achieves a mean testing accuracy of 86.29over the 12 datasets in a 20-shot case, 12.76 higher than the current state-of-the-art method's accuracy of 73.53. Furthermore, our method outperforms other methods in one plant growth stage prediction and the one weed recognition dataset. To encourage the community and related applications, we have made public our codes and pre-trained model.

Deep Learning: !improves! Recognition
Transfer Learning: !mitigates! Limited Data
PlantCLEF2022: !utilized to pre-train! Model
ViT Model: !adopted! Transfer Learning
ImageNet: !pre-trained with! Self-Supervised Loss Function
PlantCLEF2022: !pre-trained with! Supervised Loss Function
Method: !surpasses! Popular One
Method: !achieves! Mean Testing Accuracy
Method: !outperforms! Other Methods