Plants are rich repository of a large number of chemical compounds collectively referred to as specialized metabolites. These compounds are of importance for adaptive processes including responses against changing abiotic conditions and interactions with various co-existing organisms. One of the strikingly affirmed functions of these specialized metabolites is their involvement in plants' life-long interactions with complex multi-kingdom microbiomes including both beneficial and harmful microorganisms. Recent developments in genomic and molecular biology tools not only help to generate well-curated information about regulatory and structural components of biosynthetic pathways of plant specialized metabolites but also to create and screen mutant lines defective in their synthesis. In this review, we have comprehensively surveyed the function of these specialized metabolites and discussed recent research findings demonstrating the responses of various microbes on tested mutant lines having defective biosynthesis of particular metabolites. In addition, we attempt to provide key clues about the impact of these metabolites on the assembly of the plant microbiome by summarizing the major findings of recent comparative metagenomic analyses of available mutant lines under customized and natural microbial niches. Subsequently, we delineate benchmark initiatives that aim to engineer or manipulate the biosynthetic pathways to produce specialized metabolites in heterologous systems but also to diversify their immune function. While denoting the function of these metabolites, we also discuss the critical bottlenecks associated with understanding and exploiting their function in improving plant adaptation to the environment.

Gene: !affects! Biosynthesis of specialized metabolites 
Metabolites: !impact! Plant microbiome 
Mutant lines: !screened for! Defective biosynthesis of particular metabolites 
Comparative metagenomic analyses: !conducted on! Available mutant lines 
Biosynthetic pathways: !engineered or manipulated to! Produce specialized metabolites 
Specialized metabolites: !improve! Plant adaptation to the environment