The <i>Schisandra chinensis</i> is an important edible plant, and previous phytochemical research focused on the <i>S. chinensis</i> fruit (SF) due to its long history as traditional Chinese medicine. <i>Schisandra chinensis</i> fruit was used as an astringent tonic to astringe the lungs and the kidneys, replenish energy, promote the production of body fluids, tonify the kidney, and induce sedation. The components of <i>S. chinensis</i>, such as its stems (SS), leaves (SL), and roots (SR), have drawn little attention regarding their metabolites and bioactivities. In this study, a strategy of combining a chemical database with the Progenesis QI informatics platform was applied to characterize the metabolites. A total of 332 compounds were tentatively identified, including lignans, triterpenoids, flavonoids, tannins, and other compound classes. Heatmap and principal component analysis (PCA) showed remarkable differences in different parts of the plants. By multiple orthogonal partial least-squares discriminant analyses (OPLS-DA), 76 compounds were identified as potential marker compounds that differentiate these different plant parts. Based on the variable influence on the projection score from OPLS-DA, the active substances including gomisin D, schisandrol B, schisantherin C, kadsuranin, and kadlongilactone F supported the fact that the biological activity of the roots was higher than that of the fruit. These substances can be used as marker compounds in the plant roots, which likely contribute to their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. The plant roots could be a new medicinal source that exhibits better activity than that of traditional medicinal parts, which makes them worth exploring.

Schisandra chinensis: !used as! astringent tonic
Schisandra chinensis: !contains! lignans, triterpenoids, flavonoids, tannins
Schisandra chinensis: !differentiates! fruit, stems, leaves, roots
Schisandra chinensis: !exhibits! antioxidant, anti-inflammatory activities
Gomisin D: !localizes to! plant roots
Schisantherin C: !localizes to! plant roots
Kadsuranin: !localizes to! plant roots
Kadlongilactone F: !localizes to! plant roots
Gomisin D: !enhances! biological activity
Schisantherin C: !enhances! biological activity
Kadsuranin: !enhances! biological activity
Kadlongilactone F: !enhances! biological activity