Genetic markers can be linked with eco-physiological crop models to accurately predict genotype performance and individual markers' contributions in target environments, exploring interactions between genotype and environment. Here, wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) yield was dissected into seven traits corresponding to cultivar genetic coefficients in an eco-physiological model. Loci for these traits were discovered through the genome-wide association studies (GWAS). The cultivar genetic coefficients were derived from the loci using multiple linear regression or random forest, building a marker-based eco-physiological model. It is then applied to simulate wheat yields and design virtual ideotypes. The results indicated that the loci identified through GWAS explained 46%-75% variations in cultivar genetic coefficients. Using the marker-based model, the normalized root mean square error (nRMSE) between the simulated yield and observed yield was 13.95% by multiple linear regression and 13.62% by random forest. The nRMSE between the simulated and observed maturity dates was 1.24% by multiple linear regression and 1.11% by random forest, respectively. Structural equation modelling indicated that variations in grain yield could be well explained by cultivar genetic coefficients and phenological data. In addition, 24 pleiotropic loci in this study were detected on 15 chromosomes. More significant loci were detected by the model-based dissection method than considering yield per se. Ideotypes were identified by higher yield and more favourable alleles of cultivar genetic traits. This study proposes a genotype-to-phenotype approach and demonstrates novel ideas and tools to support the effective breeding of new cultivars with high yield through pyramiding favourable alleles and designing crop ideotypes.

Genetic markers: !linked to! eco-physiological crop models 
Loci: !identified through! GWAS 
Cultivar genetic coefficients: !derived from! loci 
Marker-based model: !applied to! simulate wheat yields 
Variations in grain yield: !explained by! cultivar genetic coefficients and phenological data 
Pleiotropic loci: !detected on! 15 chromosomes 
Favourable alleles: !pyramided for! higher yield