Ginseng polysaccharides, have been used to treat various diseases as an important active ingredient. Nevertheless, the biosynthesis of ginseng polysaccharides is poorly understood. To elucidate the biosynthesis mechanism of ginseng polysaccharides, combined the transcriptome analysis and polysaccharides content determination were performed on the roots, stems, and leaves collected from four cultivars of ginseng. The results indicated that the total contents of nine monosaccharides were highest in the roots. Moreover, the total content of nine monosaccharides in the roots of the four cultivars were different but similar in stems and leaves. Glucose (Glc) was the most component of all monosaccharides. In total, 19 potential enzymes synthesizing of ginseng polysaccharides were identified, and 17 enzymes were significantly associated with polysaccharides content. Among these genes, the expression of phosphoglucomutase (PGM), glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI), UTP-glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase (UGP2), fructokinase (scrK), mannose-1-phosphate guanylyltransferase (GMPP), phosphomannomutase (PMM), UDP-glucose 4-epimerase (GALE), beta-fructofuranosidase (sacA), and sucrose synthase (SUS) were correlated with that of MYB, AP2/ERF, bZIP, and NAC transcription factors (TFs). These TFs may regulate the expression of genes involved in ginseng polysaccharides synthesis. Our findings could provide insight into a better understanding of the regulatory mechanism of polysaccharides biosynthesis, and would drive progress in genetic improvement and plantation development of ginseng.

Ginseng polysaccharides: !synthesized by! 19 enzymes 
Phosphoglucomutase (PGM): !enhanced by! MYB 
Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI): !enhanced by! AP2/ERF 
UTP-glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase (UGP2): !enhanced by! bZIP 
Fructokinase (scrK): !enhanced by! NAC 
Mannose-1-phosphate guanylyltransferase (GMPP): !enhanced by! MYB 
Phosphomannomutase (PMM): !enhanced by! AP2/ERF 
UDP-glucose 4-epimerase (GALE): !enhanced by! bZIP 
Beta-fructofuranosidase (sacA): !enhanced by! NAC 
Sucrose synthase (SUS): !enhanced by! MYB