Ornamental trees with seasonally-dependent leaf color, such as Acer palmatum, have gained worldwide popularity. Leaf color is a main determinant of the ornamental and economic value of A. palmatum. However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for leaf color changes remain unclear. We chose A. palmatum cultivars with yellow ('Jinling Huangfeng') and red ('Jinling Danfeng') leaves as the ideal material for studying the complex metabolic networks responsible for variations in leaf coloration. The 24 libraries obtained from four different time points in the growth of 'Jinling Huangfeng' and 'Jinling Danfeng' was subjected to Illumina high-throughput sequencing. We observed that the difference in cyanidin and delphinidin content is the primary reason behind the varying coloration of the leaves. Transcriptomic analyses revealed 225,684 unigenes, and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) confirmed that they were involved in 'anthocyanin biosynthesis.' Eighteen structural genes involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis were thought to be related to anthocyanin accumulation, whereas 46 MYBs, 33 basic helix-loop-helixs (bHLHs), and 29 WD40s were presumed to be involved in regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis. Based on weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), three candidate genes (ApRHOMBOID, ApMAPK, and ApUNE10) were screened in the significant association module with a correlation coefficient (r<sup>2</sup>) of 0.86. In this study, the leaf color changes of two A. palmatum genotypes were analyzed. These findings provide novel insights into variations in leaf coloration and suggest pathways for targeted genetic improvements in A. palmatum.

Gene: !affects! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
Gene: !synthesizes! Cyanidin and delphinidin
Gene: !regulates! Anthocyanin biosynthesis
Gene: !interacts with! MYBs
Gene: !interacts with! bHLHs
Gene: !interacts with! WD40s
Gene: !associated with! ApRHOMBOID
Gene: !associated with! ApMAPK
Gene: !associated with! ApUNE10