We identified 156 laccase genes belonging to 11 subfamilies in the wheat genome, and the natural variation of laccase genes significantly affected the development of wheat-arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. Laccases (LACs) have a variety of functions in plant lignification, cell elongation and stress responses. This study aimed to reveal the phylogeny, chromosomal spatial distribution, coexpression and evolution of LAC genes in the wheat genome and to investigate the possible roles of LAC genes during arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis. The genomic characteristics of LAC genes were analyzed by using bioinformatics analysis methods, and the polymorphisms of LAC genes were analyzed by using a diverse wheat panel composed of 289 wheat cultivars. We identified 156 LAC genes belonging to 11 subfamilies in the wheat genome, and segmental duplication dominated the amplification of the LAC gene family in the wheat genome. LACs are dominantly located in the R2 region of wheat chromosomes. Some LACs are collinear with the characterized LACs in Arabidopsis thaliana or rice. A number of genes encoding transcription factors, kinases, and phosphatases were coexpressed with LAC genes in wheat. TaLACs may be potential targets for some miRNAs. Most TaLACs are mainly expressed in the roots and stems of plants. The expression of TaLACs could be regulated by the inoculation of Fusarium graminearum or AM fungi. The polymorphisms of TaLACs mainly accumulate by random drift instead of by selection. Through candidate gene association analysis, we found that the natural variations in TaLACs significantly affected root colonization by AM fungi. The present study provides useful information for further study of the biological functions of LAC genes in wheat, especially the roles of LAC genes during the development of AM symbiosis.

LACs: !localize to! R2 region of wheat chromosomes
LACs: !collinear with! characterized LACs in Arabidopsis thaliana or rice
LACs: !coexpressed with! transcription factors, kinases, and phosphatases
LACs: !expressed in! roots and stems of plants
LACs: !regulated by! inoculation of Fusarium graminearum or AM fungi
LACs: !accumulate by! random drift instead of selection
LACs: !affect! root colonization by AM fungi