This study compared the plastomes of Ulmaceae allowing analyses of the dynamic evolution, including genome structure, codon usage bias, repeat sequences, molecular mutation rates, and phylogenetic inferences. Ulmaceae is a small family in the order Rosales. This family consists of seven genera, including Ulmus, Zelkova, Planera, Hemiptelea, Phyllostylon, Ampelocera, and Holoptelea. Ulmaceae is an interesting lineage from plant biogeographic, systematic, evolutionary, and paleobotanic perspectives. It is also a good model to investigate the evolution of the plastomes in woody plants. In this study, we sequenced and assembled the complete plastomes of the six Ulmaceae genera to compare genomic structures and reveal the molecular evolutionary patterns. The size of the quadripartite plastomes ranged from 158,290 bp to 161,886 bp. The genomes contained 131 genes, including 87 coding genes, 36 tRNA, and 8 rRNA. The gene number, gene content, and genomic structure were highly consistent among the Ulmaceae genera. Nine variable regions including ndhA intron, ndhF-rpl32, ycf1, psbK-trnS, rps16-trnQ, trnT-trnL, trnT-psbD, trnS-trnG, and rpl32-trnL, were identified in Ulmaceae plastomes according to the nucleotide diversity values. Condon usage was biased among the genes and showed consistent trends in the seven genera. Molecular evolution analyses revealed that most of the genes and all gene groups were under widespread purifying selection. Twelve genes (ccsA, matK, psbH, psbK, rbcL, rpl22, rpl32, rpoA, rps12, rps15, rps16, and ycf2) were under positive selection. Phylogenetic analyses supported that Ulmaceae should be divided into two main clades, such as the temperate clade, including Ulmus, Zelkova, Planera, and Hemiptelea and the tropical clade, including Phyllostylon, Ampelocera and Holoptelea. This study reports the structure and evolutionary characteristics of the Elm family. These new genomic data will benefit assessments of genomic evolution and provide information to elucidate the phylogenetic relationships among Ulmaceae species.

Gene: !affects! Evolution
Gene: !localizes to! Plastomes
Gene: !interacts with! Nucleotide Diversity
Gene: !enhances! Condon Usage
Gene: !represses! Purifying Selection
Gene: !synthesizes! Phylogenetic Analyses