Wheat is one of the most important cereal crops, representing a fundamental source of calories and protein for the global human population. Drought stress (DS) is a widespread phenomenon, already affecting large wheat-growing areas worldwide, and a major threat for cereal productivity, resulting in consistent losses in average grain yield (GY). Climate change is projected to exacerbate DS incidence and severity by increasing temperatures and changing rainfall patterns. Estimating that wheat production has to substantially increase to guarantee food security to a demographically expanding human population, the need for breeding programs focused on improving wheat drought resistance is manifest. Drought occurrence, in terms of time of appearance, duration, frequency, and severity, along the plant's life cycle varies significantly among different environments and different agricultural years, making it difficult to identify reliable phenological, morphological, and functional traits to be used as effective breeding tools. The situation is further complicated by the presence of confounding factors, e.g., other concomitant abiotic stresses, in an open-field context. Consequently, the relationship between morpho-functional traits and GY under water deficit is often contradictory; moreover, controversies have emerged not only on which traits are to be preferred, but also on how one specific trait should be desired. In this review, we attempt to identify the possible causes of these disputes and propose the most suitable selection criteria in different target environments and, thus, the best trait combinations for breeders in different drought contexts. In fact, an environment-oriented approach could be a valuable solution to overcome controversies in identifying the proper selection criteria for improving wheat drought resistance.

Wheat: !represents! Source of Calories and Protein 
DS: !affects! Wheat-Growing Areas 
Climate Change: !exacerbates! DS Incidence and Severity 
Breeding Programs: !focused on! Improving Wheat Drought Resistance 
Morpho-Functional Traits: !correlated with! GY Under Water Deficit 
Environment-Oriented Approach: !valuable for! Overcoming Controversies