The roots of <i>Astragalus membranaceus</i> var. <i>mongholicus</i> (AMM) and A. membranaceus (AM) are widely used in traditional Chinese medicine. Although AMM has higher yields and accounts for a larger market share, its cultivation is fraught with challenges, including mixed germplasm resources and widespread adulteration of commercial seeds. Current methods for distinguishing Astragalus seeds from similar (SM) seeds are time-consuming, laborious, and destructive. To establish a non-destructive method, AMM, AM, and SM seeds were collected from various production areas. Machine vision and hyperspectral imaging (HSI) were used to collect morphological data and spectral data of each seed batch, which was used to establish discriminant models through various algorithms. Several preprocessing methods based on hyperspectral data were compared, including multiplicative scatter correction (MSC), standard normal variable (SNV), and first derivative (FD). Then selection methods for identifying informative features in the above data were compared, including successive projections algorithm (SPA), uninformative variable elimination (UVE), and competitive adaptive reweighted sampling (CARS). The results showed that support vector machine (SVM) modeling of machine vision data could distinguish Astragalus seeds from SM with >99% accuracy, but could not satisfactorily distinguish AMM seeds from AM. The FD-UVE-SVM model based on hyperspectral data reached 100.0% accuracy in the validation set. Another 90 seeds were tested, and the recognition accuracy was 100.0%, supporting the stability of the model. In summary, HSI data can be applied to discriminate among the seeds of AMM, AM, and SM non-destructively and with high accuracy, which can drive standardization in the Astragalus production industry.

HSI: !distinguishes! Astragalus seeds 
MSC: !compared with! SNV, FD 
SPA: !compared with! UVE, CARS 
Machine vision data: !distinguishes! SM 
FD-UVE-SVM model: !distinguishes! AMM, AM, SM 
HSI data: !applied to! discriminate seeds