Resistance to cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) in melon (Cucumis melo L.) has been described in several exotic accessions and is controlled by a recessive resistance gene, cmv1, that encodes a vacuolar protein sorting 41 (CmVPS41). cmv1 prevents systemic infection by restricting the virus to the bundle sheath cells, preventing viral phloem entry. CmVPS41 from different resistant accessions carries two causal mutations, either a G85E change, found in Pat-81 and Freeman's cucumber, or L348R, found in PI161375, cultivar Songwhan Charmi (SC). Here, we analyzed the subcellular localization of CmVPS41 in Nicotiana benthamiana and found differential structures in resistant and susceptible accessions. Susceptible accessions showed nuclear and membrane spots and many transvacuolar strands, whereas the resistant accessions showed many intravacuolar invaginations. These specific structures colocalized with late endosomes. Artificial CmVPS41 carrying individual mutations causing resistance in the genetic background of CmVPS41 from the susceptible variety Piel de Sapo (PS) revealed that the structure most correlated with resistance was the absence of transvacuolar strands. Coexpression of CmVPS41 with viral movement proteins, the determinant of virulence, did not change these localizations; however, infiltration of CmVPS41 from either SC or PS accessions in CMV-infected N. benthamiana leaves showed a localization pattern closer to each other, with up to 30% cells showing some membrane spots in the CmVPS41SC and fewer transvacuolar strands (reduced from a mean of 4 to 1-2) with CmVPS41PS. Our results suggest that the distribution of CmVPS41PS in late endosomes includes transvacuolar strands that facilitate CMV infection and that CmVPS41 re-localizes during viral infection.

cmv1: !restricts! CMV 
CmVPS41: !prevents systemic infection by! restricting virus to bundle sheath cells 
G85E change/L348R: !causes resistance in! Pat-81/Freeman's cucumber/PI161375 
CmVPS41: !localizes to! late endosomes 
CmVPS41: !absence of transvacuolar strands! correlates with resistance 
CmVPS41: !re-localizes during! viral infection