Late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins are widely distributed in higher plants and play crucial roles in regulating plant growth and development processes and resisting abiotic stress. Cultivated tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) is an important vegetable crop worldwide; however, its growth, development, yield, and quality are currently severely constrained by abiotic stressors. In contrast, wild tomato species are more tolerant to abiotic stress and can grow normally in extreme environments. The main objective of this study was to identify, characterize, and perform gene expression analysis of LEA protein families from cultivated and wild tomato species to mine candidate genes and determine their potential role in abiotic stress tolerance in tomatoes. Total 60, 69, 65, and 60 LEA genes were identified in S. lycopersicum, Solanum pimpinellifolium, Solanum pennellii, and Solanum lycopersicoides, respectively. Characterization results showed that these genes could be divided into eight clusters, with the LEA_2 cluster having the most members. Most LEA genes had few introns and were non-randomly distributed on chromosomes; the promoter regions contained numerous cis-acting regulatory elements related to abiotic stress tolerance and phytohormone responses. Evolutionary analysis showed that LEA genes were highly conserved and that the segmental duplication event played an important role in evolution of the LEA gene family. Transcription and expression pattern analyses revealed different regulatory patterns of LEA genes between cultivated and wild tomato species under normal conditions. Certain S. lycopersicum LEA (SlLEA) genes showed similar expression patterns and played specific roles under different abiotic stress and phytohormone treatments. Gene ontology and protein interaction analyses showed that most LEA genes acted in response to abiotic stimuli and water deficit. Five SlLEA proteins were found to interact with 11 S. lycopersicum WRKY proteins involved in development or resistance to stress. Virus-induced gene silencing of SlLEA6 affected the antioxidant and reactive oxygen species defense systems, increased the degree of cellular damage, and reduced drought resistance in S. lycopersicum. These findings provide comprehensive information on LEA proteins in cultivated and wild tomato species and their possible functions under different abiotic and phytohormone stresses. The study systematically broadens our current understanding of LEA proteins and candidate genes and provides a theoretical basis for future functional studies aimed at improving stress resistance in tomato.

LEA proteins: !regulate! plant growth and development
LEA proteins: !resistance to! abiotic stress
LEA genes: !divided into! 8 clusters
LEA genes: !highly conserved! by segmental duplication
LEA genes: !regulated differently! between cultivated and wild tomato species
LEA genes: !respond to! abiotic stimuli and water deficit
SlLEA proteins: !interact with! WRKY proteins
SlLEA6: !affects! antioxidant and ROS defense systems
SlLEA6: !reduces! drought resistance