Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) represents a common biological fertilizer with remarkable effect in improving crop production and environmental friendliness. In the present work, we presented a detailed characterization of plant morphology and physiology, metabolism, and pharmacological activity of <i>A. roxburghii</i> between <i>Burkholderia</i> ambifaria LK-P4 inoculation and un-inoculation (CK) treatment by routine analytical techniques (include microscopy and enzymatic activity assays and so on) coupled with metabolomics approaches. Morphological and physiological results showedthat the P4 bacteria could significantly increase plant stomatal density, freshweight, survival rate,and the content of total flavonoids in leaves but reducethe amount of free amino acid. Furthermore, metabolite data showed that fatty acids (linoleic acid, linolenic acid, stearic acid) and active substance (kyotorphin and piceatannol) were specifically up-regulated in P4 inoculation. It was also demonstrated that the differential metabolites were involved in citrate cycle, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, and biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids pathway. In addition, pharmacological efficacy found that <i>A. roxburghii</i> under P4 inoculation can significantly decrease (p < 0.05) blood glucose levels and protect the organs of mice with similar effect of Glibenclamide tablets. Overall, it can be seen that the exogenous P4 bacteria can promote the growth and increase content of special metabolites in <i>A. roxburghii</i>. This study provided theoretical basis and supported for the high-yield and high-quality bionic cultivation of <i>A. roxburghii</i>.

Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !enhances! plant stomatal density
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !increases! freshweight
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !increases! survival rate
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !increases! total flavonoids content
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !decreases! free amino acid amount
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !increases! linoleic acid
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !increases! linolenic acid
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !increases! stearic acid
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !increases! kyotorphin
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !increases! piceatannol
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !involves! citrate cycle
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB): !involves! glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (