Juglans regia L. is an important nut tree that has a wide range of distribution in temperate regions of the world. In some walnut orchards, walnut blight can become a problematic disease that affects the growth of walnut trees. To explore the correlation between biochemical response and walnut resistance, we inoculated four walnut cultivars with Xanthomonas arboricola pv. juglandis (Xaj). The walnut cultivars were, namely, 'Xiangling', 'Xiluo 2', 'Yuanfeng' and 'Xifu 2'. Total phenol content (TPC) and total flavonoid content (TFC) were measured, whereby nine major phenolic compounds and several relevant enzymes were identified. The results showed that the most resistant and susceptible walnut varieties were 'Xiluo 2' and 'Xifu 2' respectively. The reaction of walnut to Xaj was characterized by the early accumulation of phenolic compounds in the infected site. After inoculation with Xaj, we found that the resistant variety 'Xiluo 2' show the significant differences with other varieties at different time points through the determination of related antioxidant enzymes such as catalase (CAT) and peroxidase (POD). Meanwhile, the phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL) of 'Xiluo 2' increased significantly at 8 day post infection (dpi) and made differences from the control samples, while other varieties changed little. And the polyphenol oxidase (PPO) was significantly higher than in the control at 16 dpi, maintaining the highest and the lowest activity in 'Xiluo 2' and 'Xifu 2' respectively. It was also found that the content of protocatechuic acid in all cultivars increased significantly at 4 dpi, and 'Xiluo 2' was significantly higher than that of the control. In the early stage of the disease, ferulic acid content increased significantly in 'Xiluo 2'. Our findings confirmed that the metabolism of phenolic compounds and related defense enzymes are of great significance in the response of walnut to Xaj.

Xaj: !inoculates! walnut cultivars
TPC/TFC: !measured in! walnut cultivars
CAT/POD: !differ in! resistant/susceptible varieties
PAL: !increases in! resistant variety
PPO: !highest in! resistant variety
protocatechuic acid: !increases in! all cultivars
ferulic acid: !increases in! resistant variety