Soil compaction is a global problem causing inadequate rooting and poor yield in crops. Accumulating evidence indicates that phytohormones coordinately regulate root growth via regulating specific growth processes in distinct tissues. However, how abscisic acid (ABA) signaling translates into auxin production to control root growth during adaptation to different soil environments is still unclear. In this study, we report that ABA has biphasic effects on primary root growth in rice (Oryza sativa) through an auxin biosynthesis-mediated process, causing suppression of root elongation and promotion of root swelling in response to soil compaction. We found that ABA treatment induced the expression of auxin biosynthesis genes and auxin accumulation in roots. Conversely, blocking auxin biosynthesis reduced ABA sensitivity in roots, showing longer and thinner primary roots with larger root meristem size and smaller root diameter. Further investigation revealed that the transcription factor basic region and leucine zipper 46 (OsbZIP46), involved in ABA signaling, can directly bind to the YUCCA8/rice ethylene-insensitive 7 (OsYUC8/REIN7) promoter to activate its expression, and genetic analysis revealed that OsYUC8/REIN7 is located downstream of OsbZIP46. Moreover, roots of mutants defective in ABA or auxin biosynthesis displayed the enhanced ability to penetrate compacted soil. Thus, our results disclose the mechanism in which ABA employs auxin as a downstream signal to modify root elongation and radial expansion, resulting in short and swollen roots impaired in their ability to penetrate compacted soil. These findings provide avenues for breeders to select crops resilient to soil compaction.

ABA: !induces expression of! auxin biosynthesis genes 
ABA: !activates! OsbZIP46 
OsbZIP46: !binds to! OsYUC8/REIN7 promoter 
OsYUC8/REIN7: !downstream of! OsbZIP46 
ABA: !promotes! auxin accumulation 
auxin: !mediates! ABA sensitivity 
ABA: !suppresses! root elongation 
ABA: !promotes! root swelling 
mutants defective in ABA or auxin biosynthesis: !enhanced ability to penetrate! compacted soil