This study demonstrates the combinatorial management of multiple pests through a trans-acting siRNA (tasiRNA)-based micro RNA-induced gene silencing (MIGS) strategy. Transgenic cotton events demonstrated improved efficacy against cotton leaf curl disease, cotton leaf hopper and root-knot nematode. Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.), an important commercial crop grown worldwide is confronted by several pests and pathogens, thus reiterating interventions for their management. In this study, we report, the utility of a novel Arabidopsis miRNA173-directed trans-acting siRNA (tasiRNA)-based micro RNA-induced gene silencing (MIGS) strategy for the simultaneous management of cotton leaf curl disease (CLCuD), cotton leaf hopper (CLH; Amrasca biguttula biguttula) and root-knot nematode (RKN, Meloidogyne incognita). Cotton transgenics were developed with the MIGS construct targeting a total of 7 genes by an apical meristem-targeted in planta transformation strategy. Stable transgenics were selected using stringent selection pressure, molecular characterization and stress-specific bio-efficacy studies. We identified 8 superior events with 50-100% resistance against CLCuD, while reduction in the root-knot nematode multiplication factor in the range of 35-75% confirmed resistance to RKN. These transgenic cotton events were also detrimental to the growth and development of CLH, as only 43.3-62.5% of nymphs could survive. Based on the corroborating evidences obtained by all the bioefficacy analyses, 3 events viz., L-75-1, E-27-11, E-27-7 were found to be consistent in tackling the target pests. To the best of our knowledge, this report is the first of its kind demonstrating the possibility of combinatorial management of pests/diseases in cotton using MIGS approach. These identified events demonstrate immense utility of the strategy towards combinatorial stress management in cotton improvement programs.

miRNA173: !directs! tasiRNA 
tasiRNA: !targets! 7 genes 
transgenics: !selected using! stringent selection pressure 
transgenics: !show resistance to! CLCuD 
transgenics: !reduce multiplication factor of! RKN 
transgenics: !detrimental to growth and development of! CLH 
MIGS approach: !possibility of! combinatorial management of pests/diseases in cotton