Anastomosed laticifers with intrusive growth produce latex containing methyl comate and betulin with economic and ecological value in arid environments. Climatic factors influence laticifer development in the apical meristem and vascular cambium. Latex is a complex emulsion with high medicinal as well as ecological value related to plant survival. Marsdenia zehntneri is a shrubby plant that grows on limestone outcrops in the semiarid regions of Brazil. We sought to characterize the ontogenesis of the laticifers of this species and to relate that process to climatic seasonality and phenology through anatomical, ultrastructural, and micro-morphometric evaluations of the apical meristem and vascular cambium. The histochemistry of the secretory structure was investigated and the chemical composition of the latex was analyzed. Phenological assessments were performed by monitoring phenological events for 1 year. The laticifers network of M. zehntneri permeates the entire primary and secondary body of the plant, providing a wide distribution system of defensive compounds. Its laticifers, of a distinct mixed type (anastomosed, with intrusive growth), are numerous and voluminous in the apical meristem but scarce and minute in the secondary phloem. Latex secretion involves the participation of oleoplasts, polysomes, and dictyosomes. Methyl 2,3-dihydroxy-ursan-23-oate, methyl 3-hydroxy-ursan-23-oate, and betulin are encountered in high proportions in the latex and have ecological and medicinal functions. The development of primary laticifers is related to the resumption of apical meristem activity with increasing day length at the end of the austral winter. The development of secondary laticifers is related to high summer temperatures and rainfall that favor vascular cambium activity. The wide distribution of laticifers, their seasonal pattern of secretion, and their latex composition contribute to the adaptation of M. zehntneri to its natural environment.

Apical meristem: !influenced by! Climatic factors 
Vascular cambium: !influenced by! Climatic factors 
Latex: !contains! Methyl 2,3-dihydroxy-ursan-23-oate, methyl 3-hydroxy-ursan-23-oate, and betulin 
Laticifers network: !provides! Wide distribution system of defensive compounds 
Primary laticifers: !related to! Resumption of apical meristem activity 
Secondary laticifers: !related to! High summer temperatures and rainfall 
Wide distribution of laticifers: !contributes to! Adaptation of M. zehntneri