It is an intriguing issue of evolutionary biology how genetic diversity and gene expression diversity shape the adaptive patterns. Comparative transcriptomic studies of wild populations in extreme environments provide critical insights into the relative contribution of genetic and expressive components. In this study, we analyzed the genetic diversity and gene expression diversity of 20 populations of the aquatic plant Batrachium bungei along elevations ranging from 2690 to 4896 m on the Qinghai-Tibet plateau (QTP). Based on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and gene expression data from 100 individuals of B. bungei, we found that variation in genetic sequence was more sensitive to detect weak differentiation than gene expression. Using 292,613 high-quality SNPs, we documented a significant phylogeographical structure, a low within-population genetic diversity, and a high inter-population genetic differentiation in B. bungei populations. Analysis of relationship between geographic distance, genetic distance, and gene expression similarity showed that geographic isolation shaped gene flow patterns but not gene expression patterns. We observed a negative relationship between genetic diversity and gene expression diversity within and among B. bungei populations, and we demonstrated that as environmental conditions worsen with increasing altitude, genetic diversity played an increased role in maintaining the stability of populations, while the corresponding role of gene expression diversity decreased. These results suggested that genetic diversity and gene expression diversity might act as a complementary mechanism contributing to the long-term survival of B. bungei in extreme environments.

genetic diversity: !affects! gene expression diversity
geographic isolation: !shapes! gene flow patterns
environmental conditions: !worsen with! increasing altitude
genetic diversity: !increases role in! maintaining population stability
gene expression diversity: !decreases role in! maintaining population stability