Transcriptome and biochemical analyses are applied to individual plant cell types to reveal potential players involved in the molecular machinery of cell wall formation in specialized cells such as collenchyma. Plant collenchyma is a mechanical tissue characterized by an irregular, thickened cell wall and the ability to support cell elongation. The composition of the collenchyma cell wall resembles that of the primary cell wall and includes cellulose, xyloglucan, and pectin; lignin is absent. Thus, the processes associated with the formation of the primary cell wall in the collenchyma can be more pronounced compared to other tissues due to its thickening. Primary cell walls intrinsic to different tissues may differ in structure and composition, which should be reflected at the transcriptomic level. For the first time, we conducted transcriptome profiling of collenchyma strands isolated from young celery petioles and compared them with other tissues, such as parenchyma and vascular bundles. Genes encoding proteins involved in the primary cell wall formation during cell elongation, such as xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolases, expansins, and leucine-rich repeat proteins, were significantly activated in the collenchyma. As the key players in the transcriptome orchestra of collenchyma, xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase transcripts were characterized in more detail, including phylogeny and expression patterns. The comprehensive approach that included transcriptome and biochemical analyses allowed us to reveal peculiarities of collenchyma cell wall formation and modification, matching the abundance of upregulated transcripts and their potential substrates for revealed gene products. As a result, specific isoforms of multigene families were determined for further functional investigation.

Gene: !encodes! Protein 
Protein: !involved in! Primary Cell Wall Formation 
Gene: !activated in! Collenchyma 
Xyloglucan Endotransglucosylase/Hydrolase: !characterized in! Transcriptome Profiling 
Expansins: !key players in! Transcriptome Orchestra 
Leucine-Rich Repeat Proteins: !match abundance of! Upregulated Transcripts