Basmati is a speciality segment in the rice genepool characterised by explicit grain quality. For the want of suitable populations, genome-wide association study (GWAS) in Basmati rice has not been attempted. To address this gap, we have performed a GWAS on a panel of 172 elite Basmati multiparent population comprising of potential restorers and maintainers. Phenotypic data was generated for various agronomic and grain quality traits across seven different environments during two consecutive crop seasons. Based on the observed phenotypic variation, three agronomic traits namely, days to fifty per cent flowering, plant height and panicle length, and three grain quality traits namely, kernel length before cooking, length breadth ratio and kernel length after cooking were subjected to GWAS. Genotyped with 80K SNP array, the population was subjected to principal component analysis to stratify the underlying substructure and subjected to the association analysis using Bayesian-information and Linkage-disequilibrium Iteratively Nested Keyway (BLINK) model. We identified 32 unique MTAs including 11 robust MTAs for the agronomic traits and 25 unique MTAs including two robust MTAs for the grain quality traits. Six out of 13 robust MTAs were novel. By genome annotation, six candidate genes associated with the robust MTAs were identified. Further analysis of the allelic combinations of the robust MTAs enabled the identification of superior allelic combinations in the population. This information was utilized in selecting 77 elite Basmati rice genotypes from the panel. This is the first ever GWAS study in Basmati rice which could generate valuable information usable for further breeding through marker assisted selection, including enhancing of heterosis.

Gene: !affects! Agronomic Traits 
Gene: !affects! Grain Quality Traits 
Gene: !localizes to! MTAs 
Gene: !interacts with! SNP Array 
Gene: !enhances! Heterosis 
Gene: !represses! Sub-Structure 
Gene: !synthesizes! Elite Genotypes