Root-zone restriction induces physiological stress on roots, thus limiting the vegetative and enhancing reproductive development, which promotes fruit quality and growth. Numerous bacterial-related growth-promoting, stress-mitigating, and disease-prevention activities have been described, but none in root-restricted cultivation. The study aimed to understand the activities of grapevine bacterial communities and plant-bacterial relationships to improve fruit quality. We used High-throughput sequencing, edaphic soil factors, and network analysis to explore the impact of restricted cultivation on the diversity, composition and network structure of bacterial communities of rhizosphere soil, roots, leaves, flowers and berries. The bacterial richness, diversity, and networking were indeed regulated by root-zone restriction at all phenological stages, with a peak at the veraison stage, yielding superior fruit quality compared to control plants. Moreover, it also handled the nutrient availability in treated plants, such as available nitrogen (AN) was 3.5, 5.7 and 0.9 folds scarcer at full bloom, veraison and maturity stages, respectively, compared to control plants. Biochemical indicators of the berry have proved that high-quality berry is yielded in association with the bacteria. Cyanobacteria were most abundant in the phyllosphere, Proteobacteria in the rhizosphere, and Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes in the endosphere. These bacterial phyla were most correlated and influenced by different soil factors in control and treated plants. Our findings are a comprehensive approach to the implications of root-zone restriction on the bacterial microbiota, which will assist in directing a more focused procedure to uncover the precise mechanism, which is still undiscovered.

Root-zone restriction: !induces! physiological stress
Bacterial communities: !regulated by! root-zone restriction
Cyanobacteria: !most abundant in! phyllosphere
Proteobacteria: !most abundant in! rhizosphere
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes: !most abundant in! endosphere
Bacterial phyla: !correlated and influenced by! soil factors