Nitrogen (N) is an essential element required for sugar beet growth. Sugar beets with low N (LN) tolerance and high N use efficiency are excellent materials for breeding. Here, we comprehensively evaluated the morphological and physiological responses of nine sugar beet genotypes to LN supply. It was found that 0.5 mmol·L<sup>-1</sup> N (LN) significantly influenced the performance of leaves and the topology of roots by reducing the bioproduction of chlorophyll a (Chl a) and soluble protein (SP) and the accumulation of N in leaves and roots (LNA and RNA), thus differentially restricting the growth (hypocotyl diameter, HD; root length, RL) and biomass (leaf and root fresh weight; LFW and RFW; leaf dry weight, LDW) of these sugar beets. Principal component and cluster analyses showed that 780016B/12 superior (F) exhibited excellent tolerance to LN; it had higher SOD activity (62.70%) and APX activity (188.92%) and a higher proline content (131.82%) than 92011 (G, LN sensitive). These attributes helped 780016B/12 superior (F) to better endure LN stress, and the morphology and N distribution changed to adapt to N deficiency, such that the root length increased by 112.48%, leaf area increased by 101.23%, and leaf nitrogen accumulation reached a peak of 14.13 g/plant. It seems that LN-tolerant genotypes increased their root length and surface area by reducing the difference in biomass, thereby expanding the contact between roots and soil, which was conducive to the absorption of nutrients (N) by sugar beets and helped distribute more assimilation products to the roots.

Nitrogen: !essential for! sugar beet growth 
LN supply: !influences! performance of leaves and topology of roots 
Chl a, SP, LNA, RNA: !reduced by! LN supply 
HD, RL, LFW, RFW, LDW: !restricted by! LN supply 
780016B/12 superior (F): !exhibits! excellent tolerance to LN 
SOD activity, APX activity, proline content: !higher in! 780016B/12 superior (F) 
LN-tolerant genotypes: !increase! root length and surface area 
root length, surface area: !expanded by! reducing difference in biomass 
roots, soil: !contact increased between! roots and soil 
nutrients: !absorbed more easily by! sugar beets