Genome editing using CRISPR/Cas technology improves the quality of potato as a food crop and enables its use as both a model plant in fundamental research and as a potential biofactory for producing valuable compounds for industrial applications. Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) plays a significant role in ensuring global food and nutritional security. Tuber yield is negatively affected by biotic and abiotic stresses, and enzymatic browning and cold-induced sweetening significantly contribute to post-harvest quality losses. With the dual challenges of a growing population and a changing climate, potato enhancement is essential for its sustainable production. However, due to several characteristics of potato, including high levels of heterozygosity, tetrasomic inheritance, inbreeding depression, and self-incompatibility of diploid potato, conventional breeding practices are insufficient to achieve substantial trait improvement in tetraploid potato cultivars within a relatively short time. CRISPR/Cas-mediated genome editing has opened new possibilities to develop novel potato varieties with high commercialization potential. In this review, we summarize recent developments in optimizing CRISPR/Cas-based methods for potato genome editing, focusing on approaches addressing the challenging biology of this species. We also discuss the feasibility of obtaining transgene-free genome-edited potato varieties and explore different strategies to improve potato stress resistance, nutritional value, starch composition, and storage and processing characteristics. Altogether, this review provides insight into recent advances, possible bottlenecks, and future research directions in potato genome editing using CRISPR/Cas technology.

CRISPR/Cas: !improves! Potato Quality 
CRISPR/Cas: !enables! Model Plant Research 
CRISPR/Cas: !addresses! Potato Biology Challenges 
CRISPR/Cas: !develops! Novel Potato Varieties 
CRISPR/Cas: !obtains! Transgene-Free Varieties 
CRISPR/Cas: !improves! Stress Resistance 
CRISPR/Cas: !enhances! Nutritional Value 
CRISPR/Cas: !alters! Starch Composition 
CRISPR/Cas: !modifies! Storage & Processing Characteristics