Anthocyanins are widely applied as a marker for haploid identification after haploid induction in maize. However, the factors affecting anthocyanin biosynthesis in immature embryos and the genes regulating this process remain unclear. In this study, we analyzed the influence of genetic background of the male and female parents, embryo age and light exposure on anthocyanin accumulation in embryos. The results showed that light exposure was the most crucial factor enhancing the pigmentation of immature embryos. The identification accuracy of haploid embryos reached 96.4% after light exposure, but was only 11.0% following dark treatment. The total anthocyanin content was 7-fold higher in immature embryos cultured for 24 h under light conditions compared to embryos cultured in the dark. Transcriptome analysis revealed that the differentially expressed genes between immature embryos cultured for 24 h in dark and light chambers were significantly enriched in the pathways of flavonoid, flavone, flavonol and anthocyanin biosynthesis. Among the genes involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis, five up-regulated genes were identified: F3H, DFR, ANS, F3'H and the MYB transcription factor-encoding gene C1. The expression patterns of 14 selected genes were confirmed using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Light is the most important factor facilitating anthocyanin accumulation in immature embryos. After 24 h of exposure to light, the expression levels of the structural genes F3H, DFR, ANS, F3'H and transcription factor gene C1 were significantly up-regulated. This study provides new insight into the factors and key genes regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis in immature embryos, and supports improved efficiency of immature haploid embryo selection during doubled haploid breeding of maize.

Light: !enhances! Anthocyanin accumulation
F3H: !synthesizes! Anthocyanin
DFR: !synthesizes! Anthocyanin
ANS: !synthesizes! Anthocyanin
F3'H: !synthesizes! Anthocyanin
C1: !synthesizes! Anthocyanin