Frequent outbreaks of agricultural pests can reduce crop production severely and restrict agricultural production. Therefore, automatic monitoring and precise recognition of crop pests have a high practical value in the process of agricultural planting. In recent years, pest recognition and detection have been rapidly improved with the development of deep learning-based methods. Although certain progress has been made in the research on pest detection and identification technology based on deep learning, there are still many problems in the production application in a field environment. This work presents a pest detector for multi-category dense and tiny pests named the Pest-YOLO. First, the idea of focal loss is introduced into the loss function using weight distribution to improve the attention of hard samples. In this way, the problems of hard samples arose from the uneven distribution of pest populations in a dataset and low discrimination features of small pests are relieved. Next, a non-Intersection over Union bounding box selection and suppression algorithm, the confluence strategy, is used. The confluence strategy can eliminate the errors and omissions of pest detection caused by occlusion, adhesion and unlabeling among tiny dense pest individuals to the greatest extent. The proposed Pest-YOLO model is verified on a large-scale pest image dataset, the Pest24, which includes more than 20k images with over 190k pests labeled by agricultural experts and categorized into 24 classes. Experimental results show that the Pest-YOLO can obtain 69.59% for mAP and 77.71% for mRecall on the 24-class pest dataset, which is 5.32% and 28.12% higher than the benchmark model YOLOv4. Meanwhile, our proposed model is superior to other several state-of-the-art methods, including the SSD, RetinaNet, Faster RCNN, YOLOv3, YOLOv4, YOLOv5s, YOLOv5m, YOLOX, DETR, TOOD, YOLOv3-W, and AF-RCNN detectors. The code of the proposed algorithm is available at: https://github.com/chr-secrect/Pest-YOLO.

Focal Loss: !improves! Attention of Hard Samples
Confluence Strategy: !eliminates! Errors and Omissions of Pest Detection
Pest-YOLO: !outperforms! Benchmark Model YOLOv4
Pest-YOLO: !outperforms! State-of-the-Art Methods