As global soil salinization continues to intensify, there is a need to enhance salt tolerance in crops. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of tomato (<i>Solanum lycopersicum</i>) roots' adaptation to salt stress is of great significance to enhance its salt tolerance and promote its planting in saline soils. A combined analysis of the metabolome and transcriptome of <i>S. lycopersicum</i> roots under different periods of salt stress according to changes in phenotypic and root physiological indices revealed that different accumulated metabolites and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were significantly altered. The levels of phenylpropanoids increased and showed a dynamic trend with the duration of salt stress. Ferulic acid (FA) and spermidine (Spd) levels were substantially up-regulated at the initial and mid-late stages of salt stress, respectively, and were significantly correlated with the expression of the corresponding synthetic genes. The results of canonical correlation analysis screening of highly correlated DEGs and construction of regulatory relationship networks with transcription factors (TFs) for FA and Spd, respectively, showed that the obtained target genes were regulated by most of the TFs, and TFs such as MYB, Dof, BPC, GRAS, and AP2/ERF might contribute to the regulation of FA and Spd content levels. Ultimately, FA and Spd attenuated the harm caused by salt stress in <i>S. lycopersicum</i>, and they may be key regulators of its salt tolerance. These findings uncover the dynamics and possible molecular mechanisms of phenylpropanoids during different salt stress periods, providing a basis for future studies and crop improvement.

Ferulic acid: !increases with! duration of salt stress
Spermidine: !increases with! duration of salt stress
Ferulic acid: !synthesized by! corresponding synthetic genes
Spermidine: !synthesized by! corresponding synthetic genes
Ferulic acid: !regulated by! MYB, Dof, BPC, GRAS, AP2/ERF
Spermidine: !regulated by! MYB, Dof, BPC, GRAS, AP2/ERF
Ferulic acid: !attenuates harm caused by! salt stress
Spermidine: !attenuates harm caused by! salt stress