Globally, sorghum is the fifth most important crop, which is used for food, feed and fuel. However, its production and productivity are severely limited by various stresses, including drought. Hence, this study aimed to determine the responses of different drought-tolerance related traits in the Ethiopian sorghum germplasm through multi-environment field trials, thereby identifying novel sources of germplasm that can be used for breeding the crop for drought-tolerance. Three hundred twenty sorghum landraces and four improved varieties were grown at three sites within drought-prone areas (Melkassa, Mieso and Mehoni) in Ethiopia. The targeted traits were chlorophyll content at flowering (CHLF), chlorophyll content at maturity (CHLM), green leaf number at flowering (GLNF), stay-green (SG), flag leaf area (FLA), peduncle length (PDL), and panicle exertion (PAE). Multi-variate analyses of the collected data revealed the presence of high phenotypic variation in all traits. The combined and AMMI Analysis of variance showed that phenotypic variation due to the genotypes was higher for SG, CHLM, CHLF and GLNF and lower for FLA, PE and PDL in comparison with variation due to the environments or genotype by environment interactions. High broad sense heritability was observed for CHLF, CHLM, SG, GLNF, FLA, and PDL, whereas PAE showed moderate heritability. Due to the high heritability of chlorophyll content and the relatively small effect of environmental factors on it, it could serve as a criterion for selecting desirable genotypes for drought-tolerant breeding in sorghum. It has been found that chlorophyll content has a significant positive correlation with stay-green and grain yield, indicating that high chlorophyll content contributes to increasing grain yield by delaying the process of leaf senescence. The analyses of AMMI, GGE biplot, and genotype selection index revealed that several sorghum landraces outperformed the improved varieties with respect to CHLF, CHLM, and SG. Such landraces could serve as novel sources of germplasm for improving drought tolerance through breeding.

genotype: !affects! CHLF, CHLM, SG, GLNF, FLA, PDL, PAE
environment: !affects! CHLF, CHLM, SG, GLNF, FLA, PDL, PAE
CHLF: !correlates with! SG, grain yield
CHLF: !has high heritability!
landraces: !outperform! improved varieties