In northern boreal forests the warming winter climate leads to more frequent snowmelt, rain-on-snow events and freeze-thaw cycles. This may be harmful or even lethal for tree seedlings that spend even a half of the year under snow. We conducted a snow cover manipulation experiment in a natural forest to find out how changing snow conditions affect young Scots pine (<i>Pinus sylvestris</i> L.) seedlings. The ice encasement (IE), absence of snow (NoSNOW) and snow compaction (COMP) treatments affected ground level temperature, ground frost and subnivean gas concentrations compared to the ambient snow cover (AMB) and led to the increased physical damage and mortality of seedlings. The expression responses of 28 genes related to circadian clock, aerobic and anaerobic energy metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism and stress protection revealed that seedlings were exposed to different stresses in a complex way depending on the thickness and quality of the snow cover. The IE treatment caused hypoxic stress and probably affected roots which resulted in reduced water uptake in the beginning of the growing season. Without protective snowpack in NoSNOW seedlings suffered from cold and drought stresses. The combination of hypoxic and cold stresses in COMP evoked unique transcriptional responses including oxidative stress. Snow cover manipulation induced changes in the expression of several circadian clock related genes suggested that photoreceptors and the circadian clock system play an essential role in the adaptation of Scots pine seedlings to stresses under different snow conditions. Our findings show that warming winter climate alters snow conditions and consequently causes Scots pine seedlings various abiotic stresses, whose effects extend from overwintering to the following growing season.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !regulates! Circadian Clock
Gene: !influences! Energy Metabolism
Gene: !controls! Carbohydrate Metabolism
Gene: !protects! Stress
Gene: !responds to! Snow Cover Manipulation