Drought and heat stress substantially impact plant growth and productivity. When subjected to drought or heat stress, plants exhibit reduction in growth resulting in yield losses. The occurrence of these two stresses together intensifies their negative effects. Unraveling the molecular changes in response to combined abiotic stress is essential to breed climate-resilient crops. In this study, transcriptome profiles were compared between stress-tolerant (Otis), and stress-sensitive (Golden Promise) barley genotypes subjected to drought, heat, and combined heat and drought stress for five days during heading stage. The major differences that emerged from the transcriptome analysis were the overall number of differentially expressed genes was relatively higher in Golden Promise (GP) compared to Otis. The differential expression of more than 900 transcription factors in GP and Otis may aid this transcriptional reprogramming in response to abiotic stress. Secondly, combined heat and water deficit stress results in a unique and massive transcriptomic response that cannot be predicted from individual stress responses. Enrichment analyses of gene ontology terms revealed unique and stress type-specific adjustments of gene expression. Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis identified genes associated with RNA metabolism and Hsp70 chaperone components as hub genes that can be useful for engineering tolerance to multiple abiotic stresses. Comparison of the transcriptomes of unstressed Otis and GP plants identified several genes associated with biosynthesis of antioxidants and osmolytes were higher in the former that maybe providing innate tolerance capabilities to effectively combat hostile conditions. Lines with different repertoire of innate tolerance mechanisms can be effectively leveraged in breeding programs for developing climate-resilient barley varieties with superior end-use traits.

Gene: !affects! Transcriptome
Gene: !localizes to! Stress-tolerant/sensitive genotypes
Gene: !interacts with! Transcription factors
Gene: !enhances! RNA metabolism
Gene: !represses! Yield losses
Gene: !synthesizes! Antioxidants/osmolytes