Blueberry (<i>Vaccinium corymbosum</i> L.) is a popular fruit with an abundance of anthocyanins in its leaves and fruits. Light is one of the pivotal environmental elements that affects plant growth and development, but the regulatory mechanism between light quality and anthocyanin formation is poorly understood. An integrated transcriptome and metabolome analysis was performed to investigate the effects of white (control), blue (B), red (R), and red/blue (60R/40B) light on blueberry growth and reveal the potential pathway controlling anthocyanin biosynthesis in blueberry leaves. The anthocyanin content was significantly improved by the blue and red/blue light when compared with white light, whereas there was a significant reduction in the photosynthesis under the blue light, showing an inverse trend to that of anthocyanin accumulation. Transcriptomic analysis resulted in the assembly of 134,709 unigenes. Of these, 22 were differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that participate in the anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway, with the majority being significantly up-regulated under the blue light. Most of the photosynthesis-related genes that were down-regulated were expressed during anthocyanin accumulation. Targeted metabolome profiling identified 44 metabolites associated with anthocyanin biosynthesis. The contents of most of these metabolites were higher under blue light than the other light conditions, which was consistent with the transcriptome results. The integrated transcriptome and metabolome analysis suggested that, under blue light, leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase (LDOX), O-methyltransferase (OMT), and UDP-glucose flavonoid glucosyltransferase (UFGT) were the most significantly expressed, and they promoted the synthesis of cyanidin (Cy), malvidin (Mv), and pelargonidin (Pg) anthocyanidins, respectively. The expression levels of dihydroflavonol 4-reductase (DFR) and OMT, as well as the accumulation of delphinidin (Dp), peonidin (Pn), and petunidin (Pt), were significantly increased by the red/blue light. The blue and red/blue lights promoted anthocyanin biosynthesis via inducing the expression of key structural genes and accumulation of metabolites involved in anthocyanin synthesis pathway. Moreover, there was a possible feedback regulating correlation between anthocyanin biosynthesis and photosynthesis under different light qualities in blueberry leaves. This study would provide a theoretical basis for elucidating the underlying regulatory mechanism of anthocyanin biosynthesis of V. corymbosum.

Light: !affects! Anthocyanin formation 
Leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase (LDOX): !enhances! Cyanidin synthesis 
O-methyltransferase (OMT): !enhances! Malvidin synthesis 
UDP-glucose flavonoid glucosyltransferase (UFGT): !enhances! Pelargonidin synthesis 
Dihydroflavonol 4-reductase (DFR): !enhances! Delphinidin synthesis 
OMT: !enhances! Peonidin and Petunidin synthesis 
Anthocyanin biosynthesis: !regulates! Photosynthesis