Plant height and grain length are important agronomic traits in rice, exhibiting a strong effect on plant architecture and grain quality of rice varieties. Methods: A novel rice chromosomal segment substitution line (CSSL), i.e., CSSL-Z1357, with significantly increased plant height (PH) and grain length (GL) was identified from CSSLs constructed by using Nipponbare as a receptor and a restorer line Xihui 18 as a donor. Seven agronomic traits of PH, PL, GL, GW, GPP, SPP, and TGW were phenotyped, and REML implemented in HPMIXED of SAS were used to detect the QTL for these traits. Secondary CSSLs were screened out via marker-assisted selection (MAS) to estimate the additive and epistatic effects of detected QTLs, evaluating the potential utilization of pyramiding the target QTLs for yield and quality improvement of rice varieties. Results and Discussion: CSSL-Z1357 carried nine segments from Xihui 18 with an average segment length of 4.13 Mb. The results show that the long grain of CSSL-Z1357 was caused by the increased number of surface cells and the length of the inner glume. Thirteen quantitative trait loci were identified via the F2 population of Nipponbare/CSSL-Z1357, including three each for GL (qGL-3, qGL-6, and qGL-7) and PH (qPH-1, qPH-7, and qPH-12I), among which qGL-3 increased GL by 0.23 mm with synergistic allele from CSSL-Z1357. Additionally, three single (S1 to S3), two double (D1, D2), and one triple segment (T1) substitution lines were developed in F3 via MAS. Results show that pyramiding the segments from Chr.3 (qGL-3 and qPH-3), Chr.6 (qGL-6 and qPH-6), and Chr.7 (Null and qPH-7) tended to result in better phenotype of increased GL and PH and decreased grain width, providing a potential basis for enhancing grain yield and quality in rice breeding.

Nipponbare/CSSL-Z1357: !exhibits! increased plant height and grain length
QTLs: !affect! agronomic traits
qGL-3: !increases! grain length by 0.23 mm
MAS: !develops! secondary CSSLs
Pyramiding: !enhances! grain yield and quality