Reactive oxygen species are produced in response to pathogens and pathogen-associated molecular patterns, as exemplified by the rapid extracellular oxidative burst dependent on the NADPH oxidase isoform RESPIRATORY BURST OXIDASE HOMOLOG D (RBOHD) in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). We used the H2O2 biosensor roGFP2-Orp1 and the glutathione redox state biosensor GRX1-roGFP2 targeted to various organelles to reveal unsuspected oxidative events during the pattern-triggered immune response to flagellin (flg22) and after inoculation with Pseudomonas syringae. roGFP2-Orp1 was oxidized in a biphasic manner 1 and 6 h after treatment, with a more intense and faster response in the cytosol compared to chloroplasts, mitochondria, and peroxisomes. Peroxisomal and cytosolic GRX1-roGFP2 were also oxidized in a biphasic manner. Interestingly, our results suggested that bacterial effectors partially suppress the second phase of roGFP2-Orp1 oxidation in the cytosol. Pharmacological and genetic analyses indicated that the pathogen-associated molecular pattern-induced cytosolic oxidation required the BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE (BAK1) and BOTRYTIS-INDUCED KINASE 1 (BIK1) signaling components involved in the immune response but was largely independent of NADPH oxidases RBOHD and RESPIRATORY BURST OXIDASE HOMOLOG F (RBOHF) and apoplastic peroxidases peroxidase 33 (PRX33) and peroxidase 34 (PRX34). The initial apoplastic oxidative burst measured with luminol was followed by a second oxidation burst, both of which preceded the two waves of cytosolic oxidation. In contrast to the cytosolic oxidation, these bursts were RBOHD-dependent. Our results reveal complex oxidative sources and dynamics during the pattern-triggered immune response, including that cytosolic oxidation is largely independent of the preceding extracellular oxidation events.

RBOHD: !produces! Reactive oxygen species 
flg22: !triggers! Immune response 
Pseudomonas syringae: !inoculates! Plant 
roGFP2-Orp1: !oxidizes! Biphasically 
GRX1-roGFP2: !oxidizes! Biphasically 
Bacterial effectors: !suppress! Second phase of roGFP2-Orp1 oxidation 
BAK1/BIK1: !signal! Cytosolic oxidation 
RBOHD/RBOHF/PRX33/PRX34: !independent of! Cytosolic oxidation 
Luminol: !measures! Apoplastic oxidative burst