Climate change is expected to influence crop growth through frequent drought and heat extremes, and thus, drought and heat tolerance are of increasing importance as major breeding goals for cereal crops in Central Europe. Plant physiological water status traits are suitable for phenotyping plant drought/heat tolerance. The objective of this study was to determine whether relative leaf water content (RLWC), plant canopy temperature (CT), and carbon isotope discrimination (CID) are suitable for phenotyping the drought/heat resistance of German winter wheat for future climate resilience. Therefore, a comprehensive field evaluation was conducted under drier and warmer conditions in Moldova using a space-for-time approach for twenty winter wheat varieties from Germany and compared to twenty regionally adapted varieties from Eastern Europe. Among the physiological traits RLWC, CT, and CID, the heritability of RLWC showed the lowest values regardless of year or variety origin, and there was no significant correlation between RLWC and grain yield regardless of the year, suggesting that RLWC did not seem to be a useful trait for distinguishing origins or varieties under continental field conditions. Although the heritability of CT demonstrated high values, the results showed surprisingly low and nonsignificant correlations between CT and grain yield; this may have been due to a confounding effect of increased soil temperature in the investigated dark Chernozem soil. In contrast, the heritability of CID in leaves and grain was high, and there were significant correlations between grain yield and CID, suggesting that CID is a reliable indirect physiological trait for phenotyping drought/heat resistance for future climate resilience in German wheat.

RLWC: !showed low heritability! regardless of year or variety origin
CT: !demonstrated high heritability! 
CID: !showed high heritability! in leaves and grain
RLWC: !did not correlate with! grain yield
CT: !had low correlation with! grain yield
CID: !correlated significantly with! grain yield