Blueberries have a high antioxidant content and are produced as healthy food worldwide. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a type of regulatory RNAs that play a variety of roles in plants. Nonetheless, information on lncRNAs and their functions during blueberry fruit development is scarce in public databases. In the present study, we performed genome-wide identification of lncRNAs in a southern highbush blueberry using strand-specific RNA sequencing (ssRNA-Seq). Differentially expressed lncRNAs (DE-lncRNAs) and their potential target genes were analyzed at four stages of fruit development. Cis-regulatory DE-lncRNAs were predicted using co-localization analysis. These findings included a total of 25,036 lncRNAs from 17,801 loci. Blueberry lncRNAs had shorter transcript lengths, smaller open reading frame (ORF) sizes, fewer exons, and fewer isoforms than protein-coding RNAs, as well as lower expression levels and higher stage-specificity during fruit development. A total of 105 DE-lncRNAs were identified among the comparison group of PAD vs. CUP, 443 DE-lncRNAs were detected when comparing CUP with PINK fruits, and 285 DE-lncRNAs were revealed when comparing PINK and BLUE fruits. According to Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes annotation, target genes of DE-lncRNAs were primarily enriched in the "Autophagy-other", "DNA replication", "Endocytosis", 'photosynthesis' and 'chlorophyll metabolism' pathways, suggesting that lncRNAs may pay potential roles in fruit expansion and ripening. Moreover, several lncRNAs have been proposed as cis-regulators of the key genes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis. <i>MSTRG.107242.6</i>, and its putative target gene, BTB/POZ and TAZ domain-containing protein, might play critical roles in anthocyanin accumulation in blueberries. These findings highlight the regulatory function of lncRNAs and aid in elucidating the molecular mechanism underlying blueberry fruit growth.

lncRNA: !regulates! target gene
lncRNA: !enriches! Autophagy-other pathway
lncRNA: !enriches! DNA replication pathway
lncRNA: !enriches! Endocytosis pathway
lncRNA: !enriches! Photosynthesis pathway
lncRNA: !enriches! Chlorophyll metabolism pathway
lncRNA: !regulates! Flavonoid biosynthesis
MSTRG.107242.6: !regulates! BTB/POZ and TAZ domain-containing protein