The wild allotetraploid peanut <i>Arachis monticola</i> contains a higher oil content than the cultivated allotetraploid <i>Arachis hypogaea</i>. Besides the fact that increasing oil content is the most important peanut breeding objective, a proper understanding of its molecular mechanism controlling oil accumulation is still lacking. We investigated this aspect by performing comparative transcriptomics from developing seeds between three wild and five cultivated peanut varieties. The analyses not only showed species-specific grouping transcriptional profiles but also detected two gene clusters with divergent expression patterns between two species enriched in lipid metabolism. Further analysis revealed that expression alteration of lipid metabolic genes with co-expressed transcription factors in wild peanut led to enhanced activity of oil biogenesis and retarded the rate of lipid degradation. In addition, bisulfite sequencing was conducted to characterize the variation of DNA methylation between wild allotetraploid (245, WH 10025) and cultivated allotetraploid (Z16, Zhh 7720) genotypes. CG and CHG context methylation was found to antagonistically correlate with gene expression during seed development. Differentially methylated region analysis and transgenic assay further illustrated that variations of DNA methylation between wild and cultivated peanuts could affect the oil content <i>via</i> altering the expression of peroxisomal acyl transporter protein (<i>Araip.H6S1B</i>). From the results, we deduced that DNA methylation may negatively regulate lipid metabolic genes and transcription factors to subtly affect oil accumulation divergence between wild and cultivated peanuts. Our work provided the first glimpse on the regulatory mechanism of gene expression altering for oil accumulation in wild peanut and gene resources for future breeding applications.

expression alteration: !enhances! oil biogenesis 
expression alteration: !represses! lipid degradation 
DNA methylation: !antagonistically correlates with! gene expression 
DNA methylation: !negatively regulates! lipid metabolic genes 
DNA methylation: !negatively regulates! transcription factors 
variations of DNA methylation: !affects! oil content