Terpenes serve important functions in enhancing plant thermotolerance. <i>Cinnamomum camphora</i> mainly has eucalyptol (EuL), camphor (CmR), linalool (LnL) and borneol (BeL) chemotypes basing on the uppermost monoterpenes. To reveal the thermotolerance mechanisms of these uppermost monoterpenes (eucalyptol, camphor, linalool, and borneol) in <i>C. camphora</i>, we surveyed the ROS metabolism and photosynthesis in the 4 chemotypes fumigated with the corresponding uppermost monoterpene after fosmidomycin (Fos) inhibiting monoterpene synthesis under high temperature at 38°C (Fos+38°C+monoterpene), and investigated the related gene expression in EuL and CmR. Meanwhile, the thermotolerance differences among the 4 uppermost monoterpenes were analyzed. In contrast to normal temperature (28°C), ROS levels and antioxidant enzyme activities in the 4 chemotypes increased under 38°C, and further increased in the treatment with Fos inhibiting monoterpene synthesis at 38°C (Fos+38°C), which may be caused by the alterations in expression of the genes related with non-enzymatic and enzymatic antioxidant formation according to the analyses in EuL and CmR. Compared with Fos+38°C treatment, Fos+38°C+monoterpene treatments lowered ROS levels and antioxidant enzyme activities for the increased non-enzymatic antioxidant gene expression and decreased enzymatic antioxidant gene expression, respectively. High temperature at 38°C reduced the chlorophyll and carotenoid content as well as photosynthetic abilities, which may result from the declined expression of the genes associated with photosynthetic pigment biosynthesis, light reaction, and carbon fixation. Fos+38°C treatment aggravated the reduction. In contrast to Fos+38°C treatment, Fos+38°C+monoterpene treatments increased photosynthetic pigment content and improved photosynthetic abilities by up-regulating related gene expression. Among the 4 uppermost monoterpenes, camphor showed strong abilities in lowering ROS and maintaining photosynthesis, while eucalyptol showed weak abilities. This was consistent with the recovery effects of the gene expression in the treatments with camphor and eucalyptol fumigation. Therefore, the uppermost monoterpenes can enhance <i>C. camphora</i> thermotolerance as signaling molecules, and may have differences in the signaling functions.

ROS: !increases with! high temperature
antioxidant enzyme: !increases with! high temperature
non-enzymatic antioxidant gene: !upregulated by! monoterpene
enzymatic antioxidant gene: !downregulated by! monoterpene
chlorophyll/carotenoid content: !reduced by! high temperature
photosynthetic ability: !reduced by! high temperature
photosynthetic pigment content: !increased by! monoterpene
photosynthetic ability: !improved by! monoterpene
camphor: !stronger than! eucalyptol in thermotolerance