To reveal the key genes involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway, which ultimately governs the fragrance of Rhododendron fortunei, we performed a comprehensive transcriptome and metabolomic analysis of the petals of two different varieties of two alpine rhododendrons: the scented R. fortunei and the unscented Rhododendron 'Nova Zembla'. Our transcriptomic and qRT-PCR data showed that nine candidate genes were highly expressed in R. fortunei but were downregulated in Rhododendron 'Nova Zembla'. Among these genes, EGS expression was significantly positively correlated with various volatile benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds and significantly negatively correlated with the contents of various nonvolatile compounds, whereas CCoAOMT, PAL, C4H, and BALDH expression was significantly negatively correlated with the contents of various volatile benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds and significantly positively correlated with the contents of various nonvolatile compounds. CCR, CAD, 4CL, and SAMT expression was significantly negatively correlated with the contents of various benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds. The validation of RfSAMT showed that the RfSAMT gene regulates the synthesis of aromatic metabolites in R. fortunei. The findings of this study indicated that key candidate genes and metabolites involved in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway may govern the fragrance of R. fortunei. This lays a foundation for further research on the molecular mechanism underlying fragrance in the genus Rhododendron.

EGS: !positively correlates with! volatile benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
EGS: !negatively correlates with! nonvolatile compounds
CCoAOMT: !negatively correlates with! volatile benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
CCoAOMT: !positively correlates with! nonvolatile compounds
PAL: !negatively correlates with! volatile benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
PAL: !positively correlates with! nonvolatile compounds
C4H: !negatively correlates with! volatile benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
C4H: !positively correlates with! nonvolatile compounds
BALDH: !negatively correlates with! volatile benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
BALDH: !positively correlates with! nonvolatile compounds
CCR: !negatively correlates with! benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
CAD: !negatively correlates with! benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
4CL: !negatively correlates with! benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
SAMT: !negatively correlates with! benzene/phenylpropanoid compounds
