Tropical vines and lianas have evolved mechanisms to avoid mechanical damage during their climbing life histories. We explore the mechanical properties and stem development of a tropical climber that develops trellises in tropical rain forest canopies. We measured the young stems of <i>Condylocarpon guianensis</i> (Apocynaceae) that construct complex trellises <i>via</i> self-supporting shoots, attached stems, and unattached pendulous stems. The results suggest that, in this species, there is a size (stem diameter) and developmental threshold at which plant shoots will make the developmental transition from stiff young shoots to later flexible stem properties. Shoots that do not find a support remain stiff, becoming pendulous and retaining numerous leaves. The formation of a second TYPE II (lianoid) wood is triggered by attachment, guaranteeing increased flexibility of light-structured shoots that transition from self-supporting searchers to inter-connected net-like trellis components. The results suggest that this species shows a "hard-wired" development that limits self-supporting growth among the slender stems that make up a liana trellis. The strategy is linked to a stem-twining climbing mode and promotes a rapid transition to flexible trellis elements in cluttered densely branched tropical forest habitats. These are situations that are prone to mechanical perturbation <i>via</i> wind action, tree falls, and branch movements. The findings suggest that some twining lianas are mechanically fine-tuned to produce trellises in specific habitats. Trellis building is carried out by young shoots that can perform very different functions <i>via</i> subtle development changes to ensure a safe space occupation of the liana canopy.

stem diameter: !triggers! developmental transition 
attachment: !guarantees! increased flexibility 
self-supporting shoots: !transition to! inter-connected net-like trellis components 
trellis building: !carried out by! young shoots 
young shoots: !perform different functions via! subtle development changes