Molecular studies have elucidated Trichoderma's biocontrol mechanisms. Since fungicides have limited use, Trichoderma could control disease by new metabolic routes and epigenetic alterations. Due to environmental and health hazards, agrochemicals have been a concern since they were introduced in agriculture. Trichoderma, a well-known fungal genus with different mechanisms of action, is an alternative to pesticides and a great tool to help minimize disease incidence. Trichoderma-treated plants mainly benefit from disease control and growth promotion through priming, and these fungi can modulate plants' gene expression by boosting their immune system, accelerating their response to threats, and building stress tolerance. The latest studies suggest that epigenetics is required for plant priming and could be essential for growth promotion, expanding the possibilities for producing new resistant plant varieties. Trichoderma's propagules can be mass produced and formulated depending on the delivery method. Microsclerotia-based bioproducts could be a promising way of increasing the reliability and durability of marketed products in the field, as well as help guarantee longer shelf life. Developing novel formulations and selecting efficient Trichoderma strains can be tiresome, but patent search indicates an increase in the industrialization and commercialization of technologies and an expansion of companies' involvement in research and development in this field. Although Trichoderma is considered a well-known fungal genus, it still attracts the attention of large companies, universities, and research institutes around the world.

Trichoderma: !controls disease! Plants 
Trichoderma: !promotes growth! Plants 
Trichoderma: !modulates gene expression! Plants 
Trichoderma: !boosts immune system! Plants 
Trichoderma: !accelerates response to threats! Plants 
Trichoderma: !builds stress tolerance! Plants 
Epigenetics: !required for! Plant priming 
Microsclerotia-based bioproducts: !increase reliability and durability of! Marketed products 
Large companies, universities, research institutes: !attract attention of! Trichoderma