Heat stress has adverse effects on the growth and reproduction of plants. Zygophyllum xanthoxylum, a typical xerophyte, is a dominant species in the desert where summer temperatures are around 40ʡC. However, the mechanism underlying the thermotolerance of Z. xanthoxylum remained unclear. Here, we characterized the acclimation of Z. xanthoxylum to heat using a combination of physiological measurements and transcriptional profiles under treatments at 40ʡC and 45ʡC, respectively. Strikingly, moderate high temperature (40ʡC) led to an increase in photosynthetic capacity and superior plant performance, whereas severe high temperature (45ʡC) was accompanied by reduced photosynthetic capacity and inhibited growth. Transcriptome profiling indicated that the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were related to transcription factor activity, protein folding and photosynthesis under heat conditions. Furthermore, numerous genes encoding heat transcription shock factors (HSFs) and heat shock proteins (HSPs) were significantly up-regulated under heat treatments, which were correlated with thermotolerance of Z. xanthoxylum. Interestingly, the up-regulation of PSI and PSII genes and the down-regulation of chlorophyll catabolism genes likely contribute to improving plant performance of Z. xanthoxylum under moderate high temperature. We identified key genes associated with of thermotolerance and growth in Z. xanthoxylum, which provide significant insights into the regulatory mechanisms of thermotolerance and growth regulation in Z. xanthoxylum under high temperature conditions.

Heat stress: !affects! Growth and reproduction of plants
Zygophyllum xanthoxylum: !exhibits! Thermotolerance
Transcription factor activity: !correlates with! Heat treatments
Heat transcription shock factors (HSFs): !up-regulates! Under heat treatments
Heat shock proteins (HSPs): !up-regulates! Under heat treatments
PSI and PSII genes: !up-regulates! Under moderate high temperature
Chlorophyll catabolism genes: !down-regulates! Under moderate high temperature