Current climate change scenarios are posing greater threats to the growth and development of plants. Thus, significant efforts are required that can mitigate the negative effects of drought on the cotton plant. GDSL esterase/lipases can offer an imperative role in plant development and stress tolerance. However, thesystematic and functional roles of the GDSL gene family, particularly in cotton under water deficit conditions have not yet been explored. In this study, 103, 103, 99, 198, 203, 239, 249, and 215 GDSL proteins were identified in eight cotton genomes i.e., Gossypium herbaceum (A1), Gossypium arboretum (A2), Gossypium raimondii (D5), Gossypium hirsutum (AD1), Gossypium barbadense (AD2), Gossypium tomentosum (AD3), Gossypium mustelinum (AD4), Gossypium darwinii (AD5), respectively. A total of 198 GDSL genes of Gossypium hirsutum were divided into eleven clades using phylogenetic analysis, and the number of GhirGDSL varied among different clades. The cis-elements analysis showed that GhirGDSL gene expression was mainly related to light, plant hormones, and variable tense environments. Combining the results of transcriptome and RT-qPCR, GhirGDSL26 (Gh_A01G1774), a highly up-regulated gene, was selected for further elucidating its tole in drought stress tolerance via estimating physiological and biochemical parameters. Heterologous expression of the GhirGDSL26 gene in Arabidopsis thaliana resulted in a higher germination and survival rates, longer root lengths, lower ion leakage and induced stress-responsive genes expression under drought stress. This further highlighted that overexpressed plants had a better drought tolerance as compared to the wildtype plants. Moreover, 3, 3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and Trypan staining results indicated reduced oxidative damage, less cell membrane damage, and lower ion leakage in overexpressed plants as compared to wild type. Silencing of GhirGDSL26 in cotton via VIGS resulting in a susceptible phenotype, higher MDA and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> contents, lower SOD activity, and proline content. Our results demonstrated that GhirGDSL26 plays a critical role in cotton drought stress tolerance. Current findings enrich our knowledge of GDSL genes in cotton and provide theoretical guidance and excellent gene resources for improving drought tolerance in cotton.

GDSL: !affects! Plant development and stress tolerance
Gossypium hirsutum: !contains! 198 GDSL proteins
GhirGDSL26: !enhances! Drought stress tolerance
GhirGDSL26: !represses! Oxidative damage
VIGS: !silences! GhirGDSL26