Aluminium (Al) toxicity is one of the major constraints for crop growth and productivity in most of the acid soils worldwide. The primary lesion of Al toxicity is the rapid inhibition of root elongation. The root apex, especially the transition zone (TZ), has been identified as the major site of Al accumulation and injury. The signalling, in particular through phytohormones in the root apex TZ in response to Al stress, has been reported to play crucial roles in the regulation of Al-induced root growth inhibition. The binding of Al in the root apoplast is the initial event leading to inhibition of root elongation. Much progress has been made during recent years in understanding the molecular functions of cell wall modification and Al resistance-related genes in Al resistance or toxicity, and several signals including phytohormones, Ca2+, etc. have been reported to be involved in these processes. Here we summarize the recent advances in the understanding of Al-induced signalling and regulatory networks in the root apex involved in the regulation of Al-induced inhibition of root growth and Al toxicity/resistance. This knowledge provides novel insights into how Al-induced signals are recognized by root apical cells, transmitted from the apoplast to symplast, and finally initiate the defence system against Al. We conclude that the apoplast plays a decisive role in sensing and transmitting the Al-induced signals into the symplast, further stimulating a series of cellular responses (e.g. exudation of organic acid anions from roots) to adapt to the stress. We expect to stimulate new research by focusing on the signalling events in the root apex in response to Al stress, particularly taking into consideration the signal transduction between the meristem zone, TZ, and elongation zone and the apoplast and symplast.

Al: !inhibits! Root elongation 
Root apex: !accumulates! Al 
Al: !induces! Signalling 
Signalling: !involves! Phytohormones 
Al: !binds to! Apoplast 
Apoplast: !transmits! Al-induced signals 
Symplast: !receives! Al-induced signals 
Al-induced signals: !stimulate! Cellular responses