The Ferula genus encompasses 180-185 species and is one of the largest genera in Apiaceae, with many of Ferula species possessing important medical value. The previous studies provided more information for Ferula, but its infrageneric relationships are still confusing. In addition, its genetic basis of its adaptive evolution remains poorly understood. Plastid genomes with more variable sites have the potential to reconstruct robust phylogeny in plants and investigate the adaptive evolution of plants. Although chloroplast genomes have been reported within the Ferula genus, few studies have been conducted using chloroplast genomes, especially for endemic species in China. Comprehensively comparative analyses of 22 newly sequenced and assembled plastomes indicated that these plastomes had highly conserved genome structure, gene number, codon usage, and repeats type and distribution, but varied in plastomes size, GC content, and the SC/IR boundaries. Thirteen mutation hotspot regions were detected and they would serve as the promising DNA barcodes candidates for species identification in Ferula and related genera. Phylogenomic analyses with high supports and resolutions showed that Talassia transiliensis and Soranthus meyeri were nested in the Ferula genus, and thus they should be transferred into the Ferula genus. Our phylogenies also indicated the monophyly of subgenera Sinoferula and subgenera Narthex in Ferula genus. Twelve genes with significant posterior probabilities for codon sites were identified in the positively selective analysis, and their function may relate to the photosystem II, ATP subunit, and NADH dehydrogenase. Most of them might play an important role to help Ferula species adapt to high-temperatures, strong-light, and drought habitats. Plastome data is powerful and efficient to improve the support and resolution of the complicated Ferula phylogeny. Twelve genes with significant posterior probabilities for codon sites were helpful for Ferula to adapt to the harsh environment. Overall, our study supplies a new perspective for comprehending the phylogeny and evolution of Ferula.

Ferula: !contains! 180-185 species 
Ferula: !has! important medical value 
plastid genomes: !have potential to! reconstruct robust phylogeny 
chloroplast genomes: !have been reported! within Ferula genus 
plastomes: !vary in! size, GC content, SC/IR boundaries 
mutation hotspot regions: !serve as! DNA barcodes candidates 
Talassia transiliensis & Soranthus meyeri: !nested in! Ferula genus 
subgenera Sinoferula & subgenera Narthex: !monophyletic in! Ferula genus 
12 genes: !help! Ferula adapt to environment 
plastome data: !powerful and efficient to! improve Ferula phylogeny