The sorghum-sudangrass hybrid is a vital gramineous herbage.The F2 population was obtained to clarify genetic regularities among the traits of sorghum-sudangrass hybrids by bagging and selfing in the F1 generation using 'scattered ear sorghum' and 'red hull sudangrass.' This hybrid combines the characteristics of the strong resistance of parents, high yield, and good palatability and has clear heterosis. A thorough understanding of the genetic mechanisms of yield traits in sorghum-sudangrass hybrids is essential in improving their yield. Therefore, we conducted quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping for plant height, stem diameter, tiller number, leaf number, leaf length, leaf width, and fresh weight of each plant in three different environments, using a high-density genetic linkage map based on single nucleotide polymorphism markers previously constructed by our team. A total of 55 QTLs were detected, uniformly distributed over the 10 linkage groups (LGs), with logarithm of odds values ranging between 2.5 and 7.1, which could explain the 4.9-52.44% phenotypic variation. Furthermore, 17 yield-related relatively high-frequency QTL (RHF-QTL) loci were repeatedly detected in at least two environments, with an explanatory phenotypic variation of 4.9-30.97%. No RHF-QTLs were associated with the tiller number. The genes within the confidence interval of RHF-QTL were annotated, and seven candidate genes related to yield traits were screened. Three QTL sites overlapping or adjacent to previous studies were detected by comparative analysis. We also found that QTL was enriched and that qLL-10-1 and qFW-10-4 were located at the same location of 25.81 cM on LG10. The results of this study provide a foundation for QTL fine mapping, candidate gene cloning, and molecular marker-assisted breeding of sorghum-sudangrass hybrids.

F2 population: !obtained to clarify! genetic regularities
QTL mapping: !conducted for! plant height, stem diameter, tiller number, leaf number, leaf length, leaf width, and fresh weight
55 QTLs: !detected with! logarithm of odds values
17 RHF-QTLs: !repeatedly detected in! at least two environments
Genes within confidence interval: !annotated and! seven candidate genes screened
Comparative analysis: !detected! three QTL sites overlapping or adjacent to previous studies
QTL: !enriched and! qLL-10-1 and qFW-10-4 located at same location on LG10