At least 75% of the world's grain production comes from the three most important cereal crops: rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i>), wheat (<i>Triticum aestivum</i>), and maize (<i>Zea mays</i>). However, abiotic stressors such as heavy metal toxicity, salinity, low temperatures, and drought are all significant hazards to the growth and development of these grains. Quantitative trait locus (QTL) discovery and mapping have enhanced agricultural production and output by enabling plant breeders to better comprehend abiotic stress tolerance processes in cereals. Molecular markers and stable QTL are important for molecular breeding and candidate gene discovery, which may be utilized in transgenic or molecular introgression. Researchers can now study synteny between rice, maize, and wheat to gain a better understanding of the relationships between the QTL or genes that are important for a particular stress adaptation and phenotypic improvement in these cereals from analyzing reports on QTL and candidate genes. An overview of constitutive QTL, adaptive QTL, and significant stable multi-environment and multi-trait QTL is provided in this article as a solid framework for use and knowledge in genetic enhancement. Several QTL, such as DRO1 and Saltol, and other significant success cases are discussed in this review. We have highlighted techniques and advancements for abiotic stress tolerance breeding programs in cereals, the challenges encountered in introgressing beneficial QTL using traditional breeding techniques such as mutation breeding and marker-assisted selection (MAS), and the in roads made by new breeding methods such as genome-wide association studies (GWASs), the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9 system, and meta-QTL (MQTL) analysis. A combination of these conventional and modern breeding approaches can be used to apply the QTL and candidate gene information in genetic improvement of cereals against abiotic stresses.

QTL: !affects! Abiotic Stress Tolerance
Molecular Markers: !enable! QTL Discovery
Synteny: !links! Rice, Maize, Wheat
DRO1: !enhances! Salt Tolerance
Saltol: !enhances! Salt Tolerance
Mutation Breeding: !utilizes! MAS
GWAS: !utilizes! Genome-Wide Association Studies
CRISPR/Cas9 System: !utilizes! Meta-QTL Analysis