Salt stress is an unfavorable outcome of global climate change, adversely affecting crop growth and yield. It is the second-biggest abiotic factor damaging the morphological, physio-biochemical, and molecular processes during seed germination and plant development. Salt responses include modulation of hormonal biosynthesis, ionic homeostasis, the antioxidant defense system, and osmoprotectants to mitigate salt stress. Plants trigger salt-responsive genes, proteins, and metabolites to cope with the damaging effects of a high salt concentration. Enhancing salt tolerance among crop plants is direly needed for sustainable global agriculture. Novel protein markers, which are used for crop improvement against salt stress, are identified using proteomic techniques. As compared to single-technique approaches, the integration of genomic tools and exogenously applied chemicals offers great potential in addressing salt-stress-induced challenges. The interplay of salt-responsive proteins and genes is the missing key of salt tolerance. The development of salt-tolerant crop varieties can be achieved by integrated approaches encompassing proteomics, metabolomics, genomics, and genome-editing tools. In this review, the current information about the morphological, physiological, and molecular mechanisms of salt response/tolerance in crops is summarized. The significance of proteomic approaches to improve salt tolerance in various crops is highlighted, and an integrated omics approach to achieve global food security is discussed. Novel proteins that respond to salt stress are potential candidates for future breeding of salt tolerance.

Salt stress: !adversely affects! crop growth and yield
Hormonal biosynthesis: !modulated by! salt responses
Ionic homeostasis: !modulated by! salt responses
Antioxidant defense system: !modulated by! salt responses
Osmoprotectants: !mitigate! salt stress
Plants: !trigger! salt-responsive genes, proteins, and metabolites
Proteomic techniques: !used to! identify novel protein markers
Integrated omics approach: !needed to! achieve global food security
Genomics tools: !integrated with! exogenously applied chemicals
Salt-responsive proteins: !interplay with! genes
Salt-tolerant crop varieties: !developed by! integrated approaches
Salt response/tolerance: !summarized in! morphological, physiological, and molecular mechanisms