Drought is one of the main environmental factors limiting plant growth and development. The AP2/ERF transcription factor (TF) ERF194 play key roles in poplar growth and drought-stress tolerance. However, the physiological mechanism remains to be explored. In this study, the <i>ERF194</i>-overexpression (OX), suppressed-expression (RNA interference, RNAi), and non-transgenic (WT) poplar clone 717 were used to study the physiology role of ERF194 transcription factor in poplar growth and drought tolerance. Morphological and physiological methods were used to systematically analyze the growth status, antioxidant enzyme activity, malondialdehyde (MDA), soluble sugars, starch, and non-structural carbohydrate (NSC) contents of poplar. Results showed that, compared with WT, OX plants had decrease in plant height, internode length, and leaf area and increased number of fine roots under drought stress. In addition, OX had higher water potential, activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT) and peroxidase (POD), contents of chlorophyll, soluble sugar, starch, and NSC, implying that ERF194 positively regulates drought tolerance in poplar. The growth status of RNAi was similar to those of WT, but the relative water content and CAT activity of RNAi were lower than those of WT under drought treatment. Based on the transcriptome data, functional annotation and expression pattern analysis of differentially expressed genes were performed and further confirmed by RT-qPCR analysis. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment and gene expression pattern analysis indicated that overexpression of <i>ERF194</i> upregulated the expression of oxidoreductases and metabolism-related genes such as <i>POD</i> and <i>SOD</i>. Detection of <i>cis</i>-acting elements in the promoters suggested that ERF194 may bind to these genes through MeJA-responsive elements, ABA-responsive elements, or elements involved in defense and stress responses. The above results show that ERF194 improved tolerance to drought stress in poplar by regulating its growth and physiological factors. This study provides a new idea for the role of ERF194 transcription factor in plant growth and drought-stress response.

ERF194: !regulates! Drought tolerance 
ERF194: !upregulates! Oxidoreductases 
ERF194: !binds to! MeJA-responsive elements 
ERF194: !binds to! ABA-responsive elements 
ERF194: !binds to! Defense and stress response elements 
OX plants: !have decreased! Plant height 
OX plants: !have increased! Number of fine roots 
OX plants: !have higher! Water potential 
OX plants: !have higher! Activities of SOD, CAT, and POD 
OX plants: !have higher! Contents of chlorophyll, soluble sugar, starch, and NSC 
RNAi plants: !have lower! Relative water content 
RNAi plants: !have lower! CAT activity