Compressed vintages, high alcohol and low wine acidity are but a few repercussions of climate change effects on Australian viticulture. While warm and cool growing regions may have different practical concerns related to climate change, they both experience altered berry and must composition and potentially reduced desirable wine characteristics and market value. Storms, drought and uncertain water supplies combined with excessive heat not only depress vine productivity through altered physiology but can have direct consequences on the fruit. Sunburn, shrivelling and altered sugar-flavour-aroma balance are becoming more prevalent while bushfires can result in smoke taint. Moreover, distorted pest and disease cycles and changes in pathogen geographical distribution have altered biotic stress dynamics that require novel management strategies. A multipronged approach to address these challenges may include alternative cultivars and rootstocks or changing geographic location. In addition, modifying and incorporating novel irrigation regimes, vine architecture and canopy manipulation, vineyard floor management, soil amendments and foliar products such as antitranspirants and other film-forming barriers are potential levers that can be used to manage the effects of climate change. The adoption of technology into the vineyard including weather, plant and soil sensors are giving viticulturists extra tools to make quick decisions, while satellite and airborne remote sensing allow the adoption of precision farming. A coherent and comprehensive approach to climate risk management, with consideration of the environment, ensures that optimum production and exceptional fruit quality is maintained. We review the preliminary findings and feasibility of these new strategies in the Australian context.

Climate Change: !affects! Viticulture 
Viticulture: !requires! Novel Management Strategies 
Novel Management Strategies: !include! Alternative Cultivars and Rootstocks 
Alternative Cultivars and Rootstocks: !combined with! Irrigation Regimes 
Irrigation Regimes: !and! Vine Architecture and Canopy Manipulation 
Vine Architecture and Canopy Manipulation: !plus! Soil Amendments and Foliar Products 
Soil Amendments and Foliar Products: !utilize! Technology