Evolutionary dynamics of AP2/ERF and WRKY genes, the major components of defense response were studied extensively in the sesame pan-genome. Massive variation was observed for gene copy numbers, genome location, domain structure, exon-intron structure and protein parameters. In the pan-genome, 63% of AP2/ERF members were devoid of introns whereas >99% of WRKY genes contained multiple introns. AP2 subfamily was found to be micro-exon rich with the adjoining intronic sequences sharing sequence similarity to many stress-responsive and fatty acid metabolism genes. WRKY family included extensive multi-domain gene fusions where the additional domains significantly enhanced gene and exonic sizes as well as gene copy numbers. The fusion genes were found to have roles in acquired immunity, stress response, cell and membrane integrity as well as ROS signaling. The individual genomes shared extensive synteny and collinearity although ecological adaptation was evident among the Chinese and Indian accessions. Significant positive selection effects were noticed for both micro-exon and multi-domain genes. Splice variants with changes in acceptor, donor and branch sites were common and 6-7 splice variants were detected per gene. The study ascertained vital roles of lipid metabolism and chlorophyll biosynthesis in the defense response and stress signaling pathways. 60% of the studied genes localized in the nucleus while 20% preferred chloroplast. Unique cis-element distribution was noticed in the upstream promoter region with MYB and STRE in WRKY genes while MYC was present in the AP2/ERF genes. Intron-less genes exhibited great diversity in the promoter sequences wherein the predominance of dosage effect indicated variable gene expression levels. Mimicking the NBS-LRR genes, a chloroplast localized WRKY gene, Swetha_24868, with additional domains of chorismate mutase, cAMP and voltage-dependent potassium channel was found to act as a master regulator of defense signaling, triggering immunity and reducing ROS levels.

AP2/ERF: !devoid of! introns
WRKY: !contain! multiple introns
AP2 subfamily: !micro-exon rich!
WRKY family: !include! multi-domain gene fusions
fusion genes: !have roles in! acquired immunity, stress response, cell and membrane integrity, ROS signaling
individual genomes: !shared! synteny and collinearity
positive selection effects: !noticed for! micro-exon and multi-domain genes
splice variants: !detected per! gene
lipid metabolism: !vital role in! defense response and stress signaling pathways
60% of studied genes: !localized in! nucleus
20% of studied genes: !preferred! chloroplast
MYB and STRE: !present in! WRKY genes
MYC: !present in! AP2/ERF genes
intron-less genes: !exhibited! diversity in promoter sequences
Swetha_24868: !acts as! master regulator of defense signaling