Iris lactea var. chinensis, a perennial herbaceous species, is widely distributed and has good drought tolerance traits. However, there is little information in public databases concerning this herb, so it is difficult to understand the mechanism underlying its drought tolerance. In this study, we used Illumina sequencing technology to conduct an RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of I. lactea var. chinensis plants under water-stressed conditions and rehydration to explore the potential mechanisms involved in plant drought tolerance. The resulting de novo assembled transcriptome revealed 126,979 unigenes, of which 44,247 were successfully annotated. Among these, 1187 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified from a comparison of the water-stressed treatment and the control (CK) treatment (T/CK); there were 481 upregulated genes and 706 downregulated genes. Additionally, 275 DEGs were identified in the comparison of the rehydration treatment and the water-stressed treatment (R/T). Based on Quantitative Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis, the expression levels of eight randomly selected unigenes were consistent with the transcriptomic data under water-stressed and rehydration treatment, as well as in the CK. According to Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis, proline metabolism-related DEGs, including those involved in the 'proline catabolic process', the 'proline metabolic process', and 'arginine and proline metabolism', may play important roles in plant drought tolerance. Additionally, these DEGs encoded 43 transcription factors (TFs), 46 transporters, and 22 reactive oxygen species (ROS)-scavenging system-related proteins. Biochemical analysis and histochemical detection showed that proline and ROS were accumulated under water-stressed conditions, which is consistent with the result of the transcriptomic analysis. In summary, our transcriptomic data revealed that the drought tolerance of I. lactea var. chinensis depends on proline metabolism, the action of TFs and transporters, and a strong ROS-scavenging system. The related genes found in this study could help us understand the mechanisms underlying the drought tolerance of I. lactea var. chinensis.

proline metabolism: !enhances! drought tolerance
TFs: !regulate! proline metabolism
transporters: !regulate! proline metabolism
ROS-scavenging system: !regulates! proline metabolism
proline: !accumulates! under water-stressed conditions
ROS: !accumulates! under water-stressed conditions