['36625794', 'Seed longevity is an important trait for agriculture and the conservation of  genetic resources. beta-1,3-Glucanases were first recognized as pathogenesis-related  proteins involved in plant defense, but their roles in seeds are largely unknown.  Here, we report a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored beta-1,3-glucanase, BG14,  that degrades callose in seed embryos and functions in seed longevity and  dormancy in Arabidopsis. The loss of function of BG14 significantly decreased  seed longevity, whereas functional reversion (RE) and overexpression (OE) lines  reversed and increased the impaired phenotype, respectively. The loss of function  of BG14 enhanced callose deposition in the embryos of mature seeds, confirmed by  quantitative determination and the decreased callose degrading ability in bg14.  The drop-and-see (DANS) assay revealed that the fluorescence signal in bg14 was  significantly lower than that observed in the other three genotypes. BG14 is  located on the periphery of the cell wall and can completely merge with callose  at the plasmodesmata of epidermal cells. BG14 was highly expressed in developing  seeds and was induced by aging and abscisic acid (ABA). The loss of function of  BG14 led to a variety of phenotypes related to ABA, including reduced seed  dormancy and reduced responses to treatment with ABA or pacolblltrazol, whereas  OE lines showed the opposite phenotype. The reduced ABA response is because of  the decreased level of ABA and the lowered expression of ABA synthesis genes in  bg14. Taken together, this study demonstrated that BG14 is a bona fide BG that  mediates callose degradation in the plasmodesmata of embryo cells,  transcriptionally influences ABA synthesis genes in developing seeds, and  positively affects seed longevity and dormancy in Arabidopsis.', '2023 Mar', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.16102', 'ORCID:']

BG14: !degrades! callose 
BG14: !localizes to! plasmodesmata 
BG14: !enhances! seed longevity 
BG14: !enhances! seed dormancy 
BG14: !induces! ABA synthesis genes 
BG14: !represses! ABA response