Ginseng, Panax ginseng Meyer, is a traditional herb that is immensely valuable both for human health and medicine and for medicinal plant research. The homeodomain leucine zipper (HD-Zip) gene family is a plant-specific transcription factor gene family indispensable in the regulation of plant growth and development and plant response to environmental stresses. We identified 117 HD-Zip transcripts from the transcriptome of ginseng cv. Damaya that is widely grown in Jilin, China where approximately 60% of the world's ginseng is produced. These transcripts were positioned to 64 loci in the ginseng genome and the ginseng HD-Zip genes were designated as PgHDZ genes. Identification of 82 and 83 PgHDZ genes from the ginseng acc. IR826 and cv. ChP genomes, respectively, indicated that the PgHDZ gene family consists of approximately 80 PgHDZ genes. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the gene family originated after Angiosperm split from Gymnosperm and before Dicots split from Monocots. The gene family was classified into four subfamilies and has dramatically diverged not only in gene structure and functionality but also in expression characteristics. Nevertheless, co-expression network analysis showed that the activities of the genes in the family remain significantly correlated, suggesting their functional correlation. Five hub PgHDZ genes were identified that might have central functions in ginseng biological processes and four of them were shown to be actively involved in plant response to environmental pH stress in ginseng. The PgHDZ gene family was identified from ginseng and analyzed systematically. Five potential hub genes were identified and four of them were shown to be involved in ginseng response to environmental pH stress. The results provide new insights into the characteristics, diversity, evolution, and functionality of the PgHDZ gene family in ginseng and lay a foundation for comprehensive research of the gene family in plants.

PgHDZ gene family: !originated after! Angiosperm split from Gymnosperm 
PgHDZ gene family: !diverged in! gene structure and functionality 
PgHDZ gene family: !remain correlated in! activities 
Five hub PgHDZ genes: !identified as! potential central functions 
Four hub PgHDZ genes: !involved in! ginseng response to environmental pH stress