The transition from vegetative to floral phase is the result of complex crosstalk of exogenous and endogenous floral integrators. This critical physiological event is the response to environmental interaction, which causes biochemical cascades of reactions at different internal tissues, organs, and releases signals that make the plant moves from vegetative status to a reproductive phase. This network controlling flowering time is not deciphered largely in bread wheat. In this study, a comparative transcriptome analysis at a transition time in combination with genetic mapping was used to identify responsible genes in a stage and tissue-specific manner. For this reason, two winter cultivars that have been bred in Germany showing contrasting and stable heading time in different environments were selected for the analysis. In total, 670 and 1075 differentially expressed genes in the shoot apical meristem and leaf tissue, respectively, could be identified in 23 QTL intervals for the heading date. In the transition apex, Histone methylation H3-K36 and regulation of circadian rhythm are both controlled by the same homoeolog genes mapped in QTL TaHd112, TaHd124, and TaHd137. TaAGL14 gene that identifies the floral meristem was mapped in TaHd054 in the double ridge. In the same stage, the homoeolog located on chromosome 7D of FLOWERING TIME LOCUS T mapped on chr 7B, which evolved an antagonist function and acts as a flowering repressor was uncovered. The wheat orthologue of transcription factor ASYMMETRIC LEAVES 1 (AS1) was identified in the late reproductive stage and was mapped in TaHd102, which is strongly associated with heading date. Deletion of eight nucleotides in the AS1 promoter could be identified in the binding site of the SUPPRESSOR OF CONSTANS OVEREXPRESSION 1 (SOC1) gene in the late flowering cultivar. Both proteins AS1 and SOC1 are inducing flowering time in response to gibberellin biosynthesis. The global transcriptomic at the transition phase uncovered stage and tissue-specific genes mapped in QTL of heading date in winter wheat. In response to Gibberellin signaling, wheat orthologous transcription factor AS1 is expressed in the late reproductive phase of the floral transition. The locus harboring this gene is the strongest QTL associated with the heading date trait in the German cultivars. Consequently, we conclude that this is another indication of the Gibberellin biosynthesis as the mechanism behind the heading variation in wheat.

Histone methylation H3-K36: !controls! Circadian rhythm
TaAGL14 gene: !identifies! Floral meristem
TaHd054: !harbors! TaAGL14 gene
TaHd102: !harbors! Wheat orthologue of AS1
AS1: !induces! Flowering time
SOC1: !induces! Flowering time
Gibberellin signaling: !activates! AS1 and SOC1