Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) is a crucial crop for regions of the world that are prone to both heat and drought; however, the phytotoxic cowpea aphid (Aphis craccivora) impairs plant physiology at low population levels. Both antibiotic and antixenotic forms of resistance to the aphid have been mapped to two quantitative trait loci (QTLs) and near isogenic lines (NILs). The molecular mechanism for this resistance response remains unknown. To understand the genes underlying susceptibility and resistance, two cowpea lines with shared heritage were infested along a time course and characterized for transcriptome variation. Aphids remodeled cowpea development and signaling relative to host plant resistance and the duration of feeding, with resource acquisition and mobilization determining, in part, susceptibility to aphid attack. Major differences between the susceptible and resistant cowpea were identified including two regions of interest housing the most genetic differences between the lines. Candidate genes enabling aphid resistance include both conventional resistance genes (e.g., leucine rich repeat protein kinases) as well as multiple novel genes with no known orthologues. Our results demonstrate that feeding by the cowpea aphid globally remodels the transcriptome of cowpea, but how this occurs depends on both the duration of feeding and host-plant resistance. Constitutive expression profiles of the resistant genotype link aphid resistance to a finely-tuned resource management strategy that ultimately reduces damage (e.g., chlorosis) and delays cell turnover, while impeding aphid performance. Thus, aphid resistance in cowpea is a complex, multigene response that involves crosstalk between primary and secondary metabolism.

Aphis craccivora: !impairs! cowpea physiology
QTLs/NILs: !map to! antibiotic/antixenotic resistance
aphid: !remodels! cowpea development/signaling
resistant genotype: !links to! resource management strategy
leucine rich repeat protein kinases: !enable! aphid resistance
multigene response: !involves! crosstalk between primary/secondary metabolism