Sea-lavenders (Limonium Mill., Plumbaginaceae) are a cosmopolitan group of diploid and polyploid plants often adapted to extreme saline environments, with a mostly Tethyan distribution, occurring in the Mediterranean, Irano-Turanian, Euro-Siberian and in the New World. The halophylic Limonium vulgare polyploid complex in particular, presents a large distribution throughout extreme salt-marsh habitats and shows little morphological but high taximetric variation, frequently blurring species delimitation. In this work we pursue three main goals: assert whether SNP data from polyploid individuals has the resolution to distinguish the seven sampled species, to better understand how genetically structured Limonium vulgare is, and attempt to identify specific molecular mechanisms for the differentiation between L. maritimum and L. vulgare. For this purpose, 95 individuals were genotyped using Genotyping by Sequencing (GBS), which were assembled as two independent datasets using IPYRAD. All analyses performed downstream of assembly were fully automated. Phylogenetic inference, PCA, and admixture plots were used to infer answers to the study's main goals. Close to 10,000 SNPs were obtained for each dataset. Phylogenetic analyses reveal that polyploid data can be used to infer species relationships. Population structure analyses suggest a genetically structured L. vulgare. A set of 34 SNPs were found to be fully segregated between L. vulgare and L. maritimum, two of which are potentially linked to proteins that might be involved in the speciation process. Despite polyploid data analyses shortcomings, GBS generated SNPs have the resolution to discern all seven included species. Limonium vulgare revealed pronounced genetic structure along a geographical north-south cline. L. maritimum always appears as a distinct genetic entity. Segregated SNPs between L. vulgare and L. maritimum indicate salinity response and morphological trait control genes as potentially interesting to follow up for studying these species' divergence process.

GBS: !generates! SNPs 
SNPs: !distinguish! species 
L. vulgare: !structured along! geographical north-south cline 
L. maritimum: !distinct from! L. vulgare 
SNPs: !segregate! L. vulgare and L. maritimum 
SNPs: !potentially linked to! proteins 
proteins: !involved in! speciation process