N-acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs) are important players in plant-bacteria interactions. Different AHL-producing bacteria can improve plant growth and resistance against plant pathogens. In nature, plants may host a variety of AHL-producing bacteria and frequently experience numerous AHLs at the same time. Therefore, a coordinated response to combined AHL molecules is necessary. The purpose of this study was to explore the mechanism of AHL-priming using combined AHL molecules including N-(3-oxo-hexanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone, N-3-oxo-octanoyl-L-homoserine lactone, N-3-oxo-dodecanoyl-L-homoserine lactone, and N-3-oxo-tetradecanoyl-L-homoserine lactone and AHL-producing bacteria including Serratia plymuthica HRO-C48, Rhizobium etli CFN42, Burkholderia graminis DSM17151, and Ensifer meliloti (Sinorhizobium meliloti) Rm2011. We used transcriptome analysis, phytohormone measurements, as well as genetic and microbiological approaches to assess how the combination of structurally diverse AHL molecules influence Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Our findings revealed a particular response to a mixture of AHL molecules (AHL mix). Different expression patterns indicated that the reaction of plants exposed to AHL mix differs from that of plants exposed to single AHL molecules. In addition, different content of jasmonic acid (JA) and derivatives revealed that jasmonates play an important role in AHL mix-induced priming. The fast and stable decreased concentration of COOH-JA-Ile after challenge with the flagellin-derived peptide flg22 indicated that AHL mix modifies the metabolism of jasmonates. Study of various JA- and salicylic acid-related Arabidopsis mutants strengthened the notion that JA homeostasis is involved in AHL-priming. Understanding how the combination of AHLs primes plants for enhanced resistance has the potential to broaden our approaches in sustainable agriculture and will help to effectively protect plants against pathogens.

AHLs: !improve! Plant Growth 
AHL mix: !differs from! Single AHL molecules 
AHL mix: !modifies! JA metabolism 
JA homeostasis: !involved in! AHL-priming