Legumes acquire soil nutrients through nitrogen-fixing root nodules and lateral roots. To balance the costs and benefits of nodulation, legumes negatively control root nodule number by autoregulatory and hormonal pathways. How legumes simultaneously coordinate root nodule and lateral root development to procure nutrients remains poorly understood. In Medicago (Medicago truncatula), a subset of mature C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDE (CEP) hormones can systemically promote nodule number, but all CEP hormones tested to date negatively regulate lateral root number. Here we showed that Medicago CEP7 produces a mature peptide, SymCEP7, that promotes nodulation from the shoot without compromising lateral root number. Rhizobial inoculation induced CEP7 in the susceptible root nodulation zone in a Nod factor-dependent manner, and, in contrast to other CEP genes, its transcription level was elevated in the ethylene signaling mutant sickle. Using mass spectrometry, fluorescence microscopy and expression analysis, we demonstrated that SymCEP7 activity requires the COMPACT ROOT ARCHITECTURE 2 receptor and activates the shoot-to-root systemic effector, miR2111. Shoot-applied SymCEP7 rapidly promoted nodule number in the pM to nM range at concentrations up to five orders of magnitude lower than effects mediated by root-applied SymCEP7. Shoot-applied SymCEP7 also promoted nodule number in White Clover (Trifolium repens) and Lotus (Lotus japonicus), which suggests that this biological function may be evolutionarily conserved. We propose that SymCEP7 acts in the Medicago shoot to counter balance the autoregulation pathways induced rapidly by rhizobia to enable nodulation without compromising lateral root growth, thus promoting the acquisition of nutrients other than nitrogen to support their growth.

CEP7: !produces! SymCEP7 
SymCEP7: !activates! miR2111 
Rhizobial inoculation: !induces! CEP7 
Nod factor: !dependent on! CEP7 induction 
sickle: !elevates! CEP7 transcription 
COMPACT ROOT ARCHITECTURE 2 receptor: !required for! SymCEP7 activity 
Shoot-applied SymCEP7: !promotes! nodule number 
White Clover/Lotus: !respond to! SymCEP7