Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are a predominant group of serine/threonine protein kinases that have multi-faceted functions in eukaryotes. The plant CDK members have well-known roles in cell cycle progression, transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, abiotic stress and defense responses, making them promising targets for developing stress adaptable high-yielding crops. There is relatively sparse information available on the CDK family genes of cultivated oilseed crop peanut and its diploid progenitors. We have identified 52 putative cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and CDK-like (CDKLs) genes in Arachis hypogaea (cultivated peanut) and total 26 genes in each diploid parent of cultivated peanut (Arachis duranensis and Arachis ipaensis). Both CDK and CDKL genes were classified into eight groups based on their cyclin binding motifs and their phylogenetic relationship with Arabidopsis counterparts. Genes in the same subgroup displayed similar exon-intron structure and conserved motifs. Further, gene duplication analysis suggested that segmental duplication events played major roles in the expansion and evolution of CDK and CDKL genes in cultivated peanuts. Identification of diverse cis-acting response elements in CDK and CDKL genes promoter indicated their potential fundamental roles in multiple biological processes. Various gene expression patterns of CDKs and CDKLs in different peanut tissues suggested their involvement during growth and development. In addition, qRT-PCR analysis demonstrated that most representing CDK and CDKL gene family members were significantly down-regulated under ABA, PEG and mannitol treatments. Genome-wide analysis offers a comprehensive understanding of the classification, evolution, gene structure, and gene expression profiles of CDK and CDKL genes in cultivated peanut and their diploid progenitors. Additionally, it also provides cell cycle regulatory gene resources for further functional characterization to enhance growth, development and abiotic stress tolerance.

CDKs: !have multi-faceted functions in! eukaryotes 
CDKs: !classified into! 8 groups 
CDKs: !expanded and evolved by! segmental duplication events 
CDKs: !involved in! multiple biological processes 
CDKs: !expressed in! different peanut tissues 
CDKs: !down-regulated under! ABA, PEG and mannitol treatments