Sucrose non-ferment 1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2) is a highly conserved protein kinase in plants that plays an important role in regulating plant response to drought stress. Although it has been reported in some plants, the evolutionary relationship of potato SnRK2s and their function in drought resistance have not been systematically analyzed. In this study, molecular characteristic analysis showed that 8 StSnRK2s were distributed on six chromosomes, coding proteins were divided into three subgroups, and StSnRK2s clustered in the same subgroup had similar conserved motifs and domains. In addition, StSnRK2 has a wide range of replication events in some species, making it closer to dicots in the process of evolution. In addition, the average nonsynonymous substitution rate/synonymous substitution rate (Ka/Ks) value of SnRK2s in monocots was higher than that of dicots. The codon usage index showed that SnRK2s prefer to use cytosine 3 (C3s), guanine 3 (G3s) and GC content (GC3s) in monocots, whereas thymine 3 (T3s) and adenine 3 (A3s) are preferred in dicots. Furthermore, stress response analysis showed that the expression of StSnRK2s under different degrees of drought stress significantly correlated with one or more stress-related physiological indices, such as proline and malondialdehyde (MDA) content, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) activity, ion leakage (IL) etc. The drought resistance of StSnRK2 transgenic plants was determined to occur in the order of StSnRK2.1/2.8 > StSnRK2.2/2.5 > StSnRK2.4/2.6 > StSnRK2.3 > StSnRK2.7, was attributed to not only lower IL but also higher proline, soluble sugar contents and stress-related genes in transgenic plants compared to wild type (WT). In conclusion, this study provides useful insights into the evolution and function of StSnRK2s and lays a foundation for further study on the molecular mechanism of StSnRK2s regulating potato drought resistance.

SnRK2: !distributed on! 6 chromosomes 
SnRK2: !clustered in! same subgroup 
SnRK2: !prefers! C3s, G3s, GC3s (monocots) 
SnRK2: !prefers! T3s, A3s (dicots) 
SnRK2: !correlated with! proline, MDA content, SOD, CAT activity, IL 
StSnRK2: !enhances! drought resistance 
StSnRK2: !regulates! potato drought resistance