Drought stress severely affects the growth and development of rice, especially at the reproductive stage, which results in disturbed metabolic processes, reduced seed-set/grain filling, deteriorated grain quality, declined productivity, and lower yield. Despite the recent advances in understanding the responses of rice to drought stress, there is a need to comprehensively integrate the morpho-physio-biochemical studies with the molecular responses/differential expression of genes and decipher the underlying pathways that regulate the adaptability of rice at various drought-sensitive growth stages. Our comparative analysis of immature panicle from a drought-tolerant (Nagina 22) and a drought-sensitive (IR 64) rice cultivar grown under control (well-watered) and water-deficit/drought stress (treatment, imposed at the reproductive stage) conditions unraveled some novel stress-responsive genes/pathways responsible for reproductive-stage drought stress tolerance. The results revealed a more important role of upregulated (6706) genes in the panicle of N 22 at reproductive-stage drought stress compared to that (5590) in IR 64. Functional enrichment and MapMan analyses revealed that majority of the DEGs were associated with the phytohormone, redox signalling/homeostasis, secondary metabolite, and transcription factor-mediated mitigation of the adverse effects of drought stress in N 22. The upregulated expression of the genes associated with starch/sucrose metabolism, secondary metabolites synthesis, transcription factors, glutathione, linoleic acid, and phenylalanine metabolism in N 22 was significantly more than that in the panicle of IR 64. Compared to IR 64, 2743 genes were upregulated in N 22 under control conditions, which further increased (4666) under drought stress in panicle of the tolerant cultivar. Interestingly, we observed 6706 genes to be upregulated in the panicle of N 22 over IR 64 under drought and 5814 genes get downregulated in the panicle of N 22 over IR 64 under the stress. In addition, RT-qPCR analysis confirmed differential expression patterns of the DEGs. These genes/pathways associated with the reproductive-stage drought tolerance might provide an important source of molecular markers for genetic manipulation of rice for enhanced drought tolerance.

N 22: !upregulates! 6706 genes
IR 64: !upregulates! 5590 genes
N 22: !upregulates! 2743 genes
N 22: !upregulates! 4666 genes
N 22: !downregulates! 5814 genes
phytohormone: !mitigates! adverse effects of drought stress
redox signalling/homeostasis: !mitigates! adverse effects of drought stress
secondary metabolite: !mitigates! adverse effects of drought stress
transcription factor: !mitigates! adverse effects of drought stress
starch/sucrose metabolism: !enhances! N 22
secondary metabolites synthesis: !enhances! N 22
transcription factors: !enhances! N 22
glutathione: !enhances! N 22
linoleic acid: !enhances! N 22
phenylalanine metabolism: !enhances! N 22