As one of the ten most famous flowers in China, the chrysanthemum has rich germplasm with a variety of flowering induction pathways, most of which are photoperiod-induced. After treatment with DNA methylation inhibitors, it was found that DNA methylation plays an important role in flowering regulation, but the mechanism of action remains unclear. Therefore, in this study, curcumin, 5-azaC, their mixed treatment, and MET1<sub>-RNAi</sub> lines were used for transcriptome sequencing to find out how different treatments affected gene expression in chrysanthemums at different stages of flowering. Genomic DNA methylation levels were measured using HPLC technology. The methylation level of the whole genome in the vegetative growth stage was higher than that in the flowering stage. The methylation level of DNA in the vegetative growth stage was the lowest in the curcumin and mixed treatment, and the methylation level of DNA in the transgenic line, mixed treatment, and curcumin treatment was the lowest in the flowering stage. The flowering rate of mixed treatment and curcumin treatment was the lowest. Analysis of differentially expressed genes in transcriptomes showed that 5-azaC treatment had the most differentially expressed genes, followed by curcumin and transgenic lines, and mixed treatment had the fewest. In addition, 5-azaC treatment resulted in the differential expression of multiple DNA methylation transferases, which led to the differential expression of many genes. Analysis of differentially expressed genes in different treatments revealed that different treatments had gene specificity. However, the down-regulated GO pathway in all 4 treatments was involved in the negative regulation of the reproductive process, and post-embryonic development, and regulation of flower development. Several genes associated with DNA methylation and flowering regulation showed differential expression in response to various treatments. Both DNA methylase reagent treatment and targeted silencing of the MET1 gene can cause differential expression of the genes. The operation of the exogenous application is simple, but the affected genes are exceedingly diverse and untargeted. Therefore, it is possible to construct populations with DNA methylation phenotypic diversity and to screen genes for DNA methylation regulation.

Gene: !affects! Flowering rate
Gene: !localizes to! Vegetative growth stage
Gene: !interacts with! DNA methylation transferases
Gene: !enhances! Post-embryonic development
Gene: !represses! Reproductive process
Gene: !synthesizes! DNA methylation