The factors that determine the growth and spread advantages of an alien plant during the invasion process remain open to debate. The genetic diversity and differentiation of an invasive plant population might be closely related to its growth adaptation and spread in the introduced range. However, little is known about whether phenotypic and genetic variation in invasive plant populations covary during the invasion process along invaded geographic distances. In a wild experiment, we examined the genetic variation in populations of the aggressively invasive species <i>Erigeron annuus</i> at different geographical distances from the first recorded point of introduction (FRPI) in China. We also measured growth traits in the wild and common garden experiments, and the coefficient of variation (CV) of populations in the common garden experiments. We found that <i>E. annuus</i> populations had better growth performance (i.e., height and biomass) and genetic diversity, and less trait variation, in the long-term introduced region (east) than in the short-term introduced region (west). Furthermore, population growth performance was significantly positively or negatively correlated with genetic diversity or genetic variation. Our results indicate that there was parallel genetic and phenotypic differentiation along the invaded geographic distance in response to adaptation and spread, and populations that entered introduced regions earlier had consistently high genetic diversity and high growth dominance. Growth and reproduction traits can be used as reliable predictors of the adaptation and genetic variation of invasive plants.

E. annuus: !has better growth performance! in long-term introduced region
E. annuus: !has higher genetic diversity! in long-term introduced region
E. annuus: !has less trait variation! in long-term introduced region
Growth performance: !is positively correlated with! genetic diversity
Growth performance: !is negatively correlated with! genetic variation