Crop plasticity is fundamental to sustainability discussions in production agriculture. Modern corn (<i>Zea mays</i> L.) genetics can compensate yield determinants to a small degree, but plasticity mechanisms have been masked by breeder selection and plant density management preferences. While tillers are a well-known source of plasticity in cereal crops, the functional trade-offs of tiller expression to the hierarchical yield formation process in corn are unknown. This investigation aimed to further dissect the consequences of tiller expression on corn yield component determination and plasticity in a range of environments from two plant fraction perspectives - i) main stalks only, considering potential functional trade-offs due to tiller expression; and ii) comprehensive (main stalk plus tillers). This multi-seasonal study considered a dataset of 17 site-years across Kansas, United States. Replicated field trials evaluated tiller presence (removed or intact) in two hybrids (P0657AM and P0805AM) at three target plant densities (25000, 42000, and 60000 plants ha<sup>-1</sup>). Record of ears and kernels per unit area and kernel weight were collected separately for both main stalks and tillers in each plot. Indicated tiller contributions impacted the plasticity of yield components in evaluated genotypes. Ear number and kernel number per area were less dependent on plant density, but kernel number remained key to yield stability. Although ear number was less related to yield stability, ear source and type were significant yield predictors, with tiller axillary ears as stronger contributors than main stalk secondary ears in high-yielding environments. Certainly, managing for the most main stalk primary ears possible - that is, optimizing the plant density (which consequently reduces tiller expression), is desirable to maximize yields. However, the demonstrated escape from the deterministic hierarchy of corn yield formation may offer avenues to reduce corn management dependence on a seasonally variable optimum plant density, which cannot be remediated mid-season.

tiller: !affects! yield components
plant density: !influences! tiller expression
tiller axillary ears: !contribute more to! yield stability
main stalk primary ears: !maximize! yields
plant density: !reduces! tiller expression