Salt stress has become one of the main factors limiting crop yield in recent years. The post-germinative growth is most sensitive to salt stress in soybean. In this study, cultivated and wild soybeans were used for an integrated metabonomics and transcriptomics analysis to determine whether wild soybean can resist salt stress by maintaining the mobilization of stored substances in cotyledons and the balance of carbon and nitrogen in the hypocotyl/root axis (HRA). Compared with wild soybean, the growth of cultivated soybean was significantly inhibited during the post-germinative growth period under salt stress. Integrating analysis found that the breakdown products of proteins, such as glutamate, glutamic acid, aspartic acid, and asparagine, increased significantly in wild soybean cotyledons. Asparagine synthase and fumarate hydratase genes and genes encoding HSP20 family proteins were specifically upregulated. In wild soybean HRA, levels of glutamic acid, aspartic acid, asparagine, citric acid, and succinic acid increased significantly, and the glutamate decarboxylase gene and the gene encoding carbonic anhydrase in nitrogen metabolism were significantly upregulated. The metabolic model indicated that wild soybean enhanced the decomposition of stored proteins and the transport of amino acids to the HRA in cotyledons and the GABA shunt to maintain carbon and nitrogen balance in the HRA to resist salt stress. This study provided a theoretical basis for cultivating salt-tolerant soybean varieties and opened opportunities for the development of sustainable agricultural practices.

Asparagine synthase: !upregulated in! wild soybean cotyledons
Fumarate hydratase: !upregulated in! wild soybean cotyledons
HSP20 family proteins: !upregulated in! wild soybean cotyledons
Glutamate decarboxylase: !upregulated in! wild soybean HRA
Carbonic anhydrase: !upregulated in! wild soybean HRA
Stored proteins: !decomposed by! wild soybean
Amino acids: !transported to! wild soybean HRA
GABA shunt: !enhanced by! wild soybean