Excessive cadmium (Cd) accumulation in vegetables due to farmland pollution constitutes a serious threat to human health. Eggplant has a tendency to accumulate Cd. To investigate the mechanism of the differences in Cd accumulation levels between high-Cd (BXGZ) and low-Cd (MYQZ) eggplant cultivar, physiological and biochemical indicators and mRNA expression of eggplant were examined using photosynthetic apparatus, biochemical test kits, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and transcriptome sequencing, etc. The results of biochemical test kits and FTIR revealed that MYQZ enhanced pectin methylesterase (PME) activity, and lignin and pectin content in the root cell wall, which was associated with the upregulation of PME, cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase and peroxidase (PODs). Higher levels of cysteine and glutathione (GSH) contents and upregulation of genes associated with sulfur metabolism, as well as higher expression of ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABCs), cation exchangers (CAX) and metal tolerance proteins (MTPs) were observed in MYQZ. In BXGZ, the higher stomatal density and stomatal aperture as well as higher levels of Ca<sup>2+</sup> binding protein-1 (PCaP1) and aquaporins and lower levels of A2-type cyclins (CYCA2-1) are consistent with an enhanced transpiration rate in BXGZ. Furthermore, a more developed root system was shown to be associated with higher levels of auxin response factor (ARF19), GATA transcription factors (GATA4, 5 and 11) and auxin efflux carrier component (PIN5) in BXGZ. In conclusion, highly active PME, and higher levels of lignin and pectin in MYQZ are expected to reduce Cd toxicity, while Cd translocation can be inhibited with the help of ABC and other Cd transporters. As for BXGZ, the uptake and translocation of Cd were enhanced by the developed root system and stronger transpiration.

PME: !enhances! lignin and pectin content 
Sulfur metabolism genes: !upregulate! cysteine and glutathione (GSH) contents 
ABC transporters: !translocate! Cd 
Cation exchangers (CAX): !translocate! Cd 
Metal tolerance proteins (MTPs): !translocate! Cd 
Stomatal density/aperture: !increase! transpiration rate 
PCaP1: !increase! transpiration rate 
Aquaporins: !increase! transpiration rate 
A2-type cyclins (CYCA2-1): !decrease! transpiration rate 
ARF19: !increase! root system development 
GATA transcription factors (GATA4, 5 and 11): !increase! root system development 
PIN5: !increase! root system development