Floral scent is vital for pollinator attraction and varies among and within plant species. However, little is known about how inter-individual variation in floral scent affects the abundance and composition of floral visitor assemblages within populations. Moreover, for deceptive plants it is predicted that intra-population variation in scent can be maintained by negative frequency-dependent selection, but empirical evidence is still lacking. To investigate the ecological and evolutionary relations between inter-individual scent variation (<i>i.e</i>., total emission and composition) and floral visitors in deceptive plants, we studied floral scent, visitor assemblages, and fruit set in two populations of fly-pollinated (Psychodidae, Sphaeroceridae; Diptera) and deceptive <i>Arum maculatum</i> from Austria (JOS) and northern Italy (DAO). By correlating individual data on floral scent and visitor assemblages, we show that inter-individual variation in floral scent partly explains variation in visitor assemblages. The quantity of floral scent emitted per individual correlated positively with visitor abundance in both populations but explained visitor composition only in DAO, where strongly scented inflorescences attracted more sphaerocerid flies. However, in each population, the composition of floral scent did not correlate with the composition of floral visitors. There was also no evidence of negative frequency-dependent selection on floral scent. Instead, in JOS, more frequent scent phenotypes attracted more pollinators and were more likely to set an infructescence than rarer ones. Our results show that floral scent, despite being key in pollinator attraction in <i>A. maculatum</i>, only partly explains variation in pollinator abundance and composition. Overall, this study is the first to shed light on the importance of inter-individual variation in floral scent in explaining floral visitor assemblages at the population level in a deceptive plant species.

Floral scent: !affects! Visitor abundance 
Visitor abundance: !correlates with! Floral scent 
Visitor composition: !correlates with! Floral scent (only in DAO) 
Scent phenotypes: !attracts! More pollinators 
Scent phenotypes: !more likely to set! Infructescence