Studying the population structure and genetic diversity of historical datasets is a proposed use for association analysis. This is particularly important when the dataset contains traits that are time-consuming or costly to measure. A set of 96 elite barley genotypes, developed from eight breeding programs of the Western Canadian Cooperative Trials were used in the current study. Genetic diversity, allelic variation, and linkage disequilibrium (LD) were investigated using 5063 high-quality SNP markers <i>via</i> the Illumina 9K Barley Infinium iSelect SNP assay. The distribution of SNPs markers across the barley genome ranged from 449 markers on chromosome 1H to 1111 markers on chromosome 5H. The average polymorphism information content (PIC) per locus was 0.275 and ranged from 0.094 to 0.375. Bayesian clustering in STRUCTURE and principal coordinate analysis revealed that the populations are differentiated primarily due to the different breeding program origins and ear-row type into five subpopulations. Analysis of molecular variance based on PhiPT values suggested that high values of genetic diversity were observed within populations and accounted for 90% of the total variance. Subpopulation 5 exhibited the most diversity with the highest values of the diversity indices, which represent the breeding program gene pool of AFC, AAFRD, AU, and BARI. With increasing genetic distance, the LD values, expressed as r<sup>2</sup>, declined to below the critical r<sup>2 =</sup> 0.18 after 3.91 cM, and the same pattern was observed on each chromosome. Our results identified an important pattern of genetic diversity among the Canadian barley panel that was proposed to be representative of target breeding programs and may have important implications for association mapping in the future. This highlight, that efforts to identify novel variability underlying this diversity may present practical breeding opportunities to develop new barley genotypes.

SNP: !localizes to! Barley Genome 
SNP: !measures! Polymorphism Information Content 
Barley Genotypes: !differentiated by! Breeding Program Origins 
Genetic Diversity: !observed in! Subpopulation 5 
Linkage Disequilibrium: !declines to! r<sup>2 =</sup> 0.18 
Variability: !underlying! Genetic Diversity