This study reported seven new plastomes from Impatiens and observed three highly variable regions for phylogeny and DNA barcoding, which resolved the relationships among sections of subgenus Impatiens. Impatiens L. (Balsaminaceae, Ericales) is one of the largest and most diverse genera of angiosperms, widely known for its taxonomic difficulty. In this study, we reevaluated the infrageneric relationships within the genus Impatiens, using complete plastome sequence data. Seven complete plastomes of Impatiens (representing 6 species) were newly sequenced and characterized along with 20 previously published plastomes of other Impatiens species, plus 2 plastomes of outgroups (Hydrocera triflora, Balsaminaceae; Marcgravia coriacea, Marcgraviaceae). The total size of these 29 plastomes ranged from 151,538막p to 152,917막p, except 2 samples of Impatiens morsei, which exhibited a shorter length and lost some genes encoding NADH dehydrogenase subunits. Moreover, the number of simple sequence repeats (SSRs) ranged from 51 to 113, and the number of long repeats from 17 to 26. In addition, three highly variable regions were identified (trnG-GCC (The previous one), ndhF-rpl32-trnL-UGA-ccsA, and ycf1). Our phylogenomic analysis based on 80 plastome-derived protein-coding genes strongly supported the monophyly of Impatiens and its two subgenera (Clavicarpa and Impatiens), and fully resolved relationships among the six (out of seven) sampled sections of subgenus Impatiens. Overall, the plastome DNA markers and phylogenetic results reported in this study will facilitate future identification, taxonomic and DNA barcoding studies in Impatiens as well as evolutionary studies in Balsaminaceae.

Impatiens: !resolved relationships among! sections of subgenus Impatiens
plastomes: !ranged from! 151,538막p to 152,917막p
SSRs: !ranged from! 51 to 113
long repeats: !ranged from! 17 to 26
three highly variable regions: !identified! 
phylogenomic analysis: !based on! 80 plastome-derived protein-coding genes
monophyly of Impatiens: !supported! 
relationships among sections of subgenus Impatiens: !fully resolved!