In eukaryotes, mitochondrial ATP is mainly produced by the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system, which is composed of 5 multiprotein complexes (complexes I-V). Analyses of the OXPHOS system by native gel electrophoresis have revealed an organization of OXPHOS complexes into supercomplexes, but their roles and assembly pathways remain unclear. In this study, we characterized an atypical mitochondrial ferredoxin (mitochondrial ferredoxin-like, mFDX-like). This protein was previously found to be part of the bridge domain linking the matrix and membrane arms of the complex I. Phylogenetic analysis suggested that the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) mFDX-like evolved from classical mitochondrial ferredoxins (mFDXs) but lost one of the cysteines required for the coordination of the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster, supposedly essential for the electron transfer function of FDXs. Accordingly, our biochemical study showed that AtmFDX-like does not bind an Fe-S cluster and is therefore unlikely to be involved in electron transfer reactions. To study the function of mFDX-like, we created deletion lines in Arabidopsis using a CRISPR/Cas9-based strategy. These lines did not show any abnormal phenotype under standard growth conditions. However, the characterization of the OXPHOS system demonstrated that mFDX-like is important for the assembly of complex I and essential for the formation of complex I-containing supercomplexes. We propose that mFDX-like and the bridge domain are required for the correct conformation of the membrane arm of complex I that is essential for the association of complex I with complex III2 to form supercomplexes.

mFDX-like: !evolved from! mFDXs 
mFDX-like: !does not bind! Fe-S cluster 
mFDX-like: !important for! assembly of complex I 
mFDX-like: !essential for! formation of complex I-containing supercomplexes 
bridge domain: !required for! correct conformation of membrane arm of complex I 
bridge domain: !essential for! association of complex I with complex III2