The diameter at breast height (DBH) is the most important independent variable in biomass allometry models based on metabolic scaling theory (MST) or geometric theory. However, the fixed position DBH can be misleading in its use of universal scaling laws and lead to some deviation for the biomass model. Therefore, it is still an urgent scientific problem to build a high-precision biomass model system. A dataset of 114 trees was destructively sampled to obtain dry biomass components, including stems, branches, and foliage, and taper measurements to explore the applicability of biomass components to allometric scaling laws and develop a new system of additive models with the diameter in relative height (DRH) for each component of a Larch (<i>Larix principis-rupprechtii</i> Mayr) plantation in northern China. The variable exponential taper equations were modelled using nonlinear regression. In addition, applying nonlinear regression and nonlinear seemingly unrelated regression (NSUR) enabled the development of biomass allometric models and the system of additive models with DRH for each component. The results showed that the Kozak's (II) 2004 variable exponential taper equation could accurately describe the stem shape and diameter in any height of stem. When the diameters in relative height were D<sub>0.2</sub>, D<sub>0.5</sub>, and D<sub>0.5</sub> for branches, stems, and foliage, respectively, the allometric exponent of the stems and branches was the closest to the scaling relations predicted by the MST, and the allometric exponent of foliage was the most closely related to the scaling relations predicted by geometry theory. Compared with the nonlinear regression, the parameters of biomass components estimated by NSUR were lower, and it was close to the theoretical value and the most precise at forecasting. In the study of biomass process modelling, utilizing the DRH by a variable exponential taper equation can confirm the general biological significance more than the DBH of a fixed position.

DBH: !misleading in! biomass model
DRH: !applicable to! allometric scaling laws
Kozak's (II) 2004 variable exponential taper equation: !accurately describes! stem shape
MST: !predicts! allometric exponent of stems and branches
geometry theory: !predicts! allometric exponent of foliage
NSUR: !estimates! parameters of biomass components