Drought stress is one of the major constraints of global crop production. Raffinose, a non-reducing trisaccharide, has been considered to regulate positively the plant drought stress tolerance; however, evidence that augmenting raffinose production in leaves results in enhanced plant drought stress tolerance is lacking. The biochemical mechanism through which raffinose might act to mitigate plant drought stress remains unidentified. ZmRAFS encodes Zea mays RAFFINOSE SYNTHASE, a key enzyme that transfers galactose from the galactoside galactinol to sucrose for raffinose production. Overexpression of ZmRAFS in maize increased the RAFS protein and the raffinose content and decreased the water loss of leaves and enhanced plant drought stress tolerance. The biomass of the ZmRAFS overexpressing plants was similar to that of non-transgenic control plants when grown under optimal conditions, but was significantly greater than that of non-transgenic plants when grown under drought stress conditions. In contrast, the percentage of water loss of the detached leaves from two independent zmrafs mutant lines, incapable of synthesizing raffinose, was greater than that from null segregant controls and this phenomenon was partially rescued by supplementation of raffinose to detached zmrafs leaves. In addition, while there were differences in water loss among different maize lines, there was no difference in stomata density or aperture. Taken together, our work demonstrated that overexpression of the ZmRAFS gene in maize, in contrast to Arabidopsis, increased the raffinose content in leaves, assisted the leaf to retain water, and enhanced the plant drought stress tolerance without causing a detectable growth penalty.

ZmRAFS: !synthesizes! raffinose 
raffinose: !enhances! plant drought stress tolerance 
ZmRAFS overexpression: !increases! raffinose content in leaves 
ZmRAFS overexpression: !decreases! water loss of leaves 
zmrafs mutant lines: !greater! water loss than null segregant controls 
supplementation of raffinose: !partially rescues! detached zmrafs leaves