Aiming at the problem that the rubber tapping robot finds it difficult to accurately detect the tapped area and locate the new tapping line for natural rubber trees due to the influence of the rubber plantation environment during the rubber tapping operation, this study proposes a method for detecting the tapped area and locating the new tapping line for natural rubber trees based on the improved mask region convolutional neural network (Mask RCNN). First, Mask RCNN was improved by fusing the attention mechanism into the ResNeXt, modifying the anchor box parameters, and adding a tiny fully connected layer branch into the mask branch to realize the detection and rough segmentation of the tapped area. Then, the fine segmentation of the existing tapping line was realized by combining edge detection and logic operation. Finally, the existing tapping line was moved down a certain distance along the center line direction of the left and right edge lines of the tapped area to obtain the new tapping line. The tapped area detection results of 560 test images showed that the detection accuracy, segmentation accuracy, detection average precision, segmentation average precision, and intersection over union values of the improved Mask RCNN were 98.23%, 99.52%, 99.6%, 99.78%, and 93.71%, respectively. Compared with other state-of-the-art approaches, the improved Mask RCNN had better detection and segmentation performance, which could better detect and segment the tapped area of natural rubber trees under different shooting conditions. The location results of 560 new tapping lines under different shooting conditions showed that the average location success rate of new tapping lines was 90% and the average location time was 0.189 s. The average values of the location errors in the <i>x</i> and <i>y</i> directions were 3 and 2.8 pixels, respectively, and the average value of the total location error was 4.5 pixels. This research not only provides a location method for the new tapping line for the rubber tapping robot but also provides theoretical support for the realization of rubber tapping mechanization and automation.

Mask RCNN: !improved by! Attention Mechanism
Mask RCNN: !modified! Anchor Box Parameters
Mask RCNN: !added! Tiny Fully Connected Layer Branch
Edge Detection: !combined with! Logic Operation
Location Results: !showed! Average Location Success Rate of 90%