Kentucky bluegrass (Poa pratensis L.) hyperaccumulates cadmium (Cd) and exhibits a hypertolerance. Thus, it has potential for the phytoremediation of Cd-containing soil. Auxin signaling is involved in the response to Cd stress. However, the mechanisms of auxin-mediated detoxification and Cd translocation in plants remain unclear. This study aimed to investigate the effects of exogenous application of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) on the Cd translocation, subcellular Cd distribution, chemical forms of Cd, and transcriptional regulation of Kentucky bluegrass. The results showed that the exogenous application of IAA increased the amount of organelle-bound Cd and vacuole-compartmentalized Cd in root cells, reduced the Cd concentration in the leaf tissues (epidermis, mesophyll, and vascular bundle) and root tissues (rhizodermis and cortex) but increased in the stele, and alleviate Cd-induced leaf chlorosis and growth inhibition. The expression of genes associated with Cd transporters (ABCs, ZIPs, NASs, OPTs, and YSLs), phosphatases, oxalate decarboxylases and lignin biosynthesis were significantly regulated by exogenous IAA under Cd stress. A positive regulation of phosphatases and oxalate decarboxylases genes related to an increase in phosphate- and oxalate-bound Cd, as well as a decrease in pectate- and protein-bound Cd and inorganic Cd, thereby contributing to a decrease in Cd phytotoxicity. The significant regulation of Cd transporters associated with decreasing the long-distance translocation of Cd, and the activation of lignin biosynthesis may contribute to the development of root endodermal barriers and increase the deposition of undissolved Cd phosphates and oxalate-bound Cd in the stele. These results revealed the important role of auxin in Cd detoxification and translocation in Kentucky bluegrass and they provide a theoretical basis for the phytoremediation of Cd-containing soil.

IAA: !increases! organelle-bound Cd
IAA: !reduces! Cd concentration in leaf/root tissues
IAA: !regulates! Cd transporters
Cd transporters: !decrease! long-distance translocation of Cd
Phosphatases/Oxalate decarboxylases: !increase! phosphate/oxalate-bound Cd
Pectate/Protein-bound Cd/Inorganic Cd: !decrease! phytotoxicity
Lignin biosynthesis: !activate! root endodermal barriers