['36716376', 'Lipids establish the specialized thylakoid membrane of chloroplast in eukaryotic  photosynthetic organisms, while the molecular basis of lipid transfer from other  organelles to chloroplast remains further elucidation. Here we revealed the  structural basis of Arabidopsis Sec14 homology proteins AtSFH5 and AtSFH7 in  transferring phosphatidic acid (PA) from endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to  chloroplast, and whose function in regulating the lipid composition of  chloroplast and thylakoid development. AtSFH5 and AtSFH7 localize at both ER and  chloroplast, whose deficiency resulted in an abnormal chloroplast structure and a  decreased thickness of stacked thylakoid membranes. We demonstrated that AtSFH5,  but not yeast and human Sec14 proteins, could specifically recognize and transfer  PA in vitro. Crystal structures of the AtSFH5-Sec14 domain in complex with  L-alpha-phosphatidic acid (L-alpha-PA) and 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphate (DPPA)  revealed that two PA ligands nestled in the central cavity with different  configurations, elucidating the specific binding mode of PA to AtSFH5, different  from the reported phosphatidylethanolamine (PE)/phosphatidylcholine  (PC)/phosphatidylinositol (PI) binding modes. Quantitative lipidomic analysis of  chloroplast lipids showed that PA and monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG),  particularly the C18 fatty acids at sn-2 position in MGDG were significantly  decreased, indicating a disrupted ER-to-plastid (chloroplast) lipid transfer,  under deficiency of AtSFH5 and AtSFH7. Our studies identified the role and  elucidated the structural basis of plant SFH proteins in transferring PA between  organelles, and suggested a model for ER-chloroplast interorganelle phospholipid  transport from inherent ER to chloroplast derived from endosymbiosis of a  cyanobacteriumproviding a mechanism involved in the adaptive evolution of  cellular plastids.', '2023 Feb 7', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.2221637120', 'ORCID:']

AtSFH5: !localizes to! ER and chloroplast 
AtSFH5: !recognizes and transfers! PA 
AtSFH7: !localizes to! ER and chloroplast 
PA: !transferred from! ER to chloroplast 
AtSFH5/AtSFH7 deficiency: !decreases! PA and MGDG in chloroplast