Advances in genotyping technologies have provided breeders with access to the genotypic values of several thousand genetic markers in their breeding materials. Combined with phenotypic data, this information facilitates genomic selection. Although genomic selection can benefit breeders, it does not guarantee efficient genetic improvement. Indeed, multiple components of breeding schemes may affect the efficiency of genetic improvement and controlling all components may not be possible. In this study, we propose a new application of Bayesian optimisation for optimizing breeding schemes under specific constraints using computer simulation. Breeding schemes are simulated according to nine different parameters. Five of those parameters are considered constraints, and 4 can be optimised. Two optimisation methods are used to optimise those parameters, Bayesian optimisation and random optimisation. The results show that Bayesian optimisation indeed finds breeding scheme parametrisations that provide good breeding improvement with regard to the entire parameter space and outperforms random optimisation. Moreover, the results also show that the optimised parameter distributions differ according to breeder constraints. This study is one of the first to apply Bayesian optimisation to the design of breeding schemes while considering constraints. The presented approach has some limitations and should be considered as a first proof of concept that demonstrates the potential of Bayesian optimisation when applied to breeding schemes. Determining a general "rule of thumb" for breeding optimisation may be difficult and considering the specific constraints of each breeding campaign is important for finding an optimal breeding scheme.

Bayesian optimisation: !outperforms! Random optimisation
Breeding schemes: !simulated according to! Nine parameters
Five parameters: !considered constraints! Four optimised
Bayesian optimisation: !finds parametrisations that provide! Good breeding improvement
Breeder constraints: !affect! Optimised parameter distributions