Watermelon fruits exhibit a remarkable diversity of important horticultural phenotypes. In this study, we initiated a primary quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping to identify the candidate regions controlling the ovary, fruit, and seed phenotypes. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) was carried out for two differentiated watermelon lines, and 350 Mb (96%) and 354 Mb (97%) of re-sequenced reads covered the reference <i>de novo</i> genome assembly, individually. A total of 45.53% non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (nsSNPs) and 54.47% synonymous SNPs (sSNPs) were spotted, which produced 210 sets of novel SNP-based cleaved amplified polymorphism sequence (CAPS) markers by depicting 46.25% co-dominant polymorphism among parent lines and offspring. A biparental F<sub>2:3</sub> mapping population comprised of 100 families was used for trait phenotyping and CAPS genotyping, respectively. The constructed genetic map spanned a total of 2,398.40 centimorgans (cM) in length and averaged 11.42 cM, with 95.99% genome collinearity. A total of 33 QTLs were identified at different genetic positions across the eight chromosomes of watermelon (Chr-01, Chr-02, Chr-04, Chr-05, Chr-06, Chr-07, Chr-10, and Chr-11); among them, eight QTLs of the ovary, sixteen QTLs of the fruit, and nine QTLs of the seed related phenotypes were classified with 5.32-25.99% phenotypic variance explained (PVE). However, twenty-four QTLs were identified as major-effect and nine QTLs were mapped as minor-effect QTLs across the flanking regions of CAPS markers. Some QTLs were exhibited as tightly localized across the nearby genetic regions and explained the pleiotropic effects of multigenic nature. The flanking QTL markers also depicted significant allele specific contributions and accountable genes were predicted for respective traits. Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment was categorized in molecular function (MF), cellular components (CC), and biological process (BP); however, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were classified into three main classes of metabolism, genetic information processing, and brite hierarchies. The principal component analysis (PCA) of multivariate phenotypes widely demonstrated the major variability, consistent with the identified QTL regions. In short, we assumed that our identified QTL regions provide valuable genetic insights regarding the watermelon phenotypes and fine genetic mapping could be used to confirm them.

Gene: !affects! Phenotypes 
Gene: !localizes to! Chromosomes 
Gene: !interacts with! CAPS markers 
Gene: !enhances! Variance explained 
Gene: !represses! Pleiotropic effects 
Gene: !synthesizes! Allele specific contributions