Lotus (Nelumbo Adans.) is used as an herbal medicine and the flowers are a source of natural flavonoids. 'Da Sajin', which was firstly found in the plateau area, is a natural mutant in flower color with red streamers dyeing around white petals. The LC-MS-MS results showed that eight anthocyanin compounds, including cyanidin 3-O-glucoside, cyanidin 3-O-galactoside, malvidin 3-O-galactoside, and malvidin 3-O-glucoside, were differentially enriched in red-pigmented tissues of the petals, whereas most of these metabolites were undetected in white tissues of the petals. Transcriptome profiling indicated that the relative high expression levels of structural genes, such as NnPAL, NnF3H, and NnANS, was inconsistent with the low anthocyanin concentration in white tissues. Members of the NnMYB and NnbHLH transcription factor families were presumed to play a role in the metabolic flux in the anthocyanin and proanthocyanidin biosynthetic pathway. The expression model of translational initiation factor, ribosomal proteins and SKP1-CUL1-F-box protein complex related genes suggested an important role for translational and post-translational network in anthocyanin biosynthesis. In addition, pathway analysis indicated that light reaction or photo destruction might be an important external cause for floral color determination in lotus. In this study, it is supposed that the natural lotus mutant 'Da Sajin' may have originated from a red-flowered ancestor. Partial loss of anthocyanin pigments in petals may result from metabolic disorder caused by light destruction. This disorder is mainly regulated at post translation and translation level, resulting in a non-inherited phenotype. These results contribute to an improved understanding of anthocyanin metabolism in lotus, and indicate that the translational and post-translational regulatory network determines the metabolic flux of anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins under specific environmental conditions.

NnPAL: !synthesizes! anthocyanin
NnF3H: !synthesizes! anthocyanin
NnANS: !synthesizes! anthocyanin
NnMYB: !regulates! metabolic flux
NnbHLH: !regulates! metabolic flux
translational initiation factor: !regulates! translational network
ribosomal proteins: !regulates! translational network
SKP1-CUL1-F-box protein complex: !regulates! post-translational network
light reaction/photo destruction: !affects! floral color