Nitrogen (N) deficiency limits the net carbon assimilation rate (AN), but the relative N sensitivities of photosynthetic component processes and carbon loss mechanisms remain relatively unexplored for field-grown cotton. Therefore, the objective of the current study was to define the relative sensitivity of individual physiological processes driving N deficiency-induced declines in AN for field-grown cotton. Among the potential diffusional limitations evaluated, mesophyll conductance was the only parameter substantially reduced by N deficiency, but this did not affect CO2 availability in the chloroplast. A number of metabolic processes were negatively impacted by N deficiency, and these effects were more pronounced at lower leaf positions in the cotton canopy. Ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP) regeneration and carboxylation, AN, and gross photosynthesis were the most sensitive metabolic processes to N deficiency, whereas photosynthetic electron transport processes, electron flux to photorespiration, and dark respiration exhibited intermediate sensitivity to N deficiency. Among thylakoid-specific processes, the quantum yield of PSI end electron acceptor reduction was the most sensitive process to N deficiency. It was concluded that AN is primarily limited by Rubisco carboxylation and RuBP regeneration under N deficiency in field-grown cotton, and the differential N sensitivities of the photosynthetic process and carbon loss mechanisms contributed significantly to photosynthetic declines.

N: !limits! AN
mesophyll conductance: !reduced by! N deficiency
metabolic processes: !negatively impacted by! N deficiency
RuBP regeneration: !most sensitive to! N deficiency
carboxylation: !most sensitive to! N deficiency
AN: !most sensitive to! N deficiency
gross photosynthesis: !most sensitive to! N deficiency
electron transport processes: !intermediate sensitivity to! N deficiency
photorespiration: !intermediate sensitivity to! N deficiency
dark respiration: !intermediate sensitivity to! N deficiency
PSI end electron acceptor reduction: !most sensitive to! N deficiency