Grain sorghum has been a significant contributor to global food security since the prehistoric period and may contribute even more to the security of both food and energy in the future. Globally, precise management techniques are crucial for increasing grain sorghum productivity. In China, with diverse ecological types, variety introduction occasionally occurs across ecological zones. However, few information is available on the effect of ecological type on genotype performance and how plant spacing configuration influences grain yield in various ecological zones. Hence, a series of two-year field experiments were conducted in 2020 and 2021 in four ecological zones of China, from the northeast to the southwest. The experiments included six widely adapted sorghum varieties under six plant spacing configurations (two row spacing modes: equidistant row spacing (60 cm) mode and wide (80 cm)-narrow (40 cm) row spacing mode; three in-row plant spacings: 10 cm, 15 cm, and 20 cm). Our results indicated that ecological type, variety, and plant spacing configuration had a significant effect on sorghum yield. Ecological type contributed the highest proportion to the yield variance (49.8%), followed by variety (8.3%), while plant spacing configuration contributed 1.8%. Sorghum growth duration was highly influenced by the ecological type, accounting for 87.2% of its total variance, whereas plant height was mainly affected by genotype, which contributed 81.6% of the total variance. All test varieties, developed in the south or north, can reach maturity within 94-108 d, just before fall sowing in central China. Generally, sorghum growth duration becomes longer when a variety is introduced from south to north. A late-maturing variety, developed in the spring sowing and late-maturing regions, possibly could not reach maturity in the early-maturing region. The row spacing modes had no significant affect on sorghum yield, but the equal-row spacing mode consistently caused higher yields with only one exception; this might imply that equal-row spacing mode was more advantageous for boosting sorghum yield potential. In contrast, decreasing in-row plant spacing showed significant positive linear associations with sorghum grain yield in most cases. In addition, these results demonstrated that sorghum is a widely adapted crop and enables success in variety introduction across ecological zones.

Ecological type: !affects! Sorghum yield
Variety: !affects! Sorghum yield
Plant spacing configuration: !affects! Sorghum yield
Grain sorghum: !contributes to! Global food security
Grain sorghum: !enables! Variety introduction across ecological zones
Grain sorghum: !has potential to! Increase productivity
Growth duration: !influenced by! Ecological type
Plant height: !influenced by! Genotype
Row spacing mode: !influences! Sorghum yield
In-row plant spacing: !positively associated with! Sorghum grain yield