Adaptive traits are an important dimension for studying the interactions between rare plants and environment. Although the endangered mechanism of rare plants has been reported in many studies, how their twigs adapt to heterogeneous environments associated with latitude is still poorly known. Dove tree (<i>Davidia involucrata</i> Baill.), a monotypic rare species in China, was employed as a model species in our study, and the differences in functional traits, growth relationships and resource allocation among components of annual twig were investigated in three latitudinal regions (32°19' N, 30°08' and 27°55') in the Sichuan, Southwest China. Compared with low- and middle-latitude regions, the twig diameter in high-latitude region decreased by 36% and 26%, and dry mass decreased by 32% and 35%, respectively. Moreover, there existed an allometric growth between flower mass and stem mass or leaf mass in high-latitude region but an isometric growth in low- and middle-latitude regions. At the flower level, an isometric growth between bract area and flower stalk mass was detected among in three latitudinal regions, and the flower stalk mass in the low-latitude region was higher than in the middle- and high-latitude regions for a given bract area and flower mass. At the leaf level, the growth rate of petiole mass was significantly higher than those of leaf area, lamina mass and leaf mass among three latitudinal regions, and the petiole mass in the low-latitude region was higher than in the other two regions for a given leaf mass. Our research demonstrated that the twigs of dove tree in high-latitude region tend to become smaller, and resource input increase in stems and leaves but decrease in flowers, which reflects that dove tree can adapt to the environmental changes across different latitudes by adjusting phenotypic traits growth and biomass allocation of twigs.

Twig: !decreases in! High-latitude region
Stem mass: !increases in! High-latitude region
Leaf mass: !increases in! High-latitude region
Flower stalk mass: !decreases in! Low-latitude region
Bract area: !isometric growth in! Three latitudinal regions
Petiole mass: !increases in! Low-latitude region