Cassava brown streak disease (CBSD) is a major threat to food security in East and central Africa. Breeding for resistance against CBSD is the most economical and sustainable way of addressing this challenge. This study seeks to assess the (1) performance of CBSD incidence and severity; (2) identify genomic regions associated with CBSD traits and (3) candidate genes in the regions of interest, in the Cycle 2 population of the National Crops Resources Research Institute. A total of 302 diverse clones were screened, revealing that CBSD incidence across growing seasons was 44%. Severity scores for both foliar and root symptoms ranged from 1.28 to 1.99 and 1.75 to 2.28, respectively across seasons. Broad sense heritability ranged from low to high (0.15 - 0.96), while narrow sense heritability ranged from low to moderate (0.03 - 0.61). Five QTLs, explaining approximately 19% phenotypic variation were identified for CBSD severity at 3 months after planting on chromosomes 1, 13, and 18 in the univariate GWAS analysis. Multivariate GWAS analysis identified 17 QTLs that were consistent with the univariate analysis including additional QTLs on chromosome 6. Seventy-seven genes were identified in these regions with functions such as catalytic activity, ATP-dependent activity, binding, response to stimulus, translation regulator activity, transporter activity among others. These results suggest variation in virulence in the C2 population, largely due to genetics and annotated genes in these QTLs regions may play critical roles in virus initiation and replication, thus increasing susceptibility to CBSD.

CBSD: !causes! food insecurity
C2 population: !exhibits! CBSD incidence
C2 population: !exhibits! CBSD severity
Broad sense heritability: !ranges from! low to high
Narrow sense heritability: !ranges from! low to moderate
QTLs: !explain! 19% phenotypic variation
Multivariate GWAS analysis: !identifies! 17 QTLs
Genes: !localize to! QTLs regions
Genes: !catalyze! catalytic activity
Genes: !bind! ATP-dependent activity
Genes: !respond to! stimulus
Genes: !regulate! translation
Genes: !transport! transporter activity
Genes: !play critical roles in! virus initiation and replication