As sessile organisms, plants encounter dynamic and challenging environments daily, including abiotic/biotic stresses. The regulation of carbon and nitrogen allocations for the synthesis of plant proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids is fundamental for plant growth and adaption to its surroundings. Light, one of the essential environmental signals, exerts a substantial impact on plant metabolism and resource partitioning (i.e., starch). However, it is not fully understood how light signaling affects carbohydrate production and allocation in plant growth and development. An orphan gene unique to Arabidopsis thaliana, named QUA-QUINE STARCH (QQS) is involved in the metabolic processes for partitioning of carbon and nitrogen among proteins and carbohydrates, thus influencing leaf, seed composition, and plant defense in Arabidopsis. In this study, we show that PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING bHLH TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS (PIFs), including PIF4, are required to suppress QQS during the period at dawn, thus preventing overconsumption of starch reserves. QQS expression is significantly de-repressed in pif4 and pifQ, while repressed by overexpression of PIF4, suggesting that PIF4 and its close homologs (PIF1, PIF3, and PIF5) act as negative regulators of QQS expression. In addition, we show that the evening complex, including ELF3 is required for active expression of QQS, thus playing a positive role in starch catabolism during night-time. Furthermore, QQS is epigenetically suppressed by DNA methylation machinery, whereas histone H3 K4 methyltransferases (e.g., ATX1, ATX2, and ATXR7) and H3 acetyltransferases (e.g., HAC1 and HAC5) are involved in the expression of QQS. This study demonstrates that PIF light signaling factors help plants utilize optimal amounts of starch during the night and prevent overconsumption of starch before its biosynthesis during the upcoming day.

PIF4: !represses! QQS
ELF3: !enhances! QQS
DNA methylation machinery: !suppresses! QQS
ATX1: !methylates! H3 K4
ATX2: !methylates! H3 K4
ATXR7: !methylates! H3 K4
HAC1: !acetylates! H3
HAC5: !acetylates! H3