Rhizobia-legume interactions recruit cytokinin for the induction of nodule primordia in the cortex. Cytokinin signaling regulates auxin transport and biosynthesis, causing local auxin accumulation, which triggers cortical cell division. Since sugar signaling can trigger auxin responses, we explored whether sugar treatments could rescue symbiosis in the Medicago truncatula cytokinin response 1 (cre1) mutant. Herein, we demonstrate that sucrose and its nonmetabolizable isomer turanose can trigger auxin response and recover functional symbiosis in cre1, indicating sucrose signaling to be necessary for the restoration of symbiosis. In both M. truncatula A17 (wild type) and cre1, sucrose signaling significantly upregulated IAA-Ala Resistant 3 (IAR33), encoding an auxin conjugate hydrolase, in rhizobia-infected as well as in uninfected roots. Knockdown of IAR33 (IAR33-KD) significantly reduced nodulation in A17, highlighting the importance of deconjugation-mediated auxin accumulation during nodule inception. In cre1, IAR33-KD restricted the sucrose-mediated restoration of functional symbiosis, suggesting that deconjugation-mediated auxin accumulation plays a key role in the absence of CRE1-mediated auxin biosynthesis and transport control. Overexpression of IAR33 also restored functional symbiosis in cre1, further suggesting that IAR33 mediates auxin accumulation in response to sucrose signaling. Since all the observed sucrose-mediated responses were common to A17 and cre1, deconjugation-mediated auxin response appeared to be independent of CRE1, which normally governs local auxin accumulation in the presence of rhizobia. We propose that sucrose-dependent restoration of symbiosis in cre1 occurs by the activation of IAR33-mediated auxin deconjugation.

Rhizobia-legume: !recruit! Cytokinin 
Sugar treatments: !rescue! Symbiosis 
Sucrose signaling: !upregulates! IAR33 
IAR33: !mediates! Auxin accumulation 
CRE1: !governs! Local auxin accumulation 
Sucrose: !restores! Functional symbiosis