The evolutionarily conserved Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) plays a vital role in epigenetic gene repression by depositing tri-methylation on lysine residue K27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) at the target loci, thus participating in diverse biological processes. However, few reports about PRC2 are available in plant species with large and complicated genomes, like cotton. Here, we performed a genome-wide identification and comprehensive analysis of cotton PRC2 core components, especially in upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum). Firstly, a total of 8 and 16 PRC2 core components were identified in diploid and tetraploid cotton species, respectively. These components were classified into four groups, E(z), Su(z)12, ESC and p55, and the members in the same group displayed good collinearity, similar gene structure and domain organization. Next, we cloned G. hirsutum PRC2 (GhPRC2) core components, and found that most of GhPRC2 proteins were localized in the nucleus, and interacted with each other to form multi-subunit complexes. Moreover, we analyzed the expression profile of GhPRC2 genes. The transcriptome data and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) assays indicated that GhPRC2 genes were ubiquitously but differentially expressed in various tissues, with high expression levels in reproductive organs like petals, stamens and pistils. And the expressions of several GhPRC2 genes, especially E(z) group genes, were responsive to various abiotic and biotic stresses, including drought, salinity, extreme temperature, and Verticillium dahliae (Vd) infection. We identified PRC2 core components in upland cotton, and systematically investigated their classifications, phylogenetic and synteny relationships, gene structures, domain organizations, subcellular localizations, protein interactions, tissue-specific and stresses-responsive expression patterns. Our results will provide insights into the evolution and composition of cotton PRC2, and lay the foundation for further investigation of their biological functions and regulatory mechanisms.

E(z): !localizes to! nucleus
Su(z)12: !localizes to! nucleus
ESC: !localizes to! nucleus
p55: !localizes to! nucleus
GhPRC2: !interacts with! each other
GhPRC2: !enhances! reproductive organs
GhPRC2: !responds to! abiotic/biotic stresses