Despite numerous studies aimed at unraveling the genetic background of barley's response to abiotic stress, the modulation of the transcriptome induced by combinatorial drought and increased temperature remains largely unrecognized. Very limited studies were done, especially on the flag leaf, which plays an important role in grain filling in cereals. In the present study, transcriptome profiles, along with chlorophyll fluorescence parameters and yield components, were compared between barley genotypes with different flag leaf sizes under single and combined drought and heat stress. High-throughput mRNA sequencing revealed 2,457 differentially expressed genes, which were functionally interpreted using Gene Ontology term enrichment analysis. The transcriptomic signature under double stress was more similar to effects caused by drought than by elevated temperature; it was also manifested at phenotypic and chlorophyll fluorescence levels. Both common and stress-specific changes in transcript abundance were identified. Genes regulated commonly across stress treatments, determining universal stress responses, were associated, among others, with responses to drought, heat, and oxidative stress. In addition, changes specific to the size of the flag leaf blade were found. Our study allowed us to identify sets of genes assigned to various processes underlying the response to drought and heat, including photosynthesis, the abscisic acid pathway, and lipid transport. Genes encoding LEA proteins, including dehydrins and heat shock proteins, were especially induced by stress treatments. Some association between genetic composition and flag leaf size was confirmed. However, there was no general coincidence between SNP polymorphism of genotypes and differential expression of genes induced by stress factors. This research provided novel insight into the molecular mechanisms of barley flag leaf that determine drought and heat response, as well as their co-occurrence.

Gene: !affects! Process
Gene: !enhances! Photosynthesis
Gene: !represses! Abscisic Acid Pathway
Gene: !synthesizes! LEA Proteins
Gene: !interacts with! SNP Polymorphism
Gene: !localizes to! Flag Leaf Size