Wheat is grown and consumed worldwide, making it an important staple food crop for both its calorific and nutritional content. In places where wheat is used as a staple food, suboptimal micronutrient content levels, especially of grain iron (Fe) and zinc (Zn), can lead to malnutrition. Grain nutrient content is influenced by abiotic stresses, such as drought and heat stress. The best method for addressing micronutrient deficiencies is the biofortification of food crops. The prerequisites for marker-assisted varietal development are the identification of the genomic region responsible for high grain iron and zinc contents and an understanding of their genetics. A total of 193 diverse wheat genotypes were evaluated under drought and heat stress conditions across the years at the Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi, under timely sown irrigated (IR), restricted irrigated (RI) and late sown (LS) conditions. Grain iron content (GFeC) and grain zinc content (GZnC) were estimated from both the control and treatment groups. Genotyping of all the lines under study was carried out with the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from Breeder's 35K Axiom Array. Three subgroups were observed in the association panel based on both principal component analysis (PCA) and dendrogram analysis. A large whole-genome linkage disequilibrium (LD) block size of 3.49 Mb was observed. A genome-wide association study identified 16 unique stringent marker trait associations for GFeC, GZnC, and 1000-grain weight (TGW). <i>In silico</i> analysis demonstrated the presence of 28 potential candidate genes in the flanking region of 16 linked SNPs, such as synaptotagmin-like mitochondrial-lipid-binding domain, HAUS augmin-like complex, di-copper center-containing domain, protein kinase, chaperonin Cpn60, zinc finger, NUDIX hydrolase, etc. Expression levels of these genes in vegetative tissues and grain were also found. Utilization of identified markers in marker-assisted breeding may lead to the rapid development of biofortified wheat genotypes to combat malnutrition.

Grain nutrient content: !influenced by! abiotic stresses
Genotyping: !carried out with! SNPs
Linkage disequilibrium: !observed in! whole-genome
Association study: !identified! 16 unique stringent marker trait associations
In silico analysis: !demonstrated presence of! 28 potential candidate genes
Marker-assisted breeding: !may lead to! rapid development of biofortified wheat genotypes