Green manure (GM) is a crop commonly grown during fallow periods, which has been applied in agriculture as a strategy to regulate nutrient cycling, improve organic matter, and enhance soil microbial biodiversity, but to date, few studies have examined the effects of GM treatments on rhizosphere soil bacterial community and soil metabolites from continuous cropping peanut field. In this study, we found that the abundances of several functionally significant bacterial groups containing Actinobacteria, Acidobacteria, and genus Sphingomonas, which are associated with nitrogen cycling, were dramatically increased in GM-applied soils. Consistent with the bacterial community results, metabolomics analysis revealed a strong perturbation of nitrogen- or carbon-related metabolisms in GM-applied soils. The substantially up-regulated beneficial metabolites including sucrose, adenine, lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), malic acid, and betaines in GM-applied soils may contribute to overcome continuous cropping obstacle. In contrast to peanut continuous cropping, planting winter wheat and oilseed rape in winter fallow period under continuous spring peanut production systems evidently improved the soil quality, concomitantly with raised peanut pod yield by 32.93% and 25.20%, in the 2020 season, respectively. GMs application is an effective strategy to overcome continuous cropping obstacle under continuous peanut production systems by improving nutrient cycling, soil metabolites, and rhizobacterial properties.

GM: !increases! nitrogen- or carbon-related metabolisms
GM: !enhances! beneficial metabolites
GM: !improves! soil quality
GM: !raises! peanut pod yield
Actinobacteria: !associated with! nitrogen cycling
Acidobacteria: !associated with! nitrogen cycling
Sphingomonas: !associated with! nitrogen cycling
Sucrose: !up-regulated by! GMs application
Adenine: !up-regulated by! GMs application
LPC: !up-regulated by! GMs application
Malic acid: !up-regulated by! GMs application
Betaines: !up-regulated by! GMs application