<i>Chrysanthemum indicum</i> var. <i>aromaticum</i> (CIA) is an endemic plant that occurs only in the high mountain areas of the Shennongjia Forest District in China. The whole plant, in particular the flowers of CIA, have intense fragrance, making it a novel resource plant for agricultural, medicinal, and industrial applications. However, the volatile metabolite emissions in relation to CIA flower development and the molecular mechanisms underlying the generation of floral scent remain poorly understood. Here, integrative metabolome and transcriptome analyses were performed to investigate floral scent-related volatile compounds and genes in CIA flowers at three different developmental stages. A total of 370 volatile metabolites, mainly terpenoids and esters, were identified, of which 89 key differential metabolites exhibited variable emitting profiles during flower development. Transcriptome analysis further identified 8,945 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between these samples derived from different flower developmental stages and KEGG enrichment analyses showed that 45, 93, and 101 candidate DEGs associated with the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids, esters, and terpenes, respectively. Interestingly, significant DEGs involved into the volatile terpenes are only present in the MEP and its downstream pathways, including those genes encoding ISPE, ISPG, FPPS, GPPS, GERD, ND and TPS14 enzymes. Further analysis showed that 20 transcription factors from MYB, bHLH, AP2/EFR, and WRKY families were potentially key regulators affecting the expressions of floral scent-related genes during the CIA flower development. These findings provide insights into the molecular basis of plant floral scent metabolite biosynthesis and serve as an important data resources for molecular breeding and utilization of CIA plants in the future.

MEP: !synthesizes! Terpenes 
ISPE: !synthesizes! Terpenes 
ISPG: !synthesizes! Terpenes 
FPPS: !synthesizes! Terpenes 
GPPS: !synthesizes! Terpenes 
GERD: !synthesizes! Terpenes 
ND: !synthesizes! Terpenes 
TPS14: !synthesizes! Terpenes 
Phenylpropanoids: !synthesizes! Esters 
Terpenes: !synthesizes! Esters 
MYB: !regulates! Floral Scent-related Genes 
bHLH: !regulates! Floral Scent-related Genes 
AP2/EFR: !regulates! Floral Scent-related Genes 
WRKY: !regulates! Floral Scent-related Genes