Red-skinned pears (Pyrus L.) are preferred to consumers for their attractive color and abundant anthocyanins. Pyrus ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 3 (PyERF3) positively regulates anthocyanin biosynthesis through interacting with Pyrus myeloblastosis family 4 (PyMYB114) and Pyrus basic helix-loop-helix 3 (PybHLH3) in red-skinned pears. However, the role of APETALA2/ethylene response factors (AP2/ERFs), which negatively regulate anthocyanin biosynthesis, remains unclearin red-skinned pears. Here, we validated that two AP2/ERFs, PyERF4.1 and PyERF4.2, screened from the transcriptome data of 'Starkrimson' pear (Pyrus communis L.) and its green mutant, inhibit anthocyanin biosynthesis in transgenic pear calli, as well as in overexpression and gene edited tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) fruits. Meanwhile, the co-transformation of PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2 with PyERF3-PyMYB114-PybHLH3 inhibited anthocyanin biosynthesis in pear fruits and strawberry (Fragaria vesca) receptacles. Further assays showed that PyMYB114 activated the transcription of PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2; PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2 then interacted with PyERF3 to affect the stability of the PyERF3-PyMYB114-PybHLH3 complex, thereby inhibiting the transcription of the anthocyanin biosynthesis gene Pyrus anthocyanidin synthase (PyANS). Furthermore, deletion of the ERF-associated-amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif eliminated the inhibitory effect of PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2 on anthocyanin biosynthesis, and a mutation of the PyERF4.2-EAR motif (LxLxM to LxLxL) strengthened the inhibitory effect, demonstrating that the EAR motif is indispensable for the inhibitory effect of PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2 on anthocyanin biosynthesis in pears. Our study has shed light on a feedback regulatory loop mechanism that balances the excessive accumulation of anthocyanins in red-skinned pears, providing insights into the regulatory mechanism of anthocyanin biosynthesis and the regulatory network of coloration in red-skinned pears.

PyERF3: !positively regulates! anthocyanin biosynthesis
PyMYB114: !activates! PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2
PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2: !interacts with! PyERF3
PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2: !inhibits! anthocyanin biosynthesis
EAR motif: !is indispensable for! inhibitory effect of PyERF4.1/PyERF4.2