Aiming at the stability of hand-eye calibration in fruit picking scene, a simple hand-eye calibration method for picking robot based on optimization combined with TOF (Time of Flight) camera is proposed. This method needs to fix the TOF depth camera at actual and calculated coordinates of the peach the end of the robot, operate the robot to take pictures of the calibration board from different poses, and record the current photographing poses to ensure that each group of pictures is clear and complete, so as to use the TOF depth camera to image the calibration board. Obtain multiple sets of calibration board depth maps and corresponding point cloud data, that is, "eye" data. Through the circle center extraction and positioning algorithm, the circle center points on each group of calibration plates are extracted, and a circle center sorting method based on the vector angle and the center of mass coordinates is designed to solve the circle center caused by factors such as mirror distortion, uneven illumination and different photographing poses. And through the tool center point of the actuator, the coordinate value of the circle center point on the four corners of each group of calibration plates in the robot end coordinate system is located in turn, and the "hand" data is obtained. Combined with the SVD method, And according to the obtained point residuals, the weight coefficients of the marker points are redistributed, and the hand-eye parameters are iteratively optimized, which improves the accuracy and stability of the hand-eye calibration. the method proposed in this paper has a better ability to locate the gross error under the environment of large gross errors. In order to verify the feasibility of the hand-eye calibration method, the indoor picking experiment was simulated, and the peaches were identified and positioned by combining deep learning and 3D vision to verify the proposed hand-eye calibration method. The JAKA six-axis robot and TuYang depth camera are used to build the experimental platform. The experimental results show that the method is simple to operate, has good stability, and the calibration plate is easy to manufacture and low in cost. work accuracy requirements.

Robot: !takes pictures of! Calibration Board
TOF Camera: !images! Calibration Board
Circle Center Extraction Algorithm: !extracts! Circle Center Points
Vector Angle & Center of Mass Coordinates: !sort! Circle Center Points
Tool Center Point: !locates! Circle Center Points
SVD Method: !optimizes! Hand-Eye Parameters
Deep Learning & 3D Vision: !identify & position! Peaches
JAKA Six-Axis Robot & TuYang Depth Camera: !build! Experimental Platform