Soybean yield, as one of the most important and consistent breeding goals, can be greatly affected by the proportion of four-seed pods (PoFSP). In this study, QTL mapping was performed by PoFSP data and BLUE (Best Linear Unbiased Estimator) value of the chromosome segment substitution line population (CSSLs) constructed previously by the laboratory from 2016 to 2018, and phenotype-based bulked segregant analysis (BSA) was performed using the plant lines with PoFSP extreme phenotype. Totally, 5 ICIM QTLs were repeatedly detected, and 6 BSA QTLs were identified in CSSLs. For QTL (<i>qPoFSP13-1</i>) repeated in ICIM and BSA results, the secondary segregation populations were constructed for fine mapping and the interval was reduced to 100Kb. The mapping results showed that the QTL had an additive effect of gain from wild parents. A total of 14 genes were annotated in the delimited interval by fine mapping. Sequence analysis showed that all 14 genes had genetic variation in promoter region or CDS region. The qRT-PCR results showed that a total of 5 candidate genes were differentially expressed between the plant lines having antagonistic extreme phenotype (High PoFSP > 35.92%, low PoFSP< 17.56%). The results of haplotype analysis showed that all five genes had two or more major haplotypes in the resource population. Significant analysis of phenotypic differences between major haplotypes showed all five candidate genes had haplotype differences. And the genotypes of the major haplotypes with relatively high PoFSP of each gene were similar to those of wild soybean. The results of this study were of great significance to the study of candidate genes affecting soybean PoFSP, and provided a basis for the study of molecular marker-assisted selection (MAS) breeding and four-seed pods domestication.

QTL: !affects! Soybean yield 
QTL: !localizes to! 100Kb interval 
QTL: !enhances! Gain from wild parents 
Gene: !annotated in! Delimited interval 
Gene: !has genetic variation in! Promoter region or CDS region 
Gene: !differentially expressed between! Plant lines with antagonistic extreme phenotype 
Gene: !has two or more major haplotypes in! Resource population 
Haplotype: !differs in! Phenotypic differences 
Haplotype: !similar to! Wild soybean genotypes