Despite the high economic and ecological importance of forests, our knowledge of the adaptive evolution of leaf traits remains very limited. Euphrates poplar (Populus euphratica), which has high tolerance to arid environment, has evolved four heteromorphic leaf forms, including narrow (linear and lanceolate) and broad (ovate and broad-ovate) leaves on different crowns. Here, we revealed the significant functional divergence of four P. euphratica heteromorphic leaves at physiological and cytological levels. Through global analysis of transcriptome and DNA methylation across tree and leaf developmental stages, we revealed that gene expression and DNA epigenetics differentially regulated key processes involving development and functional adaptation of heteromorphic leaves, such as hormone signaling pathways, cell division, and photosynthesis. Combined analysis of gene expression, methylation, ATAC-seq and Hi-C-seq revealed longer interaction of 3D genome, hypomethylation, and open chromatin state upregulates IAA-related genes (such as PIN-FORMED1 and ANGUSTIFOLIA3) and promotes the occurrence of broad leaves while narrow leaves were associated with highly concentrated heterochromatin, hypermethylation and upregulated ABA pathway genes (such as Pyrabactin Resistance1-like10). Therefore, development of P. euphratica heteromorphic leaves along with functional divergence was regulated by differentially expressed genes, DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility, and 3D genome remodeling to adapt to the arid desert. This study advances our understanding of differential regulation on development and functional divergence of heteromorphic leaves in P. euphratica at the multi-omics level and provides a valuable resource for investigating the adaptive evolution of heteromorphic leaves in Populus.

Gene: !affects! Hormone signaling pathways
Gene: !affects! Cell division
Gene: !affects! Photosynthesis
Gene: !upregulates! IAA-related genes
Gene: !upregulates! ABA pathway genes
Gene: !promotes! Broad leaves
Gene: !represses! Narrow leaves
Gene: !associated with! Highly concentrated heterochromatin
Gene: !associated with! Hypermethylation
Gene: !associated with! Open chromatin state