Genetic improvement of temperate fruit and nut crops through conventional breeding methods is not sufficient alone due to its extreme time-consuming, cost-intensive, and hard-to-handle approach. Again, few other constraints that are associated with these species, <i>viz</i>., their long juvenile period, high heterozygosity, sterility, presence of sexual incompatibility, polyploidy, etc., make their selection and improvement process more complicated. Therefore, to promote precise and accurate selection of plants based on their genotypes, supplement of advanced biotechnological tools, <i>viz</i>., molecular marker approaches along with traditional breeding methods, is highly required in these species. Different markers, especially the molecular ones, enable direct selection of genomic regions governing the trait of interest such as high quality, yield, and resistance to abiotic and biotic stresses instead of the trait itself, thus saving the overall time and space and helping screen fruit quality and other related desired traits at early stages. The availability of molecular markers like SNP (single-nucleotide polymorphism), DArT (Diversity Arrays Technology) markers, and dense molecular genetic maps in crop plants, including fruit and nut crops, led to a revelation of facts from genetic markers, thus assisting in precise line selection. This review highlighted several aspects of the molecular marker approach that opens up tremendous possibilities to reveal valuable information about genetic diversity and phylogeny to boost the efficacy of selection in temperate fruit crops through genome sequencing and thus cultivar improvement with respect to adaptability and biotic and abiotic stress resistance in temperate fruit and nut species.

Molecular markers: !enable! Direct selection 
Traditional breeding methods: !supplemented by! Advanced biotechnological tools 
SNP: !reveal! Genetic markers 
DArT markers: !assist in! Precise line selection 
Genetic maps: !led to! Revelation of facts 
Genome sequencing: !boosts! Efficacy of selection