RNA can fold back on itself to adopt a wide range of structures. These range from relatively simple hairpins to intricate three dimensional folds, and can be accompanied by regulatory interactions with both metabolites and macromolecules. The last 50 years have witnessed elucidation of an astonishing array of RNA structures including tRNAs, ribozymes, riboswitches, the ribosome, the spliceosome, and most recently entire RNA structuromes. These advances in RNA structural biology have deepened insight into fundamental biological processes including gene editing, transcription, translation, and structure-based detection and response to temperature and other environmental signals. These discoveries reveal that RNA can be relatively static, like a rock; that it can have catalytic functions of cutting bonds, like scissors; and that it can adopt myriad functional shapes, like paper. We relate these extraordinary discoveries in the biology of RNA structure to the plant way of life. We trace plant-specific discovery of ribozymes and riboswitches, alternative splicing, organellar ribosomes, thermometers, whole-transcriptome structuromes and pan-structuromes, and conclude that plants have a special set of RNA structures that confer unique types of gene regulation. We finish with a consideration of future directions for the RNA structure-function field.

RNA: !adopts! Structures 
metabolites: !interacts with! RNA 
macromolecules: !interacts with! RNA 
tRNAs: !synthesizes! RNA 
ribozymes: !synthesizes! RNA 
riboswitches: !synthesizes! RNA 
ribosome: !synthesizes! RNA 
spliceosome: !synthesizes! RNA 
RNA: !edits! Gene 
RNA: !transcribes! Gene 
RNA: !translates! Gene 
RNA: !detects! Temperature 
RNA: !responds to! Environmental Signals 
ribozymes: !discovered by! Plants 
riboswitches: !discovered by! Plants 
alternative splicing: !discovered by! Plants 
organellar ribosomes: !discovered by! Plants 
thermometers: !discovered by! Plants 
whole-transcriptome structuromes: !discovered by! Plants 
pan-structuromes: !discovered by! Plants