Biochar amendment provides multiple benefits in enhancing crop productivity and soil nutrient availability. However, whether biochar addition affects root morphology and alters plant nutrient uptake and shoot growth under different irrigation regimes remain largely unknown. A split-root pot experiment with maize (<i>Zea mays</i> L.) was conducted on clay loam soil mixed with 2% (w/w) of wheat-straw (WSP) and softwood (SWP) biochar. The plants were subjected to full (FI), deficit (DI), and alternate partial root-zone drying (PRD) irrigation from the fourth leaf to the grain-filling stage. The results showed that, compared to plants grown in unamended soils, plants grown in the biochar-amended soils possessed greater total root length, area, diameter, volume, tips, forks, crossings, and root length density, which were further amplified by PRD. Despite a negative effect on soil available phosphorus (P) pool, WSP addition improved soil available nitrogen (N), potassium (K), and calcium (Ca) pool and cation exchange capacity under reduced irrigation. Even though biochar negatively affected nutrient concentrations in shoots as exemplified by lowered N, P, K (except leaf), and Ca concentration, it dramatically enhanced plant total N, P, K, Ca uptake, and biomass. Principal component analysis (PCA) revealed that the modified root morphology and increased soil available nutrient pools, and consequently, the higher plant total nutrient uptake might have facilitated the enhanced shoot growth and yield of maize plants in biochar-added soils. Biochar amendment further lowered specific leaf area but increased leaf N concentration per area-to-root N concentration per length ratio. All these effects were evident upon WSP amendment. Moreover, PRD outperformed DI in increasing root area-to-leaf area ratio. Overall, these findings suggest that WSP combined with PRD could be a promising strategy to improve the growth and nutrient uptake of maize plants.

Biochar: !enhances! Crop productivity 
Biochar: !alters! Plant nutrient uptake 
Biochar: !amplifies! Root length, area, diameter, volume, tips, forks, crossings, and root length density 
Biochar: !improves! Soil available nitrogen, potassium, and calcium pool 
Biochar: !negatively affects! Soil available phosphorus pool 
Biochar: !dramatically enhances! Plant total N, P, K, Ca uptake, and biomass 
Biochar: !lowers! Specific leaf area 
Biochar: !increases! Leaf N concentration per area-to-root N concentration per length ratio 
PRD: !outperforms! DI in increasing root area-to-leaf area ratio