Rice is susceptible to abiotic stresses such as drought stress. To enhance drought resistance, elucidating the mechanisms by which rice plants adapt to intermittent drought stress that may occur in the field is an important requirement. Roots are directly exposed to changes in the soil water condition, and their responses to these environmental changes are driven by photosynthates. To visualize the distribution of photosynthates in the root system of rice plants under drought stress and recovery from drought stress, we combined X-ray computed tomography (CT) with open type positron emission tomography (OpenPET) and positron-emitting tracer imaging system (PETIS) with <sup>11</sup>C tracer. The short half-life of <sup>11</sup>C (20.39 min) allowed us to perform multiple experiments using the same plant, and thus photosynthate translocation was visualized as the same plant was subjected to drought stress and then re-irrigation for recovery. The results revealed that when soil is drier, <sup>11</sup>C-photosynthates mainly translocated to the seminal roots, likely to promote elongation of the root with the aim of accessing water stored in the lower soil layers. The photosynthates translocation to seminal roots immediately stopped after rewatering then increased significantly in crown roots. We suggest that when rice plant experiencing drought is re-irrigated from the bottom of pot, the destination of <sup>11</sup>C-photosynthates translocation immediately switches from seminal root to crown roots. We reveal that rice roots are responsive to changes in soil water conditions and that rice plants differentially adapts the dynamics of photosynthates translocation to crown roots and seminal roots depending on soil conditions.

drought stress: !affects! photosynthates translocation 
photosynthates: !translocate to! seminal roots 
photosynthates: !translocate to! crown roots 
soil water condition: !influences! photosynthates translocation 
rewatering: !switches! photosynthates translocation destination