Throughout exploration of the soil, roots interact with their environment and adapt to different conditions. Directional root growth is guided by asymmetric molecular patterns but how these become established or are dynamically regulated is poorly understood. Asymmetric gradients of the phytohormone auxin are established during root gravitropism, mainly through directional transport mediated by polarized auxin transporters. Upon gravistimulation, PIN-FORMED2 (PIN2) is differentially distributed and accumulates at the lower root side to facilitate asymmetric auxin transport up to the elongation zone where it inhibits cell elongation. GOLVEN (GLV) peptides function in gravitropism by affecting PIN2 abundance in epidermal cells. In addition, GLV signaling through ROOT GROWTH FACTOR 1 INSENSITIVE (RGI) receptors regulates root apical meristem maintenance. Here, we show that GLV-RGI signaling in these two processes in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) can be mapped to different cells in the root tip and that, in the case of gravitropism, it operates mainly in the lateral root cap (LRC) to maintain PIN2 levels at the plasma membrane. Furthermore, we found that GLV signaling upregulates the phosphorylation level of PIN2 in an RGI-dependent manner. In addition, we demonstrated that the RGI5 receptor is asymmetrically distributed in the LRC and accumulates in the lower side of the LRC after gravistimulation. Asymmetric GLV-RGI signaling in the root cap likely accounts for differential PIN2 abundance at the plasma membrane to temporarily support auxin transport up to the elongation zone thereby representing an additional level of control on the asymmetrical auxin flux to mediate differential growth of the root.

Roots: !interact with! environment 
PIN2: !accumulates at! lower root side 
GLV: !affects! PIN2 abundance 
GLV: !signals through! RGI receptors 
RGI: !maps to! different cells in root tip 
GLV-RGI: !maintains! PIN2 levels 
RGI5: !asymmetrically distributes in! LRC 
GLV-RGI: !accounts for! differential PIN2 abundance 
Auxin flux: !mediates! differential root growth