FO12 strain enhances Fe deficiency responses in cucumber plants, probably through the production of ethylene and NO in the subapical regions of the roots. Rhizosphere microorganisms can elicit induced systemic resistance (ISR) in plants. This type of resistance involves complex mechanisms that confer protection to the plant against pathogen attack. Additionally, it has been reported by several studies that ISR and Fe deficiency responses are modulated by common pathways, involving some phytohormones and signaling molecules, like ethylene and nitric oxide (NO). The aim of this study was to determine whether the nonpathogenic strain of Fusarium oxysporum FO12 can induce Fe deficiency responses in cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) plants. Our results demonstrate that the root inoculation of cucumber plants with the FO12 strain promotes plant growth after several days of cultivation, as well as rhizosphere acidification and enhancement of ferric reductase activity. Moreover, Fe-related genes, such as FRO1, IRT1 and HA1, are upregulated at certain times after FO12 inoculation either upon Fe-deficiency or Fe-sufficient conditions. Furthermore, it has been found that this fungus colonizes root cortical tissues, promoting the upregulation of ethylene synthesis genes and NO production in the root subapical regions. To better understand the effects of the FO12 strain on field conditions, cucumber plants were inoculated and cultivated in a calcareous soil under greenhouse conditions. The results obtained show a modification of some physiological parameters in the inoculated plants, such as flowering and reduction of tissue necrosis. Overall, the results suggest that the FO12 strain could have a great potential as a Fe biofertilizer and biostimulant.

FO12 strain: !enhances! Fe deficiency responses
Rhizosphere microorganisms: !elicit! ISR
ISR: !involves! complex mechanisms
Fe deficiency responses: !modulated by! common pathways
FO12 strain: !promotes! plant growth
FO12 strain: !upregulates! Fe-related genes
FO12 strain: !colonizes! root cortical tissues
FO12 strain: !upregulates! ethylene synthesis genes
FO12 strain: !produces! NO
FO12 strain: !modifies! physiological parameters