Chloroplast pre-ribosomal RNA (rRNA) undergoes maturation, which is critical for ribosome assembly. While the central and auxiliary factors in rRNA maturation have been elucidated in bacteria, their mode of action remains largely unexplored in chloroplasts. We now reveal chloroplast-specific factors involved in 16S rRNA maturation, Arabidopsis thaliana orthologs of bacterial RsmD methyltransferase (AtRsmD) and ribosome maturation factor RimM (AtRimM). A forward genetic screen aimed to find suppressors of the Arabidopsis yellow variegated 2 (var2) mutant defective in photosystem II quality control found a causal nonsense mutation in AtRsmD. The substantially impaired 16S rRNA maturation and translation due to the mutation rescued the leaf variegation phenotype by lowering the levels of chloroplast-encoded proteins, including photosystem II core proteins, in var2. The subsequent co-immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry analyses and bimolecular fluorescence complementation assay found that AtRsmD interacts with AtRimM. Consistent with their interaction, loss of AtRimM also considerably impairs 16S rRNA maturation with decelerated m<sup>2</sup> G915 modification in 16S rRNA catalyzed by AtRsmD. The atrimM mutation also rescued var2 mutant phenotypes, corroborating the functional interplay between AtRsmD and AtRimM towards modification and maturation of 16S rRNA and chloroplast proteostasis. The maturation and post-transcriptional modifications of rRNA are critical to assembling ribosomes responsible for protein translation. Here, we revealed that the cooperative regulation of 16S rRNA m<sup>2</sup> G915 modifications by AtRsmD methyltransferase and ribosome assembly factor AtRimM contributes to 16S rRNA maturation, ribosome assembly, and proteostasis in chloroplasts.

AtRsmD: !interacts with! AtRimM
AtRsmD: !catalyzes! m<sup>2</sup> G915 modification in 16S rRNA
AtRimM: !enhances! 16S rRNA maturation
AtRimM: !contributes to! ribosome assembly
AtRimM: !regulates! proteostasis in chloroplasts