Seed size is an important factor contributing to maize yield, but its molecular mechanism remains unclear. The seed coat, which serves as one of the three components of the maize grain, determines seed size to a certain extent. The seed coat also shares the maternal genotype and is an ideal material for studying heterosis. In this study, the self-pollinated seeds of the maize hybrid Yudan888 and its parental lines were continuously collected from 0 day after pollination (DAP) to 15 DAP for phenotyping, cytological observation and RNA-seq. The phenotypic data showed that 3 DAP and 8 DAP are the best time points to study maize seed coat heterosis. Cytological observations indicated that maize seed coat heterosis might be the result of the coordination between cell number and cell size. Furthermore, the RNA-seq results showed that the nonadditive genes changed significantly between 3 and 8 DAP. However, the number of genes expressed additively was not significantly different. Our findings suggest that seed coat heterosis in hybrid is the result of nonadditive expression caused by dynamic changes in genes at different time points during seed expansion and seed coat development. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment indicated that genes related to DNA replication, cell cycle regulation, circadian rhythms and metabolite accumulation contributed significantly to hybrid seed coat heterosis. Maize seed coat phenotyping allowed us to infer that 3 DAP and 8 DAP are important time points in the study of seed coat heterosis. Our findings provide evidence for genes involved in DNA replication, cell cycle regulation, circadian rhythms and metabolite accumulation in hybrid with high or low parental expression as major contributors to hybrid seed coat heterosis.

Seed size: !determines! seed coat
Cell number: !coordinates with! cell size
Nonadditive genes: !change significantly! between 3 and 8 DAP
DNA replication: !contributes to! seed coat heterosis
Cell cycle regulation: !contributes to! seed coat heterosis
Circadian rhythms: !contributes to! seed coat heterosis
Metabolite accumulation: !contributes to! seed coat heterosis