The complex physical structure and abundant repeat sequences make it difficult to assemble the mitogenomes of seed plants, especially gymnosperms. Only approximately 33 mitogenomes of gymnosperms have been reported. However, as the most widely distributed and the second largest family among gymnosperms, Cupressaceae has only six assembled mitogenomes, including five draft mitogenomes and one complete mitogenome, which has greatly hindered the understanding of mitogenome evolution within this large family, even gymnosperms. In this study, we assembled and validated the complete mitogenome of Thuja sutchuenensis, with a size of 2.4 Mb. Multiple sequence units constituted its complex structure, which can be reduced to three linear contigs and one small circular contig. The analysis of repeat sequences indicated that the numbers of simple sequence repeats increased during the evolutionary history of gymnosperms, and the mitogenome of Thuja sutchuenensis harboured abundant extra-long repeats (more than 5 kb). Additionally, the longest repeat sequence identified in these seven gymnosperms also came from the mitogenome of Thuja sutchuenensis, with a length of up to 47 kb. The analysis of colinear blocks and gene clusters both revealed that the orders of mitochondrial genes within gymnosperms was not conserved. The comparative analysis showed that only four tRNAs were shared by seven gymnosperms, namely, trnD-GUC, trnE-UUC, trnI-CAU and trnY-GUA. Furthermore, four genes have undergone potential positive selection in most gymnosperm species, namely, atp8, ccmB, mttB and sdh4. We successfully assembled the second complete mitogenome within Cupressaceae and verified that it consisted of multiple sequence units. Our study also indicated that abundant long repeats may contribute to the generation of the complex conformation of the mitogenome of Thuja sutchuenensis. The investigation of Thuja sutchuenensis's mitogenome in our study provides new insight into further understanding the complex mitogenome architecture within gymnosperms.

Gene: !affects! Mitogenome structure 
Gene: !synthesizes! Mitochondrial genes 
Gene: !localizes to! Gymnosperms 
Gene: !enhances! Simple sequence repeats 
Gene: !represses! Colinear blocks 
Gene: !interacts with! Gene clusters