Uraria Desv. belongs to the tribe Desmodieae (Fabaceae), a group of legume plants, some of which have medicinal properties. However, due to a lack of genomic information, the interspecific relationships, genetic diversity, population genetics, and identification of functional genes within Uraria species are still unclear. Using RNA-Seq, a total of 66,026 Uraria lagopodioides unigenes with a total sequence content of 52,171,904 bp were obtained via de novo assembly and annotated using GO, KEGG, and KOG databases. 17,740 SSRs were identified from a set of 66,026 unigenes. Cross-species amplification showed that 54 out of 150 potential unigene-derived SSRs were transferable in Uraria, of which 19 polymorphic SSRs were developed. Cluster analysis based on polymorphisms successfully distinguished seven Uraria species and revealed their interspecific relationships. Seventeen samples of seven Uraria species were clustered into two monophyletic clades, and phylogenetic relationships of Uraria species based on unigene-derived SSRs were consistent with classifications based on morphological characteristics. Unigenes annotated in the present study will provide new insights into the functional genomics of Uraria species. Meanwhile, the unigene-derived SSR markers developed here will be invaluable for assessing the genetic diversity and evolutionary history of Uraria and relatives.

RNA-Seq: !assembles! unigenes 
unigenes: !annotated with! GO, KEGG, KOG databases 
SSRs: !identified from! unigenes 
unigene-derived SSRs: !transferable in! Uraria 
19 polymorphic SSRs: !developed from! unigene-derived SSRs 
Cluster analysis: !distinguishes! seven Uraria species 
Unigene-derived SSRs: !reveal! interspecific relationships 
17 samples: !clustered into! two monophyletic clades 
Phylogenetic relationships: !consistent with! classifications based on morphological characteristics 
Unigenes: !provide insights into! functional genomics of Uraria species 
Unigene-derived SSR markers: !invaluable for assessing! genetic diversity and evolutionary history