Salinity is one of the most widespread abiotic stresses affecting rice productivity worldwide. Understanding the genetic basis of salt tolerance is key for breeding salt-tolerant rice varieties. Numerous QTLs have been identified to help dissect rice salt-tolerance genetic mechanisms, yet only rare genes located in significant QTLs have been thoroughly studied or fine-mapped. Here, a combination of linkage mapping and transcriptome profiling analysis was used to identify salt tolerance-related functional candidate genes underlying stable QTLs. A recombinant inbred line (RIL) population derived from a cross between Jileng 1 (salt-sensitive) and Milyang 23 (salt-tolerant) was constructed. Subsequently, a high-density genetic map was constructed by using 2921 recombination bin markers developed from whole genome resequencing. A total of twelve QTLs controlling the standard evaluation score under salt stress were identified by linkage analysis and distributed on chromosomes 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 and 11. Notably, five QTL intervals were detected as environmentally stable QTLs in this study, and their functions were verified by comparative transcriptome analysis. By comparing the transcriptome profiles of the two parents and two bulks, we found 551 salt stress-specific differentially expressed genes. Among them, fifteen DEGs located in stable QTL intervals were considered promising candidate genes for salt tolerance. According to gene annotations, the gene <i>OsRCI2-8</i>(<i>Os06g0184800</i>) was the most promising, as it is known to be associated with salt stress, and its differential expression between the tolerant and sensitive RIL bulks highlights its important role in salt stress response pathways. Our findings provide five stable salt tolerance-related QTLs and one promising candidate gene, which will facilitate breeding for improved salt tolerance in rice varieties and promote the exploration of salt stress tolerance mechanisms in rice.

QTL: !controls! Standard Evaluation Score
RIL: !derived from! Jileng 1 & Milyang 23
Linkage Analysis: !identifies! QTLs
Transcriptome Profiling Analysis: !identifies! Salt Tolerance-related Functional Candidate Genes
DEGs: !located in! Stable QTL Intervals
OsRCI2-8: !associated with! Salt Stress