Variety testing is an indispensable and essential step in the process of creating new improved varieties from breeding to adoption. The performance of the varieties can be compared and evaluated based on multi-trait data from multi-location variety tests in multiple years. Although high-throughput phenotypic platforms have been used for observing some specific traits, manual phenotyping is still widely used. The efficient management of large amounts of data is still a significant problem for crop variety testing. This study reports a variety test platform (VTP) that was created to manage the whole workflow for the standardization and data quality improvement of crop variety testing. Through the VTP, the phenotype data of varieties can be integrated and reused based on standardized data elements and datasets. Moreover, the information support and automated functions for the whole testing workflow help users conduct tests efficiently through a series of functions such as test design, data acquisition and processing, and statistical analyses. The VTP has been applied to regional variety tests covering more than seven thousand locations across the whole country, and then a standardized and authoritative phenotypic database covering five crops has been generated. In addition, the VTP can be deployed on either privately or publicly available high-performance computing nodes so that test management and data analysis can be conveniently done using a web-based interface or mobile application. In this way, the system can provide variety test management services to more small and medium-sized breeding organizations, and ensures the mutual independence and security of test data. The application of VTP shows that the platform can make variety testing more efficient and can be used to generate a reliable database suitable for meta-analysis in multi-omics breeding and variety development projects.

VTP: !manages! Variety Testing
VTP: !integrates! Phenotype Data
VTP: !provides! Information Support
VTP: !automates! Functions
VTP: !deploys on! High-Performance Computing Nodes
VTP: !generates! Standardized Database
VTP: !ensures! Mutual Independence & Security