Light, temperature, water, and fertilizer are arguably the most important environmental factors regulating crop growth and productivity. Environmental stimuli, including low light, extreme temperatures, and water stresses caused by climate change, affect crop growth and production and pose a growing threat to sustainable agriculture. Furthermore, soil salinity is another major environmental constraint affecting crop growth and threatening global food security. The grain filling stage is the final stage of growth and is also the most important stage in cereals, directly determining the grain weight and final yield. However, the grain filling process is extremely vulnerable to different environmental stimuli, especially for inferior spikelets. Given the importance of grain filling in cereals and the deterioration of environmental problems, understanding environmental stimuli and their effects on grain filling constitutes a major focus of crop research. In recent years, significant advances made in this field have led to a good description of the intricate mechanisms by which different environmental stimuli regulate grain filling, as well as approaches to adapt cereals to changing climate conditions and to give them better grain filling. In this review, the current environmental stimuli, their dose-response effect on grain filling, and the physiological and molecular mechanisms involved are discussed. Furthermore, what we can do to help cereal crops adapt to environmental stimuli is elaborated. Overall, we call for future research to delve deeper into the gene function-related research and the commercialization of gene-edited crops. Meanwhile, smart agriculture is the development trend of the future agriculture under environmental stimuli.

Light: !affects! Crop Growth
Temperature: !affects! Crop Growth
Water: !affects! Crop Growth
Fertilizer: !affects! Crop Growth
Low Light: !affects! Grain Filling
Extreme Temperatures: !affects! Grain Filling
Water Stresses: !affects! Grain Filling
Soil Salinity: !affects! Crop Growth
Environmental Stimuli: !regulate! Grain Filling
Physiological Mechanisms: !involved in! Regulation of Grain Filling
Molecular Mechanisms: !involved in! Regulation of Grain Filling
Gene Function-Related Research: !needed for! Adaptation to Environmental Stimuli
Commercialization of Gene-Edited Crops: !needed for! Adaptation to Environmental Stimuli
Smart Agriculture: !development trend of! Future Agriculture