<i>Stephania japonica</i> is a slender climbing plant with peltate, triangular-ovate leaves. Not many research efforts have been devoted to investigate the anatomy and the mechanical properties of this type of leaf shape. In this study, displacement driven tensile tests with three cycles on different displacement levels are performed on petioles, venation and intercostal areas of the <i>Stephania japonica</i> leaves. Furthermore, compression tests in longitudinal direction are performed on petioles. The mechanical experiments are combined with light microscopy and X-ray tomography. The experiments show, that these plant organs and tissues behave in the finite strain range in a viscoelastic manner. Based on the results of the light microscopy and X-ray tomography, the plant tissue can be considered as a matrix material reinforced by fibers. Therefore, a continuum mechanical anisotropic viscoelastic material model at finite deformations is proposed to model such behavior. The anisotropy is specified as the so-called transverse isotropy, where the behavior in the plane perpendicular to the fibers is assumed to be isotropic. The model is obtained by postulating a Helmholtz free energy, which is split additively into an elastic and an inelastic part. Both parts of the energy depend on structural tensors to account for the transversely isotropic material behavior. The evolution equations for the internal variables, e.g. inelastic deformations, are chosen in a physically meaningful way that always fulfills the second law of thermodynamics. The proposed model is calibrated against experimental data, and the material parameters are identified. The model can be used for finite element simulations of this type of leaf shape, which is left open for the future work.

petioles: !undergo! tensile tests 
petioles: !undergo! compression tests 
tissue: !considered as! matrix material 
fibers: !reinforce! matrix material 
Helmholtz free energy: !split into! elastic and inelastic parts 
internal variables: !evolve according to! second law of thermodynamics 
model: !calibrated against! experimental data