Growing cassava in Africa requires resistance against the viruses causing cassava mosaic disease (CMD) and the viruses causing cassava brown streak disease (CBSD). A dominant CMD2 resistance gene from a West African cassava landrace provides strong resistance against the cassava mosaic viruses. However, resistance against cassava brown streak viruses is limited to cassava varieties that show tolerance to the disease. A recently identified cassava germplasm that cannot be infected with cassava brown streak viruses provides a new source of the resistance required to protect cassava from CBSD. We present a synopsis of the status of virus resistance in cassava and report on the research to combine resistance against CBSD and CMD. We improve the lengthy and erratic screening for CBSD resistance by proposing a virus infection and screening protocol for the viruses causing CBSD and CMD, which allows a rapid and precise assessment of cassava resistance under controlled conditions. Using this approach, we classified the virus responses of cassava lines from Africa and South America and identified truly virus-resistant clones that cannot be infected with any of the known viruses causing CBSD even under the most stringent virus infections. A modification of this protocol was used to test seedlings from cassava crosses for resistance against both diseases. A broad-spectrum resistance was identified in a workflow that lasted 9 months from seed germination to the identification of virus resistance. The workflow we propose dramatically reduces the evaluation and selection time required in a classical breeding workflow to reach the advanced field trial stage in only 9 months by conducting selections for virus resistance and plant multiplication in parallel. However, it does not bypass field evaluations; cassava resistance assessment prior to the field limits the evaluation to candidates with virus resistance defined as the absence of symptoms and the absence of the virus. The transfer of our virus screening workflow to cassava breeding programs enhances the efficiency by which resistance against viruses can be selected. It provides a precise definition of the plant's resistance response and can be used as a model system to tackle resistance in cassava against other diseases.

CMD2 gene: !provides resistance against! cassava mosaic viruses 
cassava germplasm: !provides resistance against! cassava brown streak viruses 
virus infection and screening protocol: !allows assessment of! cassava resistance 
clones: !classified as! virus-resistant 
seedlings: !tested for! resistance against both diseases 
workflow: !reduces evaluation and selection time to! 9 months 
virus screening workflow: !enhances efficiency of! resistance selection