Arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) are hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins containing a high sugar content and are widely distributed in the plant kingdom. AGPs have long been suggested to play important roles in sexual plant reproduction. The synthesis of their complex carbohydrates is initiated by a family of hydroxyproline galactosyltransferase (Hyp-GALT) enzymes which add the first galactose to Hyp residues in the protein backbone. Eight Hyp-GALT enzymes have been identified so far, and in the present work a mutant affecting five of these enzymes (galt2galt5galt7galt8galt9) was analyzed regarding the reproductive process. The galt25789 mutant presented a low seed set, and reciprocal crosses indicated a significant female gametophytic contribution to this mutant phenotype. Mutant ovules revealed abnormal callose accumulation inside the embryo sac and integument defects at the micropylar region culminating in defects in pollen tube reception. In addition, immunolocalization and biochemical analyses allowed the detection of a reduction in the amount of glucuronic acid in mutant ovary AGPs. Dramatically low amounts of high-molecular-weight Hyp-O-glycosides obtained following size exclusion chromatography of base-hydrolyzed mutant AGPs compared to the wild type indicated the presence of underglycosylated AGPs in the galt25789 mutant, while the monosaccharide composition of these Hyp-O-glycosides displayed no significant changes compared to the wild-type Hyp-O-glycosides. The present work demonstrates the functional importance of the carbohydrate moieties of AGPs in ovule development and pollen-pistil interactions.

galt25789 mutant: !presents! low seed set
galt25789 mutant: !displays! abnormal callose accumulation
galt25789 mutant: !reveals! integument defects
galt25789 mutant: !exhibits! reduction in glucuronic acid
galt25789 mutant: !possesses! underglycosylated AGPs
AGPs: !play important roles in! sexual plant reproduction
Hyp-GALT enzymes: !initiate! synthesis of complex carbohydrates
Hyp-O-glycosides: !obtained from! base-hydrolyzed AGPs
Hyp-O-glycosides: !display! no significant changes