In aerial spraying of plant protection UAVs, the continuous reduction of pesticides is an objective process. Under the condition of constant flight state (speed and altitude), the change of pesticide loading will inevitably lead to the shift of lift force and rotor speed generated by UAV rotor rotation, which will change the distribution of the rotor flow field and affect the effect of aerial spraying operation of plant protection UAV. Therefore, the rotor speed of UAV is taken as the research object in this paper, and the adaptive refinement physical model based on the Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM) is used to numerically simulate the rotor flow field of the quadrotor plant-protection UAV at different speeds. A high-speed particle image velocimeter (PIV) was used to obtain and verify the motion state of the droplets emitted from the fan nozzle in the rotor flow field at different speeds. The results show that, with the increase of rotor speed, the maximum velocity and vorticity of the wind field under the rotor increase gradually, the top wind speed can reach 13m/s, and the maximum vorticity can reach 589.64<i>s</i> <sup>-1</sup>. Moreover, the maximum velocity flow value is mainly concentrated within 1m below the rotor, and the maximum vorticity value is primarily concentrated within 0.5m. However, with the increase of time, the ultimate value of velocity and vorticity decreases due to the appearance of turbulence, and the distribution of velocity and vorticity are symmetrically distributed along the centre line of the fuselage, within the range of (-1m, 1m) in the X direction. It is consistent with the motion state of droplets under the action of the rotor downwash flow field obtained by PIV. The study results are expected to reveal and understand the change law of the rotor flow field of plant protection UAVs with the dynamic change of pesticide loading to provide a theoretical basis for the development of precise spraying operation mode of plant protection UAVs and improve the operation effect.

UAV rotor: !generates! lift force 
UAV rotor: !affects! distribution of rotor flow field 
LBM: !simulates! rotor flow field 
PIV: !measures! motion state of droplets 
rotor speed: !increases! maximum velocity and vorticity 
turbulence: !decreases! ultimate value of velocity and vorticity