In conformity with the international trend to substitute the artificial agro-chemicals by natural products to improve growth and productivity of crops, there is a necessity to focus on the environment sustainable and eco-friendly resources to increase crops productivity per unit area. One of these resources is the use of biostimulants. The aim of this study is to allow the vertical expansion of wheat crop by improving its growth and productivity per unit area as well as enhancing its grain quality using henna leaf extract as a biostimulant. Field study was conducted to evaluate the potentiality of different doses of henna leaf extract (HLE) for improving the performance of wheat plants (Triticum aestivum L.) at three development stages. Results revealed that the response was dose dependent hence both 0.5 and 1.0많/L doses significantly enhanced the growth of shoot and root systems, biochemical traits, yield and yield related components with being 1.0많/L the most effective one. Furthermore, 1.0많/L HLE markedly enhanced the quality of the yielded grains as revealed by increasing the content of soluble sugars (23%), starch (19%), gluten (50%), soluble proteins (37%), amylase activity (27%), total phenolics, flavonoids and tannins (67, 87 and 23%, respectively) as well as some elements including Ca (184%), Na and Fe (10%). Also, HPLC analysis of grains revealed that 1.0많/L dose significantly increased the level of different phytohormones, soluble sugars and flavonoids (quercetin, resveratrol and catechin). Application of Henna (Lawsonia inermis) leaf extract at 1.0많/L dose as a combination of seed priming and foliar spray can be recommended as a nonpolluting, inexpensive promising biostimulant, it can effectively enhance wheat growth, biochemical traits and productivity as well as improving the quality of the yielded grains.

Henna leaf extract: !enhances! wheat growth
Henna leaf extract: !enhances! biochemical traits
Henna leaf extract: !enhances! yield and yield related components
Henna leaf extract: !enhances! grain quality
Henna leaf extract: !increases! content of soluble sugars
Henna leaf extract: !increases! starch
Henna leaf extract: !increases! gluten
Henna leaf extract: !increases! soluble proteins
Henna leaf extract: !increases! amylase activity
Henna leaf extract: !increases! total phenolics
Henna leaf extract: !increases! flavonoids
Henna leaf extract: !increases! tannins
Henna leaf extract: !increases! Ca
Henna leaf extract: !increases! Na
Henna leaf extract: !increases! Fe
Henna leaf extract: !increases! phytohormones
Henna leaf extract: !increases! soluble sugars
Henna leaf extract: !increases! flavonoids