Lysin motif (LysM)-receptor-like kinase (RLK) and leucine-rich repeat (LRR)-RLK mediated signaling play important roles in the development and regulation of root nodule symbiosis in legumes. The availability of water and nutrients in the soil is a major limiting factor affecting crop productivity. Plants of the Leguminosae family form a symbiotic association with nitrogen-fixing Gram-negative soil bacteria, rhizobia for nitrogen fixation. This symbiotic relationship between legumes and rhizobia depends on the signal exchange between them. Plant receptor-like kinases (RLKs) containing lysin motif (LysM) and/or leucine-rich repeat (LRR) play an important role in the perception of chemical signals from rhizobia for initiation and establishment of root nodule symbiosis (RNS) that results in nitrogen fixation. This review highlights the diverse aspects of LysM-RLK and LRR receptors including their specificity, functions, interacting partners, regulation, and associated signaling in RNS. The activation of LysM-RLKs and LRR-RLKs is important for ensuring the successful interaction between legume roots and rhizobia. The intracellular regions of the receptors enable additional layers of signaling that help in the transduction of signals intracellularly. Additionally, symbiosis receptor-like kinase (SYMRK) containing the LRR motif acts as a co-receptor with Nod factors receptors (LysM-RLK). Cleavage of the malectin-like domain from the SYMRK ectodomain is a mechanism for controlling SYMRK stability. Overall, this review has discussed different aspects of legume receptors that are critical to the perception of signals from rhizobia and their subsequent role in creating the mutualistic relationship necessary for nitrogen fixation. Additionally, it has been discussed how crucial it is to extrapolate the knowledge gained from model legumes to crop legumes such as chickpea and common bean to better understand the mechanism underlying nodule formation in crop legumes. Future directions have also been proposed in this regard.

LysM-RLK: !perceives! signals from rhizobia 
LRR-RLK: !perceives! signals from rhizobia 
SYMRK: !acts as co-receptor with! Nod factors receptors 
Malectin-like domain: !cleaved from! SYMRK ectodomain 
LysM-RLK/LRR-RLK: !activates! successful interaction between legume roots and rhizobia