['36789486', 'Cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol (CDP-DAG), an important intermediate for  glycerolipid biosynthesis, is synthesized under the catalytic activity of CDP-DAG  synthase (CDS) to produce anionic phosphoglycerolipids such as  phosphatidylglycerol (PG) and cardiolipin (CL). Previous studies showed that  Arabidopsis CDSs are encoded by a small gene family, termed CDS1-CDS5, the  members of which are integral membrane proteins in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and  in plastids. However, the details on how CDP-DAG is provided for mitochondrial  membrane-specific phosphoglycerolipids are missing. Here we present the  identification of a mitochondrion-specific CDS, designated CDS6. Enzymatic  activity of CDS6 was demonstrated by the complementation of CL synthesis in the  yeast CDS-deficient tam41Delta mutant. The Arabidopsis cds6 mutant lacking CDS6  activity showed decreased mitochondrial PG and CL biosynthesis capacity, a severe  growth deficiency finally leading to plant death. These defects were rescued  partly by complementation with CDS6 or supplementation with PG and CL. The  ultrastructure of mitochondria in cds6 was abnormal, missing the structures of  cristae. The degradation of triacylglycerol (TAG) in lipid droplets and starch in  chloroplasts in the cds6 mutant was impaired. The expression of most  differentially expressed genes involved in the mitochondrial electron transport  chain was upregulated, suggesting an energy-demanding stage in cds6. Furthermore,  the contents of polar glycerolipids in cds6 were dramatically altered. In  addition, cds6 seedlings lost the capacity for cell proliferation and showed a  higher oxidase activity. Thus, CDS6 is indispensable for the biosynthesis of PG  and CL in mitochondria, which is critical for establishing mitochondrial  structure, TAG degradation, energy production and seedling development.', '2023 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1111/tpj.16139', 'ORCID:']

CDS6: !synthesizes! CDP-DAG 
CDS6: !affects! mitochondrial PG and CL biosynthesis 
CDS6: !impacts! ultrastructure of mitochondria 
CDS6: !regulates! TAG degradation 
CDS6: !influences! expression of genes in electron transport chain 
CDS6: !alters! polar glycerolipid contents 
CDS6: !disrupts! cell proliferation 
CDS6: !increases! oxidase activity