Leaves of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) are flue-cured to use as a key industrial supply in various parts of the world. The quality of tobacco leaves is dependent on chemical components and their proportions. Generally, the stem attached to tobacco leaf is detached before curing. However, the leaf stem remains green for an extended period of time (as compared to leaf) during flue-curing. Hence, it is expected to affect the quality of tobacco's final product. To understand the impact of the green stem of leaf on the metabolome of flue-cured tobacco, we employed a broad targeted metabolomics approach. We selected two tobacco cultivars (Yun87 and K326) and cultivated them in five geographic locations in China. For flue-curing, leaves were harvested without a stem (L) or with an attached stem (SPL). After metabolome analysis, a total of 1027 metabolites were annotated in these samples. A variable number of metabolites were differentially accumulated between both types of leaves (depending on geographic location or cultivar) representing an influence of environment or genotype. Interestingly, only 68 metabolites were differentially accumulated between L and SPL samples irrespective of the cultivar or geographic location. These differentially accumulated metabolites belonged to major groups of primary and secondary metabolites. We have discussed the importance of identified metabolites in terms of carbon, nitrogen, and polyphenolic metabolism. The present research is the first comprehensive description of several metabolites in tobacco leaves related to the contribution of leaf stem. The current study opens novel prospects for investigating the potential of such metabolites in improving the quality of flue-cured tobacco.

Leaves: !harvested with! stem 
Leaves: !harvested without! stem 
Metabolites: !differentially accumulated between! L and SPL samples 
Metabolites: !belong to! major groups of primary and secondary metabolites 
Metabolites: !contribute to! carbon, nitrogen, and polyphenolic metabolism