In seed plants, the ovule is the precursor to the seed. The process of ovule development and differentiation is regulated by multiple factors, including starch metabolism and endogenous hormones. Castanea henryi produces nuts with high nutritional value. However, the high proportion of empty buds restricts the commercial use of the tree. Previous studies have shown that the empty bud phenotype is closely related to ovule abortion. If none of the ovules in the ovary expand rapidly and develop in 7-8 weeks after pollination, an empty bud will form. Therefore, we studied the development and molecular mechanisms underlying single seed formation in C. henryi. We found that 49 days after pollination (DAP) is a critical period for the formation of fertile and abortive ovules. The morphology and starch distribution of the fertile and abortive ovules differed significantly at 49 DAP. The fertile ovules were smooth and round in appearance, with a large amount of starch. In contrast, abortive ovules were smaller with only a small amount of starch. The embryo sac of the abortive ovule proceeded to develop abnormally, and the entire ovule lacked starch. We identified 37 candidate genes involved in metabolism with potential roles in the regulation of starch levels. Three ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) genes, one granule-bound starch synthase (GBSS) gene, and two beta-amylase genes could affect starch accumulation. The levels of auxin, cytokinins, gibberellins, and jasmonic acid in fertile ovules were higher than those in abortive ovules. In addition, the levels of endogenous abscisic acid and salicylic acid in abortive ovules were higher than those in fertile ovules of the same age, consistent with the expression patterns of genes related to the synthesis of abscisic and salicylic acid and signal transduction. We identified and mapped the differentially expressed genes associated with hormone synthesis and signal transduction. These results improve our general understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying single seed development in C. henryi and the phenomenon of empty buds, providing directions for future research.

Starch Metabolism: !affects! Ovule Development 
AGPase Genes: !influence! Starch Accumulation 
GBSS Gene: !influences! Starch Accumulation 
Beta-Amylase Genes: !influence! Starch Accumulation 
Auxin: !higher in! Fertile Ovules 
Cytokinins: !higher in! Fertile Ovules 
Gibberellins: !higher in! Fertile Ovules 
Jasmonic Acid: !higher in! Fertile Ovules 
Abscisic Acid: !higher in! Abortive Ovules 
Salicylic Acid: !higher in! Abortive Ovules