Flowering is a crucial developing stage for rapeseed (<i>Brassica napus</i> L.) plants. Flowers develop on the main and branch inflorescences of rapeseed plants and then grow into siliques. The seed yield of rapeseed heavily depends on the total flower numbers per area throughout the whole flowering period. The number of rapeseed inflorescences can reflect the richness of rapeseed flowers and provide useful information for yield prediction. To count rapeseed inflorescences automatically, we transferred the counting problem to a detection task. Then, we developed a low-cost approach for counting rapeseed inflorescences using YOLOv5 with the Convolutional Block Attention Module (CBAM) based on unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) Red-Green-Blue (RGB) imagery. Moreover, we constructed a Rapeseed Inflorescence Benchmark (RIB) to verify the effectiveness of our model. The RIB dataset captured by DJI Phantom 4 Pro V2.0, including 165 plot images and 60,000 manual labels, is to be released. Experimental results showed that indicators <i>R<sup>2</sup></i> for counting and the mean Average Precision (mAP) for location were over 0.96 and 92%, respectively. Compared with Faster R-CNN, YOLOv4, CenterNet, and TasselNetV2+, the proposed method achieved state-of-the-art counting performance on RIB and had advantages in location accuracy. The counting results revealed a quantitative dynamic change in the number of rapeseed inflorescences in the time dimension. Furthermore, a significant positive correlation between the actual crop yield and the automatically obtained rapeseed inflorescence total number on a field plot level was identified. Thus, a set of UAV- assisted methods for better determination of the flower richness was developed, which can greatly support the breeding of high-yield rapeseed varieties.

UAV: !captures! RIB dataset 
RIB dataset: !contains! 165 plot images 
YOLOv5: !uses! CBAM 
YOLOv5: !detects! rapeseed inflorescences 
Rapeseed inflorescences: !reflect! flower richness 
YOLOv5: !achieves! state-of-the-art counting performance 
Actual crop yield: !correlates with! automatically obtained rapeseed inflorescence total number