The 3D point cloud data are used to analyze plant morphological structure. Organ segmentation of a single plant can be directly used to determine the accuracy and reliability of organ-level phenotypic estimation in a point-cloud study. However, it is difficult to achieve a high-precision, automatic, and fast plant point cloud segmentation. Besides, a few methods can easily integrate the global structural features and local morphological features of point clouds relatively at a reduced cost. In this paper, a distance field-based segmentation pipeline (DFSP) which could code the global spatial structure and local connection of a plant was developed to realize rapid organ location and segmentation. The terminal point clouds of different plant organs were first extracted <i>via</i> DFSP during the stem-leaf segmentation, followed by the identification of the low-end point cloud of maize stem based on the local geometric features. The regional growth was then combined to obtain a stem point cloud. Finally, the instance segmentation of the leaf point cloud was realized using DFSP. The segmentation method was tested on 420 maize and compared with the manually obtained ground truth. Notably, DFSP had an average processing time of 1.52 s for about 15,000 points of maize plant data. The mean precision, recall, and micro F1 score of the DFSP segmentation algorithm were 0.905, 0.899, and 0.902, respectively. These findings suggest that DFSP can accurately, rapidly, and automatically achieve maize stem-leaf segmentation tasks and could be effective in maize phenotype research. The source code can be found at https://github.com/syau-miao/DFSP.git.

DFSP: !achieves! Rapid Organ Location and Segmentation 
DFSP: !codes! Global Spatial Structure and Local Connection of a Plant 
DFSP: !identifies! Low-End Point Cloud of Maize Stem 
DFSP: !combines! Regional Growth to Obtain Stem Point Cloud 
DFSP: !realizes! Instance Segmentation of Leaf Point Cloud 
DFSP: !has! Average Processing Time of 1.52s 
DFSP: !has! Mean Precision, Recall, and Micro F1 Score of 0.905, 0.899, and 0.902