Photoperiod is an important environmental cue interacting with circadian clock pathway to optimize the local adaption and yield of crops. Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa) in family Amaranthaceae has been known as superfood due to the nutritious elements. As quinoa was originated from the low-latitude Andes, most of the quinoa accessions are short-day type. Short-day type quinoa usually displays altered growth and yield status when introduced into higher latitude regions. Thus, deciphering the photoperiodic regulation on circadian clock pathway will help breed adaptable and high yielding quinoa cultivars. In this study, we conducted RNA-seq analysis of the diurnally collected leaves of quinoa plants treated by short-day (SD) and long-day conditions (LD), respectively. We identified 19,818 (44% of global genes) rhythmic genes in quinoa using HAYSTACK analysis. We identified the putative circadian clock architecture and investigated the photoperiodic regulatory effects on the expression phase and amplitude of global rhythmic genes, core clock components and transcription factors. The global rhythmic transcripts were involved in time-of-day specific biological processes. A higher percentage of rhythmic genes had advanced phases and strengthened amplitudes when switched from LD to SD. The transcription factors of CO-like, DBB, EIL, ERF, NAC, TALE and WRKY families were sensitive to the day length changes. We speculated that those transcription factors may function as key mediators for the circadian clock output in quinoa. Besides, we identified 15 novel time-of-day specific motifs that may be key cis elements for rhythm-keeping in quinoa. Collectively, this study lays a foundation for understanding the circadian clock pathway and provides useful molecular resources for adaptable elites breeding in quinoa.

Photoperiod: !interacts with! circadian clock pathway
RNA-seq: !identifies! 19,818 rhythmic genes
Global rhythmic transcripts: !involved in! time-of-day specific biological processes
LD to SD switch: !advances phases and strengthens amplitudes of! rhythmic genes
Transcription factors: !sensitive to! day length changes
Time-of-day specific motifs: !identified as! key cis elements for rhythm-keeping