['36797772', 'The role of glycoproteins as key cell surface molecules during development and  stress is well established, yet the relationship between their structural  features and functional mechanisms are poorly defined. FASCICLIN-LIKE  ARABINOGALACTAN PROTEINs (FLAs), which impact plant growth and development, are  an excellent example of a glycoprotein family with a complex multidomain  structure. FLAs combine globular fasciclin-like (FAS1) domains, disordered  sequences containing glycomotifs for directing addition of O-linked  arabinogalactan (AG) glycans, and additional post-translational modifications  including N-linked glycans in the FAS1 domains, a cleaved signal peptide at the  N-terminus, and often a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor signal sequence  at the C-terminus. The roles of glycosylation, the GPI-anchor, and FAS1 domain  functions in the polysaccharide-rich extracellular matrix of plants remain  unclear, as do the relationships between them. In this study, we examined  sequence-structure-function relationships of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana)  FLA11, demonstrated to have roles in secondary cell wall (SCW) development, by  introducing domain mutations and functional specialisation through domain swaps  with FLA3 and FLA12. We identified FAS1 domains as essential for FLA function,  differentiating FLA11/FLA12, with roles in SCW development, from FLA3, specific  to flowers and involved in pollen development. The GPI-anchor and AG  glycosylation co-regulate the cell surface location and release of FLAs into cell  walls. The AG glycomotif sequence closest to the GPI-anchor (AG2) is a major  feature differentiating FLA11 from FLA12. Results of our study show that the  multidomain structure of different FLAs influences their sub-cellular location  and biological functions during plant development.', '2023 Feb 17', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1093/plphys/kiad097', 'ORCID:']

FLA11: !influences! SCW development
FLA12: !influences! SCW development
FLA3: !influences! pollen development
FAS1 domains: !essential for! FLA function
GPI-anchor: !co-regulates! cell surface location
AG glycosylation: !co-regulates! cell surface location
AG2: !differentiates! FLA11 from FLA12