Four types of cells were engineered from Artemisia annua to produce approximately 17 anthocyanins, four of which were elucidated structurally. All of them expressed the artemisinin pathway. Artemisia annua is the only medicinal crop to produce artemisinin for the treatment of malignant malaria. Unfortunately, hundreds of thousands of people still lose their life every year due to the lack of sufficient artemisinin. Artemisinin is considered to result from the spontaneous autoxidation of dihydroartemisinic acid in the presence of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in an oxidative condition of glandular trichomes (GTs); however, whether increasing antioxidative compounds can inhibit artemisinin biosynthesis in plant cells is unknown. Anthocyanins are potent antioxidants that can remove ROS in plant cells. To date, no anthocyanins have been structurally elucidated from A. annua. In this study, we had two goals: (1) to engineer anthocyanins in A. annua cells and (2) to understand the artemisinin biosynthesis in anthocyanin-producing cells. Arabidopsis Production of Anthocyanin Pigment 1 was used to engineer four types of transgenic anthocyanin-producing A. annua (TAPA1-4) cells. Three wild-type cell types were developed as controls. TAPA1 cells produced the highest contents of total anthocyanins. LC-MS analysis detected 17 anthocyanin or anthocyanidin compounds. Crystallization, LC/MS/MS, and NMR analyses identified cyanidin, pelargonidin, one cyanin, and one pelargonin. An integrative analysis characterized that four types of TAPA cells expressed the artemisinin pathway and TAPA1 cells produced the highest artemisinin and artemisinic acid. The contents of arteannuin B were similar in seven cell types. These data showed that the engineering of anthocyanins does not eliminate the biosynthesis of artemisinin in cells. These data allow us to propose a new hypothesis that enzymes catalyze the formation of artemisinin from dihydroartemisinic acid in non-GT cells. These findings show a new platform to increase artemisinin production via non-GT cells of A. annua.

Artemisia annua: !produces! artemisinin 
Four types of cells: !engineered from! Artemisia annua 
TAPA1 cells: !produced highest! total anthocyanins 
LC-MS analysis: !detected! 17 anthocyanin or anthocyanidin compounds 
Crystallization, LC/MS/MS, and NMR analyses: !identified! cyanidin, pelargonidin, one cyanin, and one pelargonin 
Four types of TAPA cells: !expressed! artemisinin pathway 
TAPA1 cells: !produced highest! artemisinin and artemisinic acid 
Seven cell types: !had similar! arteannuin B contents 
Engineering of anthocyanins: !does not eliminate! biosynthesis of artemisinin in cells 
Enzymes: !catalyze formation! of artemisinin from dihydroartemisinic acid in non-GT cells