All land plants encode two isoforms of protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPO). While PPO1 is predominantly expressed in green tissues and its loss is seedling-lethal in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), the effects of PPO2 deficiency have not been investigated in detail. We identified two ppo2 T-DNA insertion mutants from publicly available collections, one of which (ppo2-2) is a knock-out mutant. While the loss of PPO2 did not result in any obvious phenotype, substantial changes in PPO activity were measured in etiolated and root tissues. However, ppo1 ppo2 double mutants were embryo-lethal. To shed light on possible functional differences between the two isoforms, PPO2 was overexpressed in the ppo1 background. Although the ppo1 phenotype was partially complemented, even strong overexpression of PPO2 was unable to fully compensate for the loss of PPO1. Analysis of subcellular localization revealed that PPO2 is found exclusively in chloroplast envelopes, while PPO1 accumulates in thylakoid membranes. Mitochondrial localization of PPO2 in Arabidopsis was ruled out. Since Arabidopsis PPO2 does not encode a cleavable transit peptide, integration of the protein into the chloroplast envelope must make use of a non-canonical import route. However, when a chloroplast transit peptide was fused to the N-terminus of PPO2, the enzyme was detected predominantly in thylakoid membranes and was able to fully complement ppo1. Thus, the two PPO isoforms in Arabidopsis are functionally equivalent but spatially separated. Their distinctive localizations within plastids thus enable the synthesis of discrete sub-pools of the PPO product protoporphyrin IX, which may serve different cellular needs.

PPO1: !predominantly expressed in! green tissues 
PPO2: !exclusively localized to! chloroplast envelopes 
PPO1: !integrated into! thylakoid membranes 
PPO2: !non-canonically imported into! chloroplast envelope 
PPO2: !fused with! chloroplast transit peptide 
PPO2: !predominantly localized to! thylakoid membranes 
PPO1: !able to fully complement! ppo2 
PPO1/PPO2: !synthesize! discrete sub-pools of protoporphyrin IX