Ammonium sulfate is well known to salt out proteins at high concentrations. The study revealed that it can serve to increase by 60% the total number of identified carbonylated proteins by LC-MS/MS. Protein carbonylation is a significant post-translational modification associated with reactive oxygen species signaling in animal and plant cells. However, the detection of carbonylated proteins involved in signaling is still challenging, as they only represent a small subset of the proteome in the absence of stress. In this study, we investigated the hypothesis that a prefractionation step with ammonium sulphate will improve the detection of the carbonylated proteins in a plant extract. For this, we extracted total protein from the Arabidopsis thaliana leaves and subjected the extract to stepwise precipitation with ammonium sulfate to 40%, 60%, and 80% saturation. The protein fractions were then analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for protein identification. We found that all the proteins identified in the non-fractionated samples were also found in the prefractionated samples, indicating no loss was incurred during the prefractionation. About 45% more proteins were identified in the fractionated samples compared to the non-fractionated total crude extract. When the prefractionation steps were combined with the enrichment of carbonylated proteins labeled with a fluorescent hydrazide probe, several carbonylated proteins, which were unseen in the non-fractionated samples, became visible in the prefractionated samples. Consistently, the prefractionation method allowed to identify 63% more carbonylated proteins by mass spectrometry compared to the number of carbonylated proteins identified from the total crude extract without prefractionation. These results indicated that the ammonium sulfate-based proteome prefractionation can be used to improve proteome coverage and identification of carbonylated proteins from a complex proteome sample.

Ammonium sulfate: !increases! Total number of identified carbonylated proteins 
Protein carbonylation: !associated with! Reactive oxygen species signaling 
Prefractionation step: !improves! Detection of carbonylated proteins 
Prefractionation step: !allows to identify! 63% more carbonylated proteins