P. polyphylla selectively enriches beneficial microorganisms to help their growth. Paris polyphylla (P. polyphylla) is an important perennial plant for Chinese traditional medicine. Uncovering the interaction between P. polyphylla and the related microorganisms would help to utilize and cultivate P. polyphylla. However, studies focusing on P. polyphylla and related microbes are scarce, especially on the assembly mechanisms and dynamics of the P. polyphylla microbiome. High-throughput sequencing of the 16S rRNA genes was implemented to investigate the diversity, community assembly process and molecular ecological network of the bacterial communities in three root compartments (bulk soil, rhizosphere, and root endosphere) across three years. Our results demonstrated that the composition and assembly process of the microbial community in different compartments varied greatly and were strongly affected by planting years. Bacterial diversity was reduced from bulk soils to rhizosphere soils to root endosphere and varied over time. Microorganisms benefit to plants was selectively enriched in P. polyphylla roots as was its core microbiome, including Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, Steroidobacter, Sphingobium and Agrobacterium. The network's complexity and the proportion of stochasticity in the community assembly process increased. Besides, nitrogen metabolism, carbon metabolism, phosphonate and phosphinate metabolism genes in bulk soils increased over time. These findings suggest that P. polyphylla exerts a selective effect to enrich the beneficial microorganisms and proves the sequential increasing selection pressure with P. polyphylla growth. Our work adds to the understanding of the dynamic processes of plant-associated microbial community assembly, guides the selection and application timing of P. polyphylla-associated microbial inoculants and is vital for sustainable agriculture.

P. polyphylla: !selectively enriches! beneficial microorganisms
bacterial diversity: !reduced from! bulk soils to rhizosphere soils to root endosphere
Microorganisms: !benefits to! plants
Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, Steroidobacter, Sphingobium and Agrobacterium: !enriched in! P. polyphylla roots
network complexity: !increased! over time
nitrogen metabolism, carbon metabolism, phosphonate and phosphinate metabolism genes: !increased! over time