Phytohormones are naturally occurring small organic molecules found at low concentrations in plants. They perform essential functions in growth and developmental processes, from organ initiation to senescence, including fruit ripening. These regulatory molecules are studied using different experimental approaches, such as performing exogenous applications, evaluating endogenous levels, and/or obtaining genetically modified lines. Here, we discuss the advantages and limitations of current experimental approaches used to study active biomolecules modulating fruit ripening, focusing on melatonin. Although melatonin has been implicated in fruit ripening in several model fruit crops, current knowledge is affected by the different experimental approaches used, which have given different and sometimes even contradictory results. The methods of application and the doses used have produced different results in studies based on exogenous applications, while different measurement methods and ways of expressing results explain most of the variability in studies using correlative analyses. Furthermore, studies on genetically modified crops have focused on tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants only. However, TILLING and CRISPR methodologies are becoming essential tools to complement the results from the experimental approaches described above. This will not only help the scientific community better understand the role of melatonin in modulating fruit ripening, but it will also help develop technological advances to improve fruit yield and quality in major crops. The combination of various experimental approaches will undoubtedly lead to a complete understanding of the function of melatonin in fruit ripening in the near future, so that this knowledge can be effectively transferred to the field.

Melatonin: !implicated in! fruit ripening 
Exogenous applications: !produce different results! 
Correlative analyses: !explained by! measurement methods 
TILLING/CRISPR: !complement! experimental approaches 
Experimental approaches: !help understand! melatonin role