Drought stress substantially reduces the productivity of apple plants and severely restricts the development of the apple industry. Malus sieversii, a wild apple with excellent drought resistance, is a valuable wild resource for rootstock improvement of cultivated apple (Malus domestica). miRNAs and their targets play essential roles in plant growth and stress responses, but their roles in drought stress responses in apple are unknown. Here, we demonstrate that microRNA156ab is upregulated in M. sieversii in response to drought stress. Overexpressing msi-miR156ab promoted auxin accumulation, maintained the growth of apple plants, and increased plant resistance to osmotic stress. Antioxidant enzyme activities and proline contents were also increased in miR156ab-OE transgenic apple lines, which improved drought resistance. The SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE (SPL) transcription factor MsSPL13 is the target of msi-miR156ab, as demonstrated by 5-RACE and dual luciferase assays. Heterologous expression of MsSPL13 decreased auxin contents and inhibited growth in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) under normal and stress conditions. The activities of antioxidant enzymes were also suppressed in MsSPL13-OE transgenic Arabidopsis, reducing drought resistance. We showed that MsSPL13 regulates the expression of the auxin-related genes MsYUCCA5, PIN-FORMED7 (MsPIN7), and Gretchen Hagen3-5 (MsGH3-5) by binding to the GTAC cis-elements in their promoters, thereby regulating auxin metabolism. Finally, we demonstrated that the miR156ab-SPL13 module is involved in mediating the difference in auxin metabolism and stress responses between the M. sieversii and M26 (M. domestica) rootstocks. Overall, these findings reveal that the miR156ab-SPL13 module enhances drought stress tolerance in apples by regulating auxin metabolism and antioxidant enzyme activities.

miR156ab: !upregulates! SPL13
miR156ab: !promotes! auxin accumulation
SPL13: !binds to! GTAC cis-elements
SPL13: !regulates! MsYUCCA5, PIN-FORMED7, Gretchen Hagen3-5
miR156ab: !enhances! drought stress tolerance