Founder parents play extremely important roles in wheat breeding. Studies into the genetic basis of founder parents and the transmission rules of favorable alleles are of great significance in improving agronomically important traits in wheat. Here, a total of 366 founder parents, widely grown cultivars, and derivatives of four representative founder parents were genotyped based on efficient kompetitive allele-specific PCR (KASP) markers in 87 agronomically important genes controlling yield, quality, adaptability, and stress resistance. Genetic composition analysis of founder parents and widely grown cultivars showed a consistently high frequency of favorable alleles for yield-related genes. This analysis further showed that other alleles favorable for resistance, strong gluten, dwarf size, and early heading date were also subject to selective pressure over time. By comparing the transmission of alleles from four representative founder parents to their derivatives during different breeding periods, it was found that the genetic composition of the representative founder parents was optimized as breeding progressed over time, with the number and types of favorable alleles carried gradually increasing and becoming enriched. There are still a large number of favorable alleles in wheat founder parents that have not been fully utilized in breeding selection. Eighty-seven agronomically important genes were used to construct an enrichment map that shows favorable alleles of four founder parents, providing an important theoretical foundation for future identification of candidate wheat founder parents. These results reveal the genetic basis of founder parents and allele transmission for 87 agronomically important genes and shed light on breeding strategies for the next generation of elite founder parents in wheat.

Founder parents: !carry! favorable alleles 
Founder parents: !optimize! genetic composition 
Yield-related genes: !have! high frequency of favorable alleles 
Resistance, strong gluten, dwarf size, early heading date: !subject to! selective pressure 
Four representative founder parents: !transmit! alleles to derivatives 
Enrichment map: !shows! favorable alleles of four founder parents