Chromosomal variations have been revealed in both E. sibiricus and E. nutans, but chromosomal structural variations, such as intra-genome translocations and inversions, are still not recognized due to the cytological limitations of previous studies. Furthermore, the syntenic relationship between both species and wheat chromosomes remains unknown. Fifty-nine single-gene fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probes, including 22 single-gene probes previously mapped on wheat chromosomes and other newly developed probes from the cDNA of Elymus species, were used to characterize the chromosome homoeologous relationship and collinearity of both E. sibiricus and E. nutans with those of wheat. Eight species-specific chromosomal rearrangements (CRs) were exclusively identified in E. sibiricus, including five pericentric inversions in 1H, 2H, 3H, 6H and 2St; one possible pericentric inversion in 5St; one paracentric inversion in 4St; and one reciprocal 4H/6H translocation. Five species-specific CRs were identified in E. nutans, including one possible pericentric inversion in 2Y, three possible pericentric multiple-inversions in 1H, 2H and 4Y, and one reciprocal 4Y/5Y translocation. Polymorphic CRs were detected in three of the six materials in E. sibiricus, which were mainly represented by inter-genomic translocations. More polymorphic CRs were identified in E. nutans, including duplication and insertion, deletion, pericentric inversion, paracentric inversion, and intra- or inter-genomic translocation in different chromosomes. The study first identified the cross-species homoeology and the syntenic relationship between E. sibiricus, E. nutans and wheat chromosomes. There are distinct different species-specific CRs between E. sibiricus and E. nutans, which may be due to their different polyploidy processes. The frequencies of intra-species polymorphic CRs in E. nutans were higher than that in E. sibiricus. To conclude, the results provide new insights into genome structure and evolution and will facilitate the utilization of germplasm diversity in both E. sibiricus and E. nutans.

E. sibiricus: !has! 8 species-specific chromosomal rearrangements
E. nutans: !has! 5 species-specific chromosomal rearrangements
E. sibiricus: !has! polymorphic CRs
E. nutans: !has! polymorphic CRs
E. sibiricus: !reveals! cross-species homoeology
E. nutans: !reveals! cross-species homoeology
E. sibiricus: !syntenic with! wheat chromosomes
E. nutans: !syntenic with! wheat chromosomes