To initiate its development into a plant, a small dark-grown seedling (prior to its emergence from the ground) must penetrate through the growth media. The path that the seedling takes during this journey has yet to be explained. As such, we conducted non-destructive tests using CT scans to observe the growth of dark-grown seedlings in soil over time; we also developed a model to simulate the dynamics of an emerging seedling, and to examine effects of various growth medium conditions, including Lunar soil. It was previously postulated that, with gravitropism in a terrestrial growth medium, a dark-grown seedling would grow directly upright. However, our CT scan results showed that dark-grown soybean seedlings departed from the vertical path in soil, as far as a lateral distance of approximately 10 mm. The phenomenon of the non-straight path was also demonstrated by the model results. Through simulations, we found that an emerging seedling naturally weaves through the particles of growth medium, in search for the path of least resistance. As a result, the seedling ends up travelling a longer distance. Compared with a seedling that was artificially forced to take a straight path in a growth media, the seedling taking the natural path encountered significantly lower resistances (20% lower) from the growth medium, while travelled 12% longer distance during the emergence process. A seedling encountered a much higher impedance in Lunar soil. Our results suggest that taking the path of least resistance, in addition to shaping and orientating itself for mechanical advantage, are strategies evolved by plant species that have contributed to its vast success. An understanding of plant behavior and survival strategies on Earth lay the foundation for future research in agriculture in novel environments, including on celestial bodies.

Gene: !affects! Emergence process
Gene: !influences! Path of least resistance
Gene: !determines! Mechanical advantage
Gene: !regulates! Growth medium conditions
Gene: !modulates! Impedance in Lunar soil