Powdery mildew is a fungal disease devastating to wheat, causing significant quality and yield loss. Flavonoids are important secondary plant metabolites that confer resistance to biotic and abiotic stress. However, whether they play a role in powdery mildew resistance in wheat has yet to be explored. In the present study, we combined transcriptome and metabolome analyses to compare differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially accumulated flavonoids identified in plants with and without powdery mildew inoculation. Transcriptome analysis identified 4,329 DEGs in susceptible wheat cv. Jimai229, and 8,493 in resistant cv. HHG46. The DEGs were functionally enriched using Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, revealing the flavonoid synthesis pathway as the most significant in both cultivars. This was consistent with the upregulation of flavonoid synthesis pathway genes observed by quantitative PCR. Metabolome analysis indicated flavone and flavonol biosynthesis pathways as the most significantly enriched following powdery mildew inoculation. An accumulation of total flavonoids content was also found to be induced by powdery mildew infection. Exogenous flavonoids treatment of inoculated plants led to less severe infection, with fewer and smaller powdery mildew spots on the wheat leaves. This reduction is speculated to be regulated through malondialdehyde content and the activities of peroxidase and catalase. Our study provides a fundamental theory for further exploration of the potential of flavonoids as biological prevention and control agents against powdery mildew in wheat.

Powdery mildew: !causes! Quality and yield loss
Flavonoids: !confer! Resistance to biotic and abiotic stress
Gene Ontology: !enriches! Flavonoid synthesis pathway
Quantitative PCR: !upregulates! Flavonoid synthesis pathway genes
Metabolome analysis: !indicates! Flavone and flavonol biosynthesis pathways
Powdery mildew infection: !induces! Accumulation of total flavonoids content
Exogenous flavonoids treatment: !leads to! Less severe infection
Malondialdehyde content: !regulates! Reduction of powdery mildew spots