Leaf senescence involves massive multidimensional alterations, such as nutrient redistribution, and is closely related to crop yield and quality. No apical meristem, Arabidopsis transcription activation factor, and Cup-shaped cotyledon (NAC)-type transcription factors integrate various signals and modulate an enormous number of target genes to ensure the appropriate progression of leaf senescence. However, few leaf senescence-related NACs have been functionally characterized in wheat. Based on our previous RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data, we focused on a NAC family member, TaNAC69-B, which is increasingly expressed during leaf senescence in wheat. Overexpression of TaNAC69-B led to precocious leaf senescence in wheat and Arabidopsis, and affected several agricultural traits in transgenic wheat. Moreover, impaired expression of TaNAC69-B by virus-induced gene silencing retarded the leaf senescence in wheat. By RNA-seq and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis, we confirmed that some abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthesis genes, including AAO3 and its ortholog in wheat, TraesCS2B02G270600 (TaAO3-B), were elevated by the overexpression of TaNAC69-B. Consistently, we observed more severe ABA-induced leaf senescence in TaNAC69-B-OE wheat and Arabidopsis plants. Furthermore, we determined that TaNAC69-B bound to the NAC binding site core (CGT) on the promoter regions of AAO3 and TaAO3-B. Moreover, we confirmed elevated ABA levels in TaNAC69-B-OE wheat lines. Although TaNAC69-B shares 39.83% identity (amino acid) with AtNAP, TaNAC69-B did not completely restore the delayed leaf senescence in the atnap mutant. Collectively, our results revealed a positive feedback loop, consisting of TaNAC69-B, ABA biosynthesis and leaf senescence, that is essential for the regulation of leaf senescence in wheat.

TaNAC69-B: !affects! leaf senescence 
TaNAC69-B: !enhances! ABA biosynthesis 
ABA biosynthesis: !enhances! leaf senescence 
TaNAC69-B: !binds to! NAC binding site core 
TaNAC69-B: !interacts with! AtNAP