The acceptance of new crop varieties by consumers is contingent on the presence of consumer-preferred traits, which include sensory attributes, nutritional value, industrial products and bioactive compounds production. Recent developments in genome editing technologies provide novel insight to identify gene functions and improve the various qualitative and quantitative traits of commercial importance in plants. Various conventional as well as advanced gene-mutagenesis techniques such as physical and chemical mutagenesis, CRISPR-Cas9, Cas12 and base editors are used for the trait improvement in crops. To meet consumer demand, breakthrough biotechnologies, especially CRISPR-Cas have received a fair share of scientific and industrial interest, particularly in plant genome editing. CRISPR-Cas is a versatile tool that can be used to knock out, replace and knock-in the desired gene fragments at targeted locations in the genome, resulting in heritable mutations of interest. This review highlights the existing literature and recent developments in CRISPR-Cas technologies (base editing, prime editing, multiplex gene editing, epigenome editing, gene delivery methods) for reliable and precise gene editing in plants. This review also discusses the potential of gene editing exhibited in crops for the improvement of consumer-demanded traits such as higher nutritional value, colour, texture, aroma/flavour, and production of industrial products such as biofuel, fibre, rubber and pharmaceuticals. In addition, the bottlenecks and challenges associated with gene editing system, such as off targeting, ploidy level and the ability to edit organelle genome have also been discussed.

CRISPR-Cas: !edits! Genes 
Genes: !affects! Traits 
Traits: !improve! Consumer Demand 
CRISPR-Cas: !knocks out! Desired Gene Fragments 
CRISPR-Cas: !knocks in! Desired Gene Fragments 
CRISPR-Cas: !replaces! Desired Gene Fragments 
CRISPR-Cas: !multiplexes! Gene Editing 
CRISPR-Cas: !epigenome edits! Genes 
CRISPR-Cas: !delivers! Genes 
Gene Editing: !challenges! Off Targeting 
Gene Editing: !challenges! Ploidy Level 
Gene Editing: !challenges! Organelle Genome Editing