Glehnia littoralis is an economic herb with both medicinal and edible uses. It also has important ecological value and special phylogenetic status as it is a monotypic genus species distributing around beach. Little information on its reproductive biology has been reported so far, which has hindered conservation and application of this species. In this study, we observed morphological changes from buds emergence to seeds formation and internal changes during sporogenesis, gametophyte development and embryo and endosperm development of G. littoralis using paraffin-embedded-sectioning and stereo microscope. The results showed that the stages of internal development events of G. littoralis corresponded to obvious external morphological changes, most of developmental features were consistent with other Apiaceae species. The development of male and female gametophytes was not synchronized in the same flower, however, exhibited temporal overlap. From mid-late April to mid-May, the anther primordial and ovule primordial developed into the trinucleate pollen grain and eight-nuclear embryo sac, respectively. From late-May to mid-July, the zygote developed into mature embryo. In addition, some defects in gynoecium or ovule development and abnormal embryo and endosperm development were found. We induced that the possible causes of abortion in G. littoralis were as follows: nutrient limitation, poor pollination and fertilization, and bad weather. This study revealed the whole process and morphological characteristics of the development of reproductive organ in G. littoralis, which not only provided important data for the study of systematic and conservation biology, but also provided a theoretical basis for cross breeding.

Glehnia littoralis: !exhibits! morphological changes 
Glehnia littoralis: !develops! male and female gametophytes 
male and female gametophytes: !develop into! trinucleate pollen grain and eight-nuclear embryo sac 
zygote: !develops into! mature embryo 
abnormalities: !cause! abortion 
development of reproductive organ: !provides data for! systematic and conservation biology