The protein kinase (PK) superfamily constitutes one of the largest and most conserved protein families in eukaryotic genomes, comprising core components of signaling pathways in cell regulation. Despite its remarkable relevance, only a few kinase families have been studied in <i>Hevea brasiliensis</i>. A comprehensive characterization and global expression analysis of the PK superfamily, however, is currently lacking. In this study, with the aim of providing novel inferences about the mechanisms associated with the stress response developed by PKs and retained throughout evolution, we identified and characterized the entire set of PKs, also known as the kinome, present in the Hevea genome. Different RNA-sequencing datasets were employed to identify tissue-specific expression patterns and potential correspondences between different rubber tree genotypes. In addition, coexpression networks under several abiotic stress conditions, such as cold, drought and latex overexploitation, were employed to elucidate associations between families and tissues/stresses. A total of 1,809 PK genes were identified using the current reference genome assembly at the scaffold level, and 1,379 PK genes were identified using the latest chromosome-level assembly and combined into a single set of 2,842 PKs. These proteins were further classified into 20 different groups and 122 families, exhibiting high compositional similarities among family members and with two phylogenetically close species <i>Manihot esculenta</i> and <i>Ricinus communis</i>. Through the joint investigation of tandemly duplicated kinases, transposable elements, gene expression patterns, and coexpression events, we provided insights into the understanding of the cell regulation mechanisms in response to several conditions, which can often lead to a significant reduction in rubber yield.

PK: !constitutes! one of the largest and most conserved protein families
PK: !identified in! Hevea brasiliensis
PK: !classified into! 20 different groups and 122 families
PK: !investigated through! tandemly duplicated kinases, transposable elements, gene expression patterns, and coexpression events
PK: !provides insights into! cell regulation mechanisms in response to several conditions