Male sterility is a common phenomenon in the plant kingdom and based on the organelles harboring the male-sterility genes, it can be classified into the genic male sterility (GMS) and the cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS). In every generation, CMS can generate 100% male-sterile population, which is very important for the breeders to take advantage of the heterosis and for the seed producers to guarantee the seed purity. Celery is a cross-pollinated plant with the compound umbel type of inflorescence which carries hundreds of small flowers. These characteristics make CMS the only option to produce the commercial hybrid celery seeds. In this study, transcriptomic and proteomic analyses were performed to identify genes and proteins that are associated with celery CMS. A total of 1255 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 89 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified between the CMS and its maintainer line, then 25 genes were found to differentially expressed at both the transcript and protein levels. Ten DEGs involved in the fleece layer and outer pollen wall development were identified by Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses, most of which were down-regulated in the sterile line W99A. These DEGs and DEPs were mainly enriched in the pathways of "phenylpropanoid/sporopollenin synthesis/metabolism", "energy metabolism", "redox enzyme activity" and "redox processes". Results obtained in this study laid a foundation for the future investigation of mechanisms of pollen development as well as the reasons for the CMS in celery.

CMS: !generates! 100% male-sterile population
DEGs/DEPs: !associated with! celery CMS
GO/KEGG: !identify! DEGs involved in fleece layer/outer pollen wall development
DEGs/DEPs: !enriched in! phenylpropanoid/sporopollenin synthesis/metabolism pathways
DEGs/DEPs: !enriched in! energy metabolism pathways
DEGs/DEPs: !enriched in! redox enzyme activity pathways
DEGs/DEPs: !enriched in! redox processes pathways