Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) have a positive effect on drought tolerance of plants after establishing reciprocal resymbiosis with roots, while the underlying mechanism is not deciphered. Metabolomics can explain the mechanism of plant response to environmental stress by analyzing the changes of all small molecular weight metabolites. The purpose of this study was to use Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer to analyze changes in root metabolites of walnut (Juglans regia) after inoculation with an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Diversispora spurca under well-watered (WW) and drought stress (DS). Sixty days of soil drought significantly inhibited root mycorrhizal colonization rate, shoot and root biomass production, and leaf water potential in walnut, while AMF inoculation significantly increased biomass production and leaf water potential, accompanied by a higher increase magnitude under DS versus under WW. A total of 3278 metabolites were identified. Under WW, AMF inoculation up-regulated 172 metabolites and down-regulated 61 metabolites, along with no changes in 1104 metabolites. However, under DS, AMF inoculation up-regulated 49 metabolites and down-regulated 116 metabolites, coupled with no changes in 1172 metabolites. Among them, juglone (a quinone found in walnuts) as the first ranked differential metabolite was up-regulated by AMF under WW but not under DS; 2,3,5-trihydroxy-5-7-dimethoxyflavanone as the first ranked differential metabolite was increased by AMF under DS but not under WW. The KEGG annotation showed a large number of metabolic pathways triggered by AMF, accompanied by different metabolic pathways under WW and DS. Among them, oxidative phosphorylation and phenylalanine metabolism and biosynthesis were triggered by AMF in response to WW and DS, where N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine was induced by AMF to increase under DS, while decreasing under WW. This study provides new insights into the metabolic mechanisms of mycorrhiza-enhanced drought tolerance in walnuts.

AMF: !enhances! Drought tolerance
Metabolomics: !explains! Plant response to environmental stress
AMF: !increases! Biomass production
AMF: !increases! Leaf water potential
Juglone: !up-regulated by! AMF under WW
2,3,5-trihydroxy-5-7-dimethoxyflavanone: !increased by! AMF under DS
Oxidative phosphorylation: !triggered by! AMF in response to WW and DS
Phenylalanine metabolism and biosynthesis: !triggered by! AMF in response to WW and DS
N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine: !induced by! AMF to increase under DS