Hybrid rice has made considerable contributions to achieve the ambitious goal of food security for the world's population. Hybrid rice from indica/xian and japonica/geng subspecies shows much higher heterosis and is thereby an important innovation in promoting rice production in the next decade. However, such inter-subspecific hybrid rice has long suffered from serious hybrid sterility, which is a major challenge that needs to be addressed. In this study, we performed a genome design strategy to produce fertile inter-subspecific hybrid by creation of wide compatibility varieties that are able to overcome hybrid sterility. Based on combined genetic analyses in two indica-japonica crosses, we determined that four hybrid sterility loci, S5, f5, pf12 and Sc, are the major QTLs controlling inter-subspecific hybrid sterility and thus the minimal targets that can be manipulated for breeding sub-specific hybrid rice. We then cloned the pf12 locus, one of the most effective loci for hybrid male sterility, by map-based cloning, and showed that artificial disruption of pf12A gene at this locus could successfully rescue hybrid fertility. We further dissected the genetic basis of wide compatibility using three pairwise crosses from a wide-compatibility variety Dular and representative indica and japonica varieties. On this basis, we constructed and assembled different combinations of naturally compatible alleles of four loci, S5, Sc, pf12, and f5, and found that the improved lines could fully recover pollen and embryo sac fertility in test-crossed F<sub>1</sub>s, thereby completely fulfilling the demands of inter-subspecific hybrid spikelet fertility in agricultural production. This breeding scheme would facilitate redesign of future inter-subspecific hybrid rice with a higher yield potential.

S5: !enhances! Fertility 
f5: !enhances! Fertility 
pf12: !enhances! Fertility 
Sc: !enhances! Fertility 
pf12A gene: !disrupts! Hybrid sterility 
Dular: !produces! Wide compatibility alleles 
Indica/Japonica: !contains! Hybrid sterility loci