The plastid genome has proven to be an effective tool for examining deep correlations in plant phylogenetics, owing to its highly conserved structure, uniparental inheritance, and limited variation in evolutionary rates. Iridaceae, comprising more than 2,000 species, includes numerous economically significant taxa that are frequently utilized in food industries and medicines and for ornamental and horticulture purposes. Molecular studies on chloroplast DNA have confirmed the position of this family in the order Asparagales with non-asparagoids. The current subfamilial classification of Iridaceae recognizes seven subfamilies-Isophysioideae, Nivenioideae, Iridoideae, Crocoideae, Geosiridaceae, Aristeoideae, and Patersonioideae-which are supported by limited plastid DNA regions. To date, no comparative phylogenomic studies have been conducted on the family Iridaceae. We assembled and annotated (<i>de novo</i>) the plastid genomes of 24 taxa together with seven published species representing all the seven subfamilies of Iridaceae and performed comparative genomics using the Illumina MiSeq platform. The plastomes of the autotrophic Iridaceae represent 79 protein-coding, 30 tRNA, and four rRNA genes, with lengths ranging from 150,062 to 164,622 bp. The phylogenetic analysis of the plastome sequences based on maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian inference analyses suggested that <i>Watsonia</i> and <i>Gladiolus</i> were closely related, supported by strong support values, which differed considerably from recent phylogenetic studies. In addition, we identified genomic events, such as sequence inversions, deletions, mutations, and pseudogenization, in some species. Furthermore, the largest nucleotide variability was found in the seven plastome regions, which can be used in future phylogenetic studies. Notably, three subfamilies-Crocoideae, Nivenioideae, and Aristeoideae-shared a common <i>ycf</i>2 gene locus deletion. Our study is a preliminary report of a comparative study of the complete plastid genomes of 7/7 subfamilies and 9/10 tribes, elucidating the structural characteristics and shedding light on plastome evolution and phylogenetic relationships within Iridaceae. Additionally, further research is required to update the relative position of <i>Watsonia</i> within the tribal classification of the subfamily Crocoideae.

Iridaceae: !comprises! 2,000 species 
Iridaceae: !includes! economically significant taxa 
Molecular studies: !confirm! position of Iridaceae in Asparagales 
Plastid genome: !assembles and annotates! 24 taxa 
Phylogenetic analysis: !suggests! Watsonia and Gladiolus closely related 
Genomic events: !identify! sequence inversions, deletions, mutations, pseudogenization 
Nucleotide variability: !found in! seven plastome regions 
Crocoideae, Nivenioideae, Aristeoideae: !share! common ycf2 gene locus deletion 
Research: !required to update! relative position of Watsonia