Drylands dominate the trend and variability of the land carbon (C) sink. A better understanding of the implications of climate-induced changes in the drylands for C sink-source dynamics is urgently needed. The effect of climate on ecosystem C fluxes (gross primary productivity (GPP), ecosystem respiration (ER), and net ecosystem productivity (NEP)) in drylands has been extensively explored, but the roles of other concurrently changing factors, such as vegetation conditions and nutrient availability, remain unclear. We used eddy-covariance C-flux measurements from 45 ecosystems with concurrent information on climate (mean annual temperature (MAT) and mean annual precipitation (MAP)), soil (soil moisture (SM) and soil total nitrogen content (soil N)), and vegetation (leaf area index (LAI) and leaf nitrogen content (LNC)) factors to assess their roles in C fluxes. The results showed that the drylands in China were weak C sinks. GPP and ER were positively correlated with MAP, while they were negatively correlated with MAT. NEP first decreased and then increased with increasing MAT and MAP, and 6.6 °C and 207 mm were the boundaries for the NEP response to MAT and MAP, respectively. SM, soil N, LAI, and MAP were the main factors affecting GPP and ER. However, SM and LNC had the most important influence on NEP. Compared with climate and vegetation factors, soil factors (SM and soil N) had a greater impact on C fluxes in the drylands. Climate factors mainly affected C fluxes by regulating vegetation and soil factors. To accurately estimate the global C balance and predict the response of ecosystems to environmental change, it is necessary to fully consider the discrepant effects of climate, vegetation, and soil factors on C fluxes, as well as the cascade relationships between different factors.

MAP: !affects! GPP, ER
MAT: !affects! GPP, ER
SM: !affects! GPP, ER, NEP
soil N: !affects! GPP, ER, NEP
LAI: !affects! GPP, ER
LNC: !affects! NEP
climate: !regulates! vegetation, soil