Climate change has been driving warming trends and changes in precipitation patterns and regimes throughout Europe. Future projections indicate a continuation of these trends in the next decades. This situation is challenging the sustainability of viniculture and, thus, significant efforts towards adaptation should be then carried out by local winegrowers. Ecological Niche Models were built, using the ensemble modelling approach, to estimate the bioclimatic suitability of four main wine-producing European countries, namely France, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, in the recent past (1989-2005), for the cultivation of twelve Portuguese grape varieties. The models were then used to project the bioclimatic suitability to two future periods (2021- 2050 and 2051-2080) to better understand the potential shifts related to climate change (modeled after Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's Representative Concentration Pathways 4.5 and 8.5 scenarios). The models were obtained with the modeling platform BIOMOD2, using four bioclimatic indices, namely the "Huglin Index", the "Cool Night index", the "Growing Season Precipitation index", and the "Temperature Range during Ripening index" as predictor variables, as well as the current locations of the chosen grape varieties in Portugal. All models performed with high statistical accuracy (AUC > 0.9) and were able to discriminate several suitable bioclimatic areas for the different grape varieties, in and around where they are currently located but also in other parts of the study area. The distribution of the bioclimatic suitability changed, however, when looking at future projections. For both climatic scenarios, projected bioclimatic suitability suffered a considerable shift to the north of Spain and France. In some cases, bioclimatic suitability also moved towards areas of higher elevation. Portugal and Italy barely retained any of the initially projected varietal areas. These shifts were mainly due to the overall rise in thermal accumulation and lower accumulated precipitation in the southern regions projected for the future. Ensemble models of Ecological Niche Models were shown to be valid tools for winegrowers who want to adapt to a changing climate. The long-term sustainability of viniculture in southern Europe will most likely have to go through a process of mitigation of the effects of increasing temperatures and decreasing precipitation.

Climate change: !affects! Viniculture 
Ensemble modelling: !estimates! Bioclimatic suitability 
BIOMOD2: !uses! Four bioclimatic indices 
Future projections: !indicate! Shifts in bioclimatic suitability 
Thermal accumulation: !increases! In southern regions 
Accumulated precipitation: !decreases! In southern regions