Lily (<i>Lilium</i> spp. and hybrids) is an important cut flower crop worldwide. Lily flowers have large anthers, which release a large amount of pollen that stains the tepals or clothing and thus can affect the commercial value of cut flowers. In this study, lily Oriental 'Siberia' was used to investigate the regulatory mechanism of lily anther development, which may provide information to prevent pollen pollution in the future. Based on the flower bud length, anther length and color, and anatomical observations, lily anther development was categorized into five stages: green (G), green-to-yellow 1 (GY1), green-to-yellow 2 (GY2), yellow (Y), and purple (P). Total RNA was extracted from the anthers at each stage for transcriptomic analysis. A total of 268.92-Gb clean reads were generated, and 81,287 unigenes were assembled and annotated. The number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and unique genes were largest for the pairwise comparison between the G and GY1 stages. The G and P samples were clustered separately, whereas the GY1, GY2, and Y samples were clustered together in scatter plots from a principal component analysis. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses of DEGs detected in the GY1, GY2, and Y stages revealed that the pectin catabolic process, hormone levels, and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were enriched. The DEGs associated with jasmonic acid biosynthesis and signaling were highly expressed at the early stages (G and GY1), whereas the DEGs associated with phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were mainly expressed in the intermediate stages (GY1, GY2, and Y). The DEGs involved in the pectin catabolic process were expressed at advanced stages (Y and P). Cucumber mosaic virus-induced gene silencing of <i>LoMYB21</i> and <i>LoAMS</i> caused a strongly inhibited anther dehiscence phenotype, but without affecting the development of other floral organs. These results provide novel insights for understanding the regulatory mechanism of anther development in lily and other plants.

Lily anther development: !categorized into! 5 stages 
Total RNA: !extracted from! anthers 
DEGs: !largest for! G-GY1 comparison 
G-P samples: !clustered separately! 
GY1-Y samples: !clustered together! 
Gene Ontology/KEGG: !enriched for! pectin catabolic process, hormone levels, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis 
JA biosynthesis/signaling: !highly expressed at! early stages 
Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis: !mainly expressed in! intermediate stages 
Pectin catabolic process: !expressed at! advanced stages 
LoMYB21/LoAMS: !silenced to! inhibit anther dehiscence