EF have been explored for its beneficial impact on environment and for its commercial applications. It has proved its worth in these sectors and showed an impact on biological properties of plants by producing various bioactive molecules and enzymes. Endophytes are plant mutualists that live asymptomatically within plant tissues and exist in almost every plant species. Endophytic fungi benefit from the host plant nutrition, and the host plant gains improved competitive abilities and tolerance against pathogens, herbivores, and various abiotic stresses. Endophytic fungi are one of the most inventive classes which produce secondary metabolites and play a crucial role in human health and other biotic aspects. This review is focused on systematic study on the biodiversity of endophytic fungi in plants, and their role in enhancing various properties of plants such as antimicrobial, antimycobacterial, antioxidant, cytotoxic, anticancer, and biological activity of secondary metabolites produced by various fungal endophytes in host plants reported from 1994 to 2021. This review emphasizes the endophytic fungal population shaped by host genotype, environment, and endophytic fungi genotype affecting host plant. The impact of endophytic fungi has been discussed in detail which influences the commercial properties of plants. Endophytes also have an influence on plant productivity by increasing parameters such as nutrient recycling and phytostimulation. Studies focusing on mechanisms that regulate attenuation of secondary metabolite production in EF would provide much needed impetus on ensuring continued production of bioactive molecules from a indubitable source. If this knowledge is further extensively explored regarding fungal endophytes in plants for production of potential phytochemicals, then it will help in exploring a keen area of interest for pharmacognosy.

Endophytes: !benefit! Host Plant 
Host Plant: !gains! Improved Competitive Abilities 
Endophytes: !produce! Secondary Metabolites 
Endophytes: !influence! Commercial Properties of Plants 
Endophytes: !increase! Nutrient Recycling and Phytostimulation