2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase (2ODD) is the second largest family of oxidases involved in various oxygenation/hydroxylation reactions in plants. Many members in the family regulate gene transcription, nucleic acid modification/repair and secondary metabolic synthesis. The 2ODD family genes also function in the formation of abundant flavonoids during anthocyanin synthesis, thereby modulating plant development and response to diverse stresses. Totally, 379, 336, 205, and 204 2ODD genes were identified in G. barbadense (Gb), G. hirsutum (Gh), G. arboreum (Ga), and G. raimondii (Gb), respectively. The 336 2ODDs in G. hirsutum were divided into 15 subfamilies according to their putative functions. The structural features and functions of the 2ODD members in the same subfamily were similar and evolutionarily conserved. Tandem duplications and segmental duplications served essential roles in the large-scale expansion of the cotton 2ODD family. Ka/Ks values for most of the gene pairs were less than 1, indicating that 2ODD genes undergo strong purifying selection during evolution. Gh2ODDs might act in cotton responses to different abiotic stresses. GhLDOX3 and GhLDOX7, two members of the GhLDOX subfamily from Gh2ODDs, were significantly down-regulated in transcription under alkaline stress. Moreover, the expression of GhLDOX3 in leaves was significantly higher than that in other tissues. These results will provide valuable information for further understanding the evolution mechanisms and functions of the cotton 2ODD genes in the future. Genome-wide identification, structure, and evolution and expression analysis of 2ODD genes in Gossypium were carried out. The 2ODDs were highly conserved during evolutionary. Most Gh2ODDs were involved in the regulation of cotton responses to multiple abiotic stresses including salt, drought, hot, cold and alkali.

2ODD: !regulates! gene transcription 
2ODD: !modulates! plant development 
2ODD: !synthesizes! flavonoids 
2ODD: !expanded by! tandem/segmental duplication 
2ODD: !undergoes! purifying selection 
2ODD: !involved in! cotton response to abiotic stress 
GhLDOX3/7: !down-regulated in! transcription under alkaline stress 
GhLDOX3: !expressed higher in! leaves than other tissues