Color is an essential appearance characteristic of sweet cherry (<i>Prunus avium</i> L.) fruits and mainly determined by anthocyanin. Temperature plays an important role in the regulation of anthocyanin accumulation. In this research, anthocyanin, sugar, plant hormone and related gene expression were analyzed using physiological and transcriptomic methods in order to reveal the effects of high temperature on fruit coloring and the related mechanism. The results showed that high temperature severely inhibited anthocyanin accumulation in fruit peel and slowed the coloring process. The total anthocyanin content in fruit peel increased by 455% and 84% after 4 days of normal temperature treatment (NT, 24°C day/14°C night) and high temperature treatment (HT, 34°C day/24°C night), respectively. Similarly, the contents of 8 anthocyanin monomers were significantly higher in NT than in HT. HT also affected the levels of sugars and plant hormones. The total soluble sugar content increased by 29.49% and 16.81% in NT and HT, respectively, after 4 days of treatment. The levels of ABA, IAA and GA20 also increased in both the two treatments but more slowly in HT. Conversely, the contents of cZ, cZR and JA decreased more rapidly in HT than in NT. The results of the correlation analysis showed that the ABA and GA20 contents were significantly correlated with the total anthocyanin contents. Further transcriptome analysis showed that HT inhibited the activation of structural genes in anthocyanin biosynthesis as well as the repression of <i>CYP707A</i> and AOG, which dominated the catabolism and inactivation of ABA. These results indicate that ABA may be a key regulator in the high-temperature-inhibited fruit coloring of sweet cherry. High temperature induces higher ABA catabolism and inactivation, leading to lower ABA levels and finally resulting in slow coloring.

High temperature: !inhibits! Anthocyanin accumulation
ABA: !correlates with! Total anthocyanin content
High temperature: !induces higher! ABA catabolism
ABA: !represses! CYP707A and AOG
High temperature: !slows! Coloring process