Heat stress (HS) is one of the alarming issues today due to global warming and is the foremost detrimental to crop production. Maize is one of the versatile crops grown over different agro-climatic conditions. However, it is significantly sensitive to heat stress, especially during the reproductive phase. The heat stress tolerance mechanism is yet to be elucidated at the reproductive stage. Thus, the present study focused on identifying transcriptional changes in two inbreds, LM 11 (sensitive to HS) and CML 25 (tolerant to HS), under intense heat stress at 42°C during the reproductive stage from three tissues viz. flag leaf, tassel, and ovule. Samples from each inbred were collected after 5 days of pollinations for RNA isolation. Six cDNA libraries were constructed from three separate tissues of LM 11 and CML 25 and sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq2500 platform. A total of 2,164 (1127 up-regulated and 1037 down-regulated) differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified with 1151, 451, and 562 DEGs in comparisons of LM 11 and CML 25, corresponding to a leaf, pollen, and ovule, respectively. Functional annotated DEGs associated with transcription factors (TFs) <i>viz</i>. AP2, MYB, WRKY, PsbP, bZIP, and NAM, heat shock proteins (HSP20, HSP70, and HSP101/ClpB), as well as genes related to photosynthesis (PsaD & PsaN), antioxidation (APX and CAT) and polyamines (Spd and Spm). KEGG pathways analyses showed that the metabolic overview pathway and secondary metabolites biosynthesis pathway, with the involvement of 264 and 146 genes, respectively, were highly enriched in response to heat stress. Notably, the expression changes of the most common HS-responsive genes were typically much more significant in CML 25, which might explain why CML 25 is more heat tolerant. Seven DEGs were common in leaf, pollen, and ovule; and involved in the polyamines biosynthesis pathway. Their exact role in maize heat stress response would warrant further studies. These results enhanced our understanding to heat stress responses in maize.

AP2: !regulates! TFs
MYB: !regulates! TFs
WRKY: !regulates! TFs
PsbP: !regulates! TFs
bZIP: !regulates! TFs
NAM: !regulates! TFs
HSP20: !enhances! Heat Stress Tolerance
HSP70: !enhances! Heat Stress Tolerance
HSP101/ClpB: !enhances! Heat Stress Tolerance
PsaD: !synthesizes! Photosynthesis
PsaN: !synthesizes! Photosynthesis
APX: !enhances! Antioxidation
CAT: !enhances! Antioxidation
Spd: !synthesizes! Polyamines
Spm: !synthesizes! Polyamines
Metabolic Overview Pathway: !involves! 264 Genes
Secondary Metabolites Biosynthesis Pathway: !involves! 146 Genes