Durian (<i>Durio zibethinus</i>), which yields the fruit known as the "King of Fruits," is an important economic crop in Southeast Asia. Several durian cultivars have been developed in this region. In this study, we resequenced the genomes of three popular durian cultivars in Thailand, including Kradumthong (KD), Monthong (MT), and Puangmanee (PM) to investigate genetic diversities of cultivated durians. KD, MT, and PM genome assemblies were 832.7, 762.6, and 821.6 Mb, and their annotations covered 95.7, 92.4, and 92.7% of the embryophyta core proteins, respectively. We constructed the draft durian pangenome and analyzed comparative genomes with related species in Malvales. Long terminal repeat (LTR) sequences and protein families in durian genomes had slower evolution rates than that in cotton genomes. However, protein families with transcriptional regulation function and protein phosphorylation function involved in abiotic and biotic stress responses appeared to evolve faster in durians. The analyses of phylogenetic relationships, copy number variations (CNVs), and presence/absence variations (PAVs) suggested that the genome evolution of Thai durians was different from that of the Malaysian durian, Musang King (MK). Among the three newly sequenced genomes, the PAV and CNV profiles of disease resistance genes and the expressions of methylesterase inhibitor domain containing genes involved in flowering and fruit maturation in MT were different from those in KD and PM. These genome assemblies and their analyses provide valuable resources to gain a better understanding of the genetic diversity of cultivated durians, which may be useful for the future development of new durian cultivars.

Durian: !yields! "King of Fruits" 
Durian: !developed in! Southeast Asia 
Durian: !genomes resequenced! KD, MT, PM 
KD, MT, PM: !covered! 95.7, 92.4, 92.7% embryophyta core proteins 
LTR sequences: !evolved slower than! cotton genomes 
Protein families: !involved in! abiotic/biotic stress responses 
Thai durians: !different from! Malaysian durian MK 
MT: !PAV/CNV profiles of! disease resistance genes different 
MT: !expressions of! methylesterase inhibitor domain different