Calcium ions (Ca<sup>2+</sup>), secondary messengers, are crucial for the signal transduction process of the interaction between plants and pathogens. Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling also regulates autophagy. As plant calcium signal-decoding proteins, calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) have been found to be involved in biotic and abiotic stress responses. However, information on their functions in response to powdery mildew attack in wheat crops is limited. In the present study, the expression levels of TaCDPK27, four essential autophagy-related genes (ATGs) (TaATG5, TaATG7, TaATG8, and TaATG10), and two major metacaspase genes, namely, TaMCA1 and TaMCA9, were increased by powdery mildew (Blumeria graminis f. sp. tritici, Bgt) infection in wheat seedling leaves. Silencing TaCDPK27 improves wheat seedling resistance to powdery mildew, with fewer Bgt hyphae occurring on TaCDPK27-silenced wheat seedling leaves than on normal seedlings. In wheat seedling leaves under powdery mildew infection, silencing TaCDPK27 induced excess contents of reactive oxygen species (ROS); decreased the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase (POD) and catalase (CAT); and led to an increase in programmed cell death (PCD). Silencing TaCDPK27 also inhibited autophagy in wheat seedling leaves, and silencing TaATG7 also enhanced wheat seedling resistance to powdery mildew infection. TaCDPK27-mCherry and GFP-TaATG8h colocalized in wheat protoplasts. Overexpressed TaCDPK27-mCherry fusions required enhanced autophagy activity in wheat protoplast under carbon starvation. These results suggested that TaCDPK27 negatively regulates wheat resistance to PW infection, and functionally links with autophagy in wheat.

Ca<sup>2+</sup>: !regulates! Autophagy
CDPKs: !involved in! Biotic/Abiotic Stress Responses
TaCDPK27: !increases! Expression Levels
TaCDPK27: !improves! Wheat Seedling Resistance to Powdery Mildew
TaCDPK27: !induces! ROS Contents
TaCDPK27: !inhibits! Autophagy
TaATG7: !enhances! Wheat Seedling Resistance to Powdery Mildew
TaCDPK27-mCherry: !colocalizes with! GFP-TaATG8h
TaCDPK27-mCherry: !requires! Enhanced Autophagy Activity