Chinese cabbage is one of the most widely grown leafy vegetables in China. Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) is a maternally inherited trait that produces abnormal pollen during anther development, which is commonly seen in cruciferous vegetables. However, the molecular mechanism of Chinese cabbage CMS is not clear. In this study, the metabolome and hormone profiles of Chinese cabbage male sterile line (CCR20000) and sterile maintainer line (CCR20001) were analyzed in flower buds during normal stamen development and abnormal stamen development, respectively. A total of 556 metabolites were detected based on UPLC-MS/MS detection platform and database search, and the changes of hormones such as auxin, cytokinins, abscisic acid, jasmonates, salicylic acid, gibberellin acid and ethylene were analyzed. The results showed that compared with the male fertile line (MF), the male sterile line (MS) significantly decreased the content of flavonoids and phenolamides metabolites in the stamen dysplasia stage, accompanied by a large accumulation of glucosinolate metabolites. Meanwhile, the contents of GA9, GA20, IBA, tZ and other hormones in MS were significantly lower than those in MF strains. Further, by comparing the metabolome changes of MF and MS during stamen dysplasia, it was found that flavonoid metabolites and amino acid metabolites were distinctly different. These results suggest that flavonoids, phenolamides and glucosinolate metabolites may be closely related to the sterility of MS strains. This study provides an effective basis for further research on the molecular mechanism of CMS in Chinese cabbage.

Flavonoids: !affects! Sterility 
Phenolamides: !affects! Sterility 
Glucosinolate Metabolites: !accumulates in! Sterile Line 
GA9: !decreases in! Sterile Line 
GA20: !decreases in! Sterile Line 
IBA: !decreases in! Sterile Line 
tZ: !decreases in! Sterile Line 
Flavonoid Metabolites: !differs between! Fertile & Sterile Lines 
Amino Acid Metabolites: !differs between! Fertile & Sterile Lines