Deschampsia antarctica is one of the only two native vascular plants in Antarctica, mostly located in the ice-free areas of the Peninsula's coast and adjacent islands. This region is characterized by a short growing season, frequent extreme climatic events, and soils with reduced nutrient availability. However, it is unknown whether its photosynthetic and stress tolerance mechanisms are affected by the availability of nutrients to deal with this particular environment. We studied the photosynthetic, primary metabolic, and stress tolerance performance of D. antarctica plants growing on three close sites (<500 m) with contrasting soil nutrient conditions. Plants from all sites showed similar photosynthetic rates, but mesophyll conductance and photobiochemistry were more limiting (~25%) in plants growing on low-nutrient availability soils. Additionally, these plants showed higher stress levels and larger investments in photoprotection and carbon pools, most probably driven by the need to stabilize proteins and membranes, and remodel cell walls. In contrast, when nutrients were readily available, plants shifted their carbon investment towards amino acids related to osmoprotection, growth, antioxidants, and polyamines, leading to vigorous plants without appreciable levels of stress. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that D. antarctica displays differential physiological performances to cope with adverse conditions depending on resource availability, allowing it to maximize stress tolerance without jeopardizing photosynthetic capacity.

Nutrient availability: !affects! Photosynthetic performance 
Nutrient availability: !enhances! Stress tolerance 
Photosynthetic performance: !limits! Mesophyll conductance 
Photosynthetic performance: !limits! Photobiochemistry 
Low-nutrient availability soils: !increases! Stress levels 
Low-nutrient availability soils: !increases! Investment in photoprotection 
Readily available nutrients: !shifts! Carbon investment 
Readily available nutrients: !leads to! Vigorous plants