The impact of water deficit on volatile organic compounds (VOCs) responsible for grape aroma remains quite unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of different timing and intensity of water deficit on berry VOCs and on their biosynthetic pathways. Fully irrigated control vines were compared with the following treatments: i) two different levels of water deficit from berry pea-size through veraison, ii) one level of water deficit during the lag-phase, and iii) two different levels of water deficit from veraison through harvest. At harvest, total VOC concentrations were higher in berries of water stressed vines from berry pea size through veraison or during the lag phase, whereas post-veraison water deficit determined similar concentrations as control. This pattern was even more pronounced for the glycosylated fraction and was also observed for single compounds, mainly monoterpenes and C<sub>13</sub>-norisoprenoids. On the other hand, free VOCs were higher in berries from lag phase or post-veraison stressed vines. The significant glycosylated and free VOCs increment measured after the short water stress limited to the lag phase highlight the pivotal role played by this stage in berry aroma compound biosynthesis modulation. The severity of water stress before veraison was also important, since glycosylated VOCs showed a positive correlation with the pre-veraison daily water stress integral. The RNA-seq analysis showed a wide regulation induced by irrigation regimes on terpenes and carotenoids biosynthetic pathways. The terpene synthases and glycosyltransferases as well as genes of the network of transcription factors were upregulated, especially in berries from pre-veraison stressed vines. Since the timing and intensity of water deficit contribute to regulate berry VOCs, irrigation management can be used to achieve high-quality grapes while saving water.

water deficit: !affects! VOCs
VOCs: !increase with! water deficit
lag phase: !important for! berry aroma compound biosynthesis
RNA-seq analysis: !shows regulation of! terpenes and carotenoids biosynthetic pathways
terpene synthases: !upregulated by! irrigation regimes
glycosyltransferases: !upregulated by! irrigation regimes
transcription factors: !upregulated by! irrigation regimes
irrigation management: !can be used to! achieve high-quality grapes