The secondary vascular tissue emanating from meristems is central to understanding how vascular plants such as forest trees evolve, grow, and regulate secondary radial growth. However, the overall molecular characterization of meristem origins and developmental trajectories from primary to secondary vascular tissues in woody tree stems is technically challenging. In this study, we combined high-resolution anatomic analysis with a spatial transcriptome (ST) technique to define features of meristematic cells in a developmental gradient from primary to secondary vascular tissues in poplar stems. The tissue-specific gene expression of meristems and derived vascular tissue types were accordingly mapped to specific anatomical domains. Pseudotime analyses were used to track the origins and changes of meristems throughout the development from primary to secondary vascular tissues. Surprisingly, two types of meristematic-like cell pools within secondary vascular tissues were inferred based on high-resolution microscopy combined with ST, and the results were confirmed by in situ hybridization of , transgenic trees, and single-cell sequencing. The rectangle shape procambium-like (PCL) cells develop from procambium meristematic cells and are located within the phloem domain to produce phloem cells, whereas fusiform shape cambium zone (CZ) meristematic cells develop from fusiform metacambium meristematic cells and are located inside the CZ to produce xylem cells. The gene expression atlas and transcriptional networks spanning the primary transition to secondary vascular tissues generated in this work provide new resources for studying the regulation of meristem activities and the evolution of vascular plants. A web server (https://pgx.zju.edu.cn/stRNAPal/) was also established to facilitate the use of ST RNA-seq data.

Meristem: !gives rise to! Secondary vascular tissue 
Procambium meristematic cells: !develop into! Rectangle shape procambium-like (PCL) cells 
Fusiform metacambium meristematic cells: !develop into! Fusiform shape cambium zone (CZ) meristematic cells 
PCL cells: !located in! Phloem domain 
CZ meristematic cells: !located in! Cambium zone 
PCL cells: !produce! Phloem cells 
CZ meristematic cells: !produce! Xylem cells