Small regulatory RNAs can move between organisms and regulate gene expression in the recipient. Whether the trans-species small RNAs being exported are distinguished from the normal endogenous small RNAs of the source organism is not known. The parasitic plant Cuscuta campestris (dodder) produces many microRNAs that specifically accumulate at the host-parasite interface, several of which have trans-species activity. We found that induction of C. campestris interface-induced microRNAs is similar regardless of host species, and occurs in C. campestris haustoria produced in the absence of any host. The loci encoding C. campestris interface-induced microRNAs are distinguished by a common cis-regulatory element. This element is identical to a conserved upstream sequence element (USE) used by plant small nuclear RNA loci. The properties of the interface-induced microRNA primary transcripts strongly suggest that they are produced via U6-like transcription by RNA polymerase III. The USE promotes accumulation of interface-induced miRNAs in a heterologous system. This promoter element distinguishes C. campestris interface-induced microRNA loci from other plant small RNAs. Our data suggest that C. campestris interface-induced miRNAs are produced in a manner distinct from canonical miRNAs. All confirmed C. campestris microRNAs with documented trans-species activity are interface-induced and possess these features. We speculate that production of these distinct interface-induced miRNAs may allow these miRNAs to be exported to hosts.

Small regulatory RNAs: !move between organisms! and regulate gene expression
Cuscuta campestris: !produces! microRNAs
microRNAs: !accumulate at! host-parasite interface
microRNA loci: !distinguished by! common cis-regulatory element
common cis-regulatory element: !identical to! conserved upstream sequence element
upstream sequence element: !promotes accumulation of! interface-induced miRNAs
interface-induced miRNAs: !produced via! U6-like transcription by RNA polymerase III
interface-induced miRNAs: !allow! export to hosts