Pruning wounds are the main entry points for fungi causing grapevine trunk diseases (GTDs). Several studies identified factors influencing the temporal dynamics of wound susceptibility, which include the fungal species and inoculum dose, weather conditions, grape variety, pruning date, and so forth. Here, we conducted a quantitative analysis of literature data to synthesise outcomes across studies and to identify the factors that most affect the length of pruning wound susceptibility. We extracted data on the frequency at which the inoculated wounds showed GTD symptoms or an inoculated pathogen was reisolated following artificial inoculation at the time of pruning or in the following days. A negative exponential model was fit to these data to describe changes in wound susceptibility as a function of time since pruning, in which the rate parameter changed depending on specific factors. The results show that wound susceptibility is high at the time of pruning, and they remain susceptible to invasion by GTD fungi for months after pruning. Infection incidence on wounds was higher for fungi associated with Botryosphaeria dieback than those associated with Eutypa dieback or Esca complex, and wound susceptibility decreased faster for Eutypa dieback than for other GTD agents. Grapevine variety and pruning season also affected the wound susceptibility period. Sauvignon Blanc remains susceptible to GTDs longer than other varieties. We also found that the time of pruning can affect infection dynamics, especially for more susceptible varieties. The results increase our understanding of GTD epidemiology and should help growers control infections.

Pruning wounds: !susceptible to! GTD fungi
Fungal species: !affects! wound susceptibility
Inoculum dose: !affects! wound susceptibility
Weather conditions: !affects! wound susceptibility
Grape variety: !affects! wound susceptibility
Pruning date: !affects! wound susceptibility
Botryosphaeria dieback: !associated with! higher infection incidence
Eutypa dieback: !associated with! faster decrease in wound susceptibility
Esca complex: !associated with! higher infection incidence
Sauvignon Blanc: !remains susceptible to! GTDs longer