Tea plants have adapted to grow in tropical acidic soils containing high concentrations of aluminum (Al) and fluoride (F) (as Al/F hyperaccumulators) and use secret organic acids (OAs) to acidify the rhizosphere for acquiring phosphorous and element nutrients. The self-enhanced rhizosphere acidification under Al/F stress and acid rain also render tea plants prone to accumulate more heavy metals and F, which raises significant food safety and health concerns. However, the mechanism behind this is not fully understood. Here, we report that tea plants responded to Al and F stresses by synthesizing and secreting OAs and altering profiles of amino acids, catechins, and caffeine in their roots. These organic compounds could form tea-plant mechanisms to tolerate lower pH and higher Al and F concentrations. Furthermore, high concentrations of Al and F stresses negatively affected the accumulation of tea secondary metabolites in young leaves, and thereby tea nutrient value. The young leaves of tea seedlings under Al and F stresses also tended to increase Al and F accumulation in young leaves but lower essential tea secondary metabolites, which challenged tea quality and safety. Comparisons of transcriptome data combined with metabolite profiling revealed that the corresponding metabolic gene expression supported and explained the metabolism changes in tea roots and young leaves via stresses from high concentrations of Al and F. The study provides new insight into Al- and F-stressed tea plants with regard to responsive metabolism changes and tolerance strategy establishment in tea plants and the impacts of Al/F stresses on metabolite compositions in young leaves used for making teas, which could influence tea nutritional value and food safety.

Al/F stress: !enhances! rhizosphere acidification 
Al/F stress: !synthesizes! OAs 
Al/F stress: !alters! amino acids, catechins, caffeine 
Al/F stress: !increases! Al and F accumulation 
Al/F stress: !lowers! essential tea secondary metabolites 
Metabolic gene expression: !supports! metabolism changes 
Metabolic gene expression: !explains! metabolism changes