Understanding the multifaceted plant diversity and its maintenance mechanisms is crucial for biodiversity conservation. Dam-induced water level fluctuations dramatically alter various aspects of riparian diversity, such as taxonomic (TD), phylogenetic (PD), or functional (FD) diversity. However, few studies simultaneously evaluated plant TD, FD, and PD, especially in the subtropical reservoir riparian zone. Here we sampled plant diversity and environmental drivers along inundation gradients of the Three Gorges Reservoir Region in China. We integrated multifaceted plant diversity to assess how distinct ecological processes affect the plant community assembly and how they respond to inundation gradients, spatial variability, climate, and soils in dam-regulated riparian zones. We found that alpha TD, PD, and FD diversity exhibited decreasing trends with increasing inundation gradients and significant positive correlations with soil organic matter. The number of clustering plant communities increases along the inundation gradients. Beta TD and PD diversity were mainly dominated by species turnover with fewer contributions from nestedness, while beta FD diversity was mainly dominated by nestedness with fewer contributions from species turnover. The explainable rates of different dimensions of beta diversity, turnover, and nestedness ranged from 11% to 61%, with spatial factors explaining the highest beta diversity in different dimensions, followed by inundation gradients, soil properties, and climate variables. Our results suggest dispersal limitations are more important for species turnover in dam-regulated riparian zones at regional scales, while inundation gradients and soil fertility are more critical in shaping plant community assemblages at the local scale. This study emphasizes that environmental and spatial gradients are critical for understanding the assembly mechanisms driving multifaceted plant communities at local and regional scales and reinforces the importance of protecting seed sources and dispersal pathways and maintaining river connectivity when implementing restoration projects.

inundation gradients: !affects! plant TD, PD, and FD diversity
soil organic matter: !correlates with! alpha TD, PD, and FD diversity
spatial factors: !explains! highest beta diversity
inundation gradients: !influences! plant community assemblages
dispersal limitations: !dominates! species turnover
soil fertility: !shapes! plant community assemblages