The enhancement of CRISPR-Cas gene editing with robust nuclease activity promotes genetic modification of desirable agronomic traits, such as resistance to pathogens, drought tolerance, nutritional value, and yield-related traits in crops. The genetic diversity of food crops has reduced tremendously over the past twelve millennia due to plant domestication. This reduction presents significant challenges for the future especially considering the risks posed by global climate change to food production. While crops with improved phenotypes have been generated through crossbreeding, mutation breeding, and transgenic breeding over the years, improving phenotypic traits through precise genetic diversification has been challenging. The challenges are broadly associated with the randomness of genetic recombination and conventional mutagenesis. This review highlights how emerging gene-editing technologies reduce the burden and time necessary for developing desired traits in plants. Our focus is to provide readers with an overview of the advances in CRISPR-Cas-based genome editing for crop improvement. The use of CRISPR-Cas systems in generating genetic diversity to enhance the quality and nutritional value of staple food crops is discussed. We also outlined recent applications of CRISPR-Cas in developing pest-resistant crops and removing unwanted traits, such as allergenicity from crops. Genome editing tools continue to evolve and present unprecedented opportunities to enhance crop germplasm via precise mutations at the desired loci of the plant genome.

CRISPR-Cas: !enhances! genetic modification 
Domestication: !reduces! genetic diversity 
Crossbreeding: !improves! phenotypes 
Mutation breeding: !improves! phenotypes 
Transgenic breeding: !improves! phenotypes 
CRISPR-Cas: !reduces! burden and time 
CRISPR-Cas: !generates! genetic diversity 
CRISPR-Cas: !enhances! quality and nutritional value 
CRISPR-Cas: !develops! pest-resistant crops 
CRISPR-Cas: !removes! allergenicity 
Genome editing tools: !evolve! opportunities 
Genome editing tools: !enhance! crop germplasm