Abiotic stresses adversely affect the productivity and production of vegetable crops. The increasing number of crop genomes that have been sequenced or re-sequenced provides a set of computationally anticipated abiotic stress-related responsive genes on which further research may be focused. Knowledge of omics approaches and other advanced molecular tools have all been employed to understand the complex biology of these abiotic stresses. A vegetable can be defined as any component of a plant that is eaten for food. These plant parts may be celery stems, spinach leaves, radish roots, potato tubers, garlic bulbs, immature cauliflower flowers, cucumber fruits, and pea seeds. Abiotic stresses, such as deficient or excessive water, high temperature, cold, salinity, oxidative, heavy metals, and osmotic stress, are responsible for the adverse activity in plants and, ultimately major concern for decreasing yield in many vegetable crops. At the morphological level, altered leaf, shoot and root growth, altered life cycle duration and fewer or smaller organs can be observed. Likewise different physiological and biochemical/molecular processes are also affected in response to these abiotic stresses. In order to adapt and survive in a variety of stressful situations, plants have evolved physiological, biochemical, and molecular response mechanisms. A comprehensive understanding of the vegetable's response to different abiotic stresses and the identification of tolerant genotypes are essential to strengthening each vegetable's breeding program. The advances in genomics and next-generation sequencing have enabled the sequencing of many plant genomes over the last twenty years. A combination of modern genomics (MAS, GWAS, genomic selection, transgenic breeding, and gene editing), transcriptomics, and proteomics along with next-generation sequencing provides an array of new powerful approaches to the study of vegetable crops. This review examines the overall impact of major abiotic stresses on vegetables, adaptive mechanisms and functional genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic processes used by researchers to minimize these challenges. The current status of genomics technologies for developing adaptable vegetable cultivars that will perform better in future climates is also examined.

Abiotic stress: !adversely affects! Vegetable crops
Genomics: !enables! Sequencing of plant genomes
Modern genomics: !provides! Powerful approaches to study vegetable crops
Adaptive mechanisms: !used by! Plants to survive in stressful situations
Functional genomic processes: !minimizes! Abiotic stress challenges
Genomics technologies: !develops! Adaptable vegetable cultivars