Photoperiod provides a key environmental signal that controls plant growth. Plants have evolved an integrated mechanism for sensing photoperiods with internal clocks to orchestrate physiological events. This mechanism has been identified to enable timely plant growth and improve fitness. Although the components and pathways underlying photoperiod regulation have been described in many species, diurnal patterns of gene expression at the genome-wide level under different photoperiods are rarely reported in perennial fruit trees. To explore the global gene expression in response to photoperiod, pear plants were cultured under long-day (LD) and short-day (SD) conditions. A time-series transcriptomic study was implemented using LD and SD samples collected at 4 h intervals over two days. We identified 13,677 rhythmic genes, of which 7,639 were identified under LD and 10,557 under SD conditions. Additionally, 4,674 genes were differentially expressed in response to photoperiod change. We also characterized the candidate homologs of clock-associated genes in pear. Clock genes were involved in the regulation of many processes throughout the day, including photosynthesis, stress response, hormone dynamics, and secondary metabolism. Strikingly, genes within photosynthesis-related pathways were enriched in both the rhythmic and differential expression analyses. Several key candidate genes were identified to be associated with regulating photosynthesis and improving productivity under different photoperiods. The results suggest that temporal variation in gene expression should not be ignored in pear gene function research. Overall, our work expands the understanding of photoperiod regulation of plant growth, particularly by extending the research to non-model trees. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Photoperiod: !controls! Plant Growth
Plants: !have evolved! Integrated Mechanism
LD/SD: !provide! Photoperiod Regulation
Rhythmic Genes: !identified under! LD/SD Conditions
Clock Genes: !involved in! Regulation of Processes
Photosynthesis-related Pathways: !enriched in! Rhythmic/Differential Expression Analyses
Candidate Genes: !associated with! Regulating Photosynthesis/Improving Productivity