PvSYMRK-EGFP undergoes constitutive and rhizobia-induced endocytosis, which rely on the phosphorylation status of T589, the endocytic YXXØ motif and the kinase activity of the receptor. Legume-rhizobia nodulation is a complex developmental process. It initiates when the rhizobia-produced Nod factors are perceived by specific LysM receptors present in the root hair apical membrane. Consequently, SYMRK (Symbiosis Receptor-like Kinase) becomes active in the root hair and triggers an extensive signaling network essential for the infection process and nodule organogenesis. Despite its relevant functions, the underlying cellular mechanisms involved in SYMRK signaling activity remain poorly characterized. In this study, we demonstrated that PvSYMRK-EGFP undergoes constitutive and rhizobia-induced endocytosis. We found that in uninoculated roots, PvSYMRK-EGFP is mainly associated with the plasma membrane, although intracellular puncta labelled with PvSymRK-EGFP were also observed in root hair and nonhair-epidermal cells. Inoculation with Rhizobium etli producing Nod factors induces in the root hair a redistribution of PvSYMRK-EGFP from the plasma membrane to intracellular puncta. In accordance, deletion of the endocytic motif YXXØ (YKTL) and treatment with the endocytosis inhibitors ikarugamycin (IKA) and tyrphostin A23 (TyrA23), as well as brefeldin A (BFA), drastically reduced the density of intracellular PvSYMRK-EGFP puncta. A similar effect was observed in the phosphorylation-deficient (T589A) and kinase-dead (K618E) mutants of PvSYMRK-EGFP, implying these structural features are positive regulators of PvSYMRK-EGFP endocytosis. Our findings lead us to postulate that rhizobia-induced endocytosis of SYMRK modulates the duration and amplitude of the SYMRK-dependent signaling pathway.

PvSYMRK-EGFP: !undergoes! Constitutive and rhizobia-induced endocytosis 
YXXØ motif: !regulates! PvSYMRK-EGFP endocytosis 
T589: !phosphorylation status affects! PvSYMRK-EGFP endocytosis 
Receptor kinase activity: !regulates! PvSYMRK-EGFP endocytosis 
IKA, TyrA23, BFA: !inhibit! PvSYMRK-EGFP endocytosis 
T589A, K618E mutants: !affect! PvSYMRK-EGFP endocytosis