Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) is a major monopartite virus in the family Geminiviridae and has caused severe yield losses in tomato and tobacco planting areas worldwide. Wall-associated kinases (WAKs) and WAK-like kinases (WAKLs) are a subfamily of the receptor-like kinase family implicated in cell wall signaling and transmitting extracellular signals to the cytoplasm, thereby regulating plant growth and development and resistance to abiotic and biotic stresses. Recently, many studies on WAK/WAKL family genes have been performed in various plants under different stresses; however, identification and functional survey of the WAK/WAKL gene family of Nicotiana benthamiana have not yet been performed, even though its genome has been sequenced for several years. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to identify the WAK/WAKL gene family in N. benthamiana and explore their possible functions in response to TYLCV infection. Thirty-eight putative WAK/WAKL genes were identified and named according to their locations in N. benthamiana. Phylogenetic analysis showed that NbWAK/WAKLs are clustered into five groups. The protein motifs and gene structure compositions of NbWAK/WAKLs appear to be highly conserved among the phylogenetic groups. Numerous cis-acting elements involved in phytohormone and/or stress responses were detected in the promoter regions of NbWAK/WAKLs. Moreover, gene expression analysis revealed that most of the NbWAK/WAKLs are expressed in at least one of the examined tissues, suggesting their possible roles in regulating the growth and development of plants. Virus-induced gene silencing and quantitative PCR analyses demonstrated that NbWAK/WAKLs are implicated in regulating the response of N. benthamiana to TYLCV, ten of which were dramatically upregulated in locally or systemically infected leaves of N. benthamiana following TYLCV infection. Our study lays an essential base for the further exploration of the potential functions of NbWAK/WAKLs in plant growth and development and response to viral infections in N. benthamiana.

WAK/WAKL: !identifies! N. benthamiana
NbWAK/WAKLs: !clusters into! 5 groups
Protein motifs: !conserved among! phylogenetic groups
Cis-acting elements: !detected in! promoter regions
Gene expression: !reveals roles in! regulating plant growth
Virus-induced gene silencing: !implicates NbWAK/WAKLs in! TYLCV response