Anthocyanin production in bicolored sweet cherry (Prunus avium cv. Rainier) fruit is induced by light exposure, leading to red coloration. The phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) is essential for this process, but the regulatory relationships that link light and ABA with anthocyanin-associated coloration are currently unclear. In this study, we determined that light treatment of bicolored sweet cherry fruit increased anthocyanin accumulation and induced ABA production and that ABA participates in light-modulated anthocyanin accumulation in bicolored sweet cherry. Two B-box (BBX) genes, PavBBX6/9, were highly induced by light and ABA treatments, as was anthocyanin accumulation. The ectopic expression of PavBBX6 or PavBBX9 in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) increased anthocyanin biosynthesis and ABA accumulation. Overexpressing PavBBX6 or PavBBX9 in sweet cherry calli also enhanced light-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis and ABA accumulation. Additionally, transient overexpression of PavBBX6 or PavBBX9 in sweet cherry peel increased anthocyanin and ABA contents, whereas silencing either gene had the opposite effects. PavBBX6 and PavBBX9 directly bound to the G-box elements in the promoter of UDP glucose-flavonoid-3-O-glycosyltransferase (PavUFGT), a key gene for anthocyanin biosynthesis, and 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase 1 (PavNCED1), a key gene for ABA biosynthesis, and enhanced their activities. These results suggest that PavBBX6 and PavBBX9 positively regulate light-induced anthocyanin and ABA biosynthesis by promoting PavUFGT and PavNCED1 expression, respectively. Our study provides insights into the relationship between the light-induced ABA biosynthetic pathway and anthocyanin accumulation in bicolored sweet cherry fruit.

Light: !induces! Anthocyanin production
ABA: !essential for! Anthocyanin production
PavBBX6/9: !induced by! Light & ABA
PavBBX6/9: !enhances! Anthocyanin biosynthesis & ABA accumulation
PavBBX6/9: !binds to! PavUFGT & PavNCED1
PavBBX6/9: !promotes! PavUFGT & PavNCED1 expression