Oxygen deprivation (hypoxia) in the root due to waterlogging causes profound metabolic changes in the aerial organs depressing growth and limiting plant productivity in barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). Genome-wide analyses in waterlogged wild type (WT) barley (cv. Golden Promise) plants and plants over-expressing the phytoglobin 1 HvPgb1 [HvPgb1(OE)] were performed to determine leaf specific transcriptional responses during waterlogging. Normoxic WT plants outperformed their HvPgb1(OE) counterparts for dry weight biomass, chlorophyll content, photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance, and transpiration. Root waterlogging severely depressed all these parameters in WT plants but not in HvPgb1(OE) plants, which exhibited an increase in photosynthetic rate. In leaftissue, root waterlogging repressed genes encoding photosynthetic components and chlorophyll biosynthetic enzymes, while induced those of reactive oxygen species (ROS)-generating enzymes. This repression was alleviated in HvPgb1(OE) leaves which also exhibited an induction of enzymes participating in antioxidant responses. In the same leaves, the transcript levels of several genes participating in nitrogen metabolism were also higher relative to WT leaves. Ethylene levels were diminished by root waterlogging in leaves of WT plants, but not in HvPgb1(OE), which were enriched in transcripts of ethylene biosynthetic enzymes and ethylene response factors. Pharmacological treatments increasing the level or action of ethylene further suggested the requirement of ethylene in plant response to root waterlogging. In natural germplasm an elevation in foliar HvPgb1 between 16h and 24h of waterlogging occurred in tolerant genotypes but not in susceptible ones. By integrating morpho-physiological parameters with transcriptome data, this study provides a framework defining leaf responses to root waterlogging and indicates that the induction of HvPgb1 may be used as a selection tool to enhance resilience to excess moisture.

Root waterlogging: !represses! photosynthetic components 
Root waterlogging: !induces! ROS-generating enzymes 
HvPgb1(OE): !alleviates! repression of photosynthetic components 
HvPgb1(OE): !induces! antioxidant responses 
HvPgb1(OE): !induces! nitrogen metabolism genes 
Root waterlogging: !diminishes! ethylene levels 
HvPgb1(OE): !enriches! ethylene biosynthetic enzymes 
HvPgb1(OE): !enriches! ethylene response factors 
Tolerant genotypes: !elevates! foliar HvPgb1