A high content in anthocyanins, for their health beneficial properties, represents an added value for fruits and vegetables. Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) is one of the most consumed vegetables worldwide and is rich in vitamins and carotenoids. In recent years, purple-skinned tomatoes, enriched of anthocyanins, were produced recovering allelic variants from wild Solanum species. The molecular basis of the Anthocyanin fruit (Aft) locus, exploited by breeders to activate the anthocyanin synthesis in tomato epicarp, has been recently identified in the correct splicing of the R2R3 MYB gene AN2like. Aubergine (Abg) is a tomato accession which introgressed from Solanum lycopersicoides a locus activating the synthesis of anthocyanins in the fruit. The Abg locus was mapped in the region of chromosome 10 containing Aft and the possibility that Abg and Aft represented alleles of the same gene was hypothesized. We dissected the R2R3 MYB gene cluster located in the Abg genomic introgression and demonstrated that AN2like is correctly spliced in Abg plants and is expressed in the fruit epicarp. Moreover, its silencing specifically inhibits the anthocyanin synthesis. The Abg allele of AN2like undergoes alternative splicing and produces two proteins with different activities. Furthermore, in Abg the master regulator of the anthocyanin synthesis in tomato vegetative tissues, AN2, is very poorly expressed. Finally, a novel R2R3 MYB gene was identified: it encodes another positive regulator of the pathway, whose activity was lost in tomato and in its closest relatives. In this study, we propose that AN2like is responsible of the anthocyanin production in Abg fruits. Unlike wild type tomato, the Abg allele of AN2like is active and able to regulate its targets. Furthermore, in Abg alternative splicing leads to two forms of AN2like with different activities, likely representing a novel type of regulation of anthocyanin synthesis in tomato.

Aft: !activates! Anthocyanin synthesis
Abg: !introgressed from! Solanum lycopersicoides
AN2like: !spliced correctly in! Abg plants
AN2like: !silencing inhibits! Anthocyanin synthesis
AN2like: !undergoes alternative splicing! Produces two proteins
AN2: !poorly expressed in! Abg
R2R3 MYB gene: !identified! Positive regulator of pathway