Terrestrial plants can affect the growth and health of adjacent plants via interspecific interaction. Here, we studied the mechanism by which plant root exudates affect the recruitment of the rhizosphere microbiome in adjacent plants - with implications for plant protection - using a tomato (Solanum lycopersicum)-potatoonion (Allium cepa var. agrogatum Don.) intercropping system. First, we showed the intercropping system to result in a disease-suppressive rhizosphere microbiome in tomato plants against Verticillium wilt disease, caused by the soilborne pathogen Verticillium dahliae. Second, 16S rRNA gene sequencing found that intercropping with potatoonion altered the composition of the tomato rhizosphere microbiome, by promoting the colonization of specific Bacillus sp. This taxon was isolated and shown to inhibit V. dahliae growth and induce systemic resistance in tomato plants. Third, a belowground segregation experiment found that root exudates mediated the interspecific interaction between potatoonion and tomato. Moreover, experiments using split-root tomato plants found root exudates from potatoonion, especially taxifolin - a flavonoid compound - to stimulate tomato plants to recruit plant-beneficial bacteria, such as Bacillus sp. Last, UPLC-MS analysis found taxifolin to alter tomato root exudates chemistry, thus acting as an indirect compound modulating the root colonization of Bacillus sp. Our results revealed that this intercropping system can improve tomato plant fitness by changing the rhizosphere microbiome recruitment via utilizing signaling chemicals released by root exudates of potatoonion. This study revealed a novel mechanism by which interspecific plant interaction modulates the establishment of a disease-suppressive microbiome, thus opening up new avenues of research for precision plant microbiome manipulations.

Tomato: !intercrops with! Potatoonion 
Potatoonion: !releases! Taxifolin 
Taxifolin: !alters! Tomato root exudates chemistry 
Tomato: !recruits! Plant-beneficial bacteria 
Plant-beneficial bacteria: !inhibits! V. dahliae growth 
V. dahliae: !causes! Verticillium wilt disease