Cotton (Gossypium sp.) has been cultivated for centuries for its spinnable fibers, but its seed oil also possesses untapped economic potential if, improvements could be made to its oleic acid content. Previous studies, including those from our laboratory, identified pima accessions containing approximately doubled levels of seed oil oleic acid, compared to standard upland cottonseed oil. Here, the molecular properties of a fatty acid desaturase encoded by a mutant allele identified by genome sequencing in an earlier analysis were analyzed. The mutant sequence is predicted to encode a C-terminally truncated protein lacking nine residues, including a predicted endoplasmic reticulum membrane retrieval motif. We determined that the mutation was caused by a relatively recent movement of a Ty1/copia type retrotransposon that is not found associated with this desaturase gene in other sequenced cotton genomes. The mutant desaturase, along with its repaired isozyme and the wild-type A-subgenome homoeologous protein were expressed in transgenic yeast and stably transformed Arabidopsis plants. All full-length enzymes efficiently converted oleic acid to linoleic acid. The mutant desaturase protein produced only trace amounts of linoleic acid, and only when strongly overexpressed in yeast cells, indicating that the missing C-terminal amino acid residues are not strictly required for enzyme activity, yet are necessary for proper subcellular targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. These results provide the biochemical underpinning that links a genetic lesion present in a limited group of South American pima cotton accessions and their rare seed oil oleic acid traits. Markers developed to the mutant desaturase allele are currently being used in breeding programs designed to introduce this trait into agronomic upland cotton varieties.

Gene: !encodes! Fatty acid desaturase 
Gene: !caused by! Ty1/copia type retrotransposon 
Gene: !converts! Oleic acid to linoleic acid 
Gene: !produces! Trace amounts of linoleic acid 
Gene: !links! Genetic lesion and seed oil oleic acid traits 
Gene: !used in! Breeding programs