The consumption of plants plays an important role in human health. In addition to providing macro and micronutrients, plants are the sole sources of several phytonutrients that play a major role in disease prevention. However, in modern diets, increased consumption of cheaper, processed foods with poor nutritional value over fruits and vegetables leads to insufficient consumption of essential nutrients such as vitamin C. Taking supplements can address some of the insufficient nutrients in a diet. However, supplements are not as diverse or bioavailable as the nutrients in plants. Improving the abundance of nutrients in plants will reduce the amounts that need to be consumed, thereby reducing the price barrier and use of supplements. In this study, broccoli (<i>Brassica oleracea</i> var. <i>italica</i>) microgreens grown in a controlled environment were biofortified for increased vitamin C content. The microgreens grown on growing pads were treated with supplemental nutrient solutions. Treatments were applied four to five days after germination and included four different concentrations of ascorbic acid specifically, 0% (control), 0.05%, 0.1%, 0.25% and 0.5%, added to the nutrient solution. Microgreens with turgid cotyledons and appearance of tip of first true leaves were harvested about 14 days after germination and were analyzed for biomass, chlorophylls, carotenoids, vitamin C and other minerals content. The ascorbic acid improved the microgreens' fresh biomass, percent dry matter, chlorophylls, carotenoids, vitamin C, and potassium content. Moreover, this study also mapped out the correlation between ascorbic acid, phytochemicals, and broccoli microgreens' mineral composition. The total vitamin C was positively correlated to K and negatively correlated to chlorophylls, N, P, Mg, Ca, S, and B (p < 0.01). These relationships can be applied in future vitamin C biofortification research across different microgreens. In conclusion, vitamin C was increased up to 222% by supplemental ascorbic acid without being detrimental to plant health and mineral composition.

Ascorbic Acid: !increases! Vitamin C 
Ascorbic Acid: !improves! Fresh Biomass 
Ascorbic Acid: !improves! Percent Dry Matter 
Ascorbic Acid: !improves! Chlorophylls 
Ascorbic Acid: !improves! Carotenoids 
Ascorbic Acid: !improves! Potassium Content 
Vitamin C: !correlates positively with! Potassium 
Vitamin C: !correlates negatively with! Chlorophylls 
Vitamin C: !correlates negatively with! Nitrogen 
Vitamin C: !correlates negatively with! Phosphorus 
Vitamin C: !correlates negatively with! Magnesium 
Vitamin C: !correlates negatively with! Calcium 
Vitamin C: !correlates negatively with! Sulfur 
Vitamin C: !correlates negatively with! Boron