Recent work shed light on how plant intracellular immune receptors of the nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat (NLR) family are activated upon pathogen effector recognition to trigger immune responses. Activation of Toll-interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing NLRs (TNLs) induces receptor oligomerization and close proximity of the TIR domain, which is required for TIR enzymatic activity. TIR-catalyzed small signaling molecules bind to EDS1 family heterodimers and subsequently activate downstream helper NLRs, which function as Ca<sup>2+</sup> permeable channel to activate immune responses eventually leading to cell death. Subcellular localization requirements of TNLs and signaling partners are not well understood, although they are required to understand fully the mechanisms underlying NLR early signaling. TNLs show diverse subcellular localization while EDS1 shows nucleocytosolic localization. Here, we studied the impact of TIR and EDS1 mislocalization on the signaling activation of different TNLs. In Nicotiana benthamiana, our results suggest that close proximity of TIR domains isolated from flax L6 and Arabidopsis RPS4 and SNC1 TNLs drives signaling activation from different cell compartments. Nevertheless, both Golgi-membrane anchored L6 and nucleocytosolic RPS4 have the same requirements for EDS1 subcellular localization in Arabidopsis thaliana. By using mislocalized variants of EDS1, we found that autoimmune L6 and RPS4 TIR domain can induce seedling cell death when EDS1 is present in the cytosol. However, when EDS1 is restricted to the nucleus, both induce a stunting phenotype but no cell death. Our data point out the importance of thoroughly investigating the dynamics of TNLs and signaling partners subcellular localization to understand TNL signaling fully.

TNL: !induces! TIR domain activity 
TNL: !requires! EDS1 family heterodimer 
TNL: !activates! downstream helper NLRs 
EDS1: !localizes to! nucleus/cytosol 
EDS1: !influences! signaling activation of TNLs 
TIR domain: !catalyzes! small signaling molecules