44 wheat LOX genes were identified by silico genome-wide search method. TaLOX5, 7, 10, 24, 29, 33 were specifically expressed post aphid infestation, indicating their participation in wheat-aphid interaction. In plants, LOX genes play important roles in various biological progresses including seed germination, tuber development, plant vegetative growth and most crucially in plant signal transduction, stress response and plant defense against plant diseases and insects. Although LOX genes have been characterized in many species, the importance of the LOX family in wheat has still not been well understood, hampering further improvement of wheat under stress conditions. Here, we identified 44 LOX genes (TaLOXs) in the whole wheat genome and classified into three subfamilies (9-LOXs, Type I 13-LOXs and Type II 13-LOXs) according to phylogenetic relationships. The TaLOXs belonging to the same subgroup shared similar gene structures and motif organizations. Synteny analysis demonstrated that segmental duplication events mainly contributed to the expansion of the LOX gene family in wheat. The results of protein-protein interaction network (PPI) and miRNA-TaLOXs predictions revealed that three TaLOXs (TaLOX20, 22 and 37) interacted mostly with proteins related to methyl jasmonate (MeJA) signaling pathway. The expression patterns of TaLOXs in different tissues (root, stem, leaf, spike and grain) under diverse abiotic stresses (heat, cold, drought, drought and heat combined treatment, and salt) as well as under diverse biotic stresses (powdery mildew pathogen, Fusarium graminearum and stripe rust pathogen) were systematically analyzed using RNA-seq data. We obtained aphid-responsive candidate genes by RNA-seq data of wheat after the English grain aphid infestation. Aphid-responsive candidate genes, including TaLOX5, 7, 10, 24, 29 and 33, were up-regulated in the wheat aphid-resistant genotype (Lunxuan144), while they were little expressed in the susceptible genotype (Jimai22) during late response (48 h and 72 h) to the English grain aphid infestation. Meanwhile, qRT-PCR analysis was used to validate these aphid-responsive candidate genes. The genetic divergence and diversity of all the TaLOXs in bread wheat and its relative species were investigated by available resequencing data. Finally, the 3D structure of the TaLOX proteins was predicted based on the homology modeling method. This study not only systematically investigated the characteristics and evolutionary relationships of TaLOXs, but also provided potential candidate genes in response to the English grain aphid infestation and laid the foundation to further study the regulatory roles in the English grain aphid infestation of LOX family in wheat and beyond.

TaLOXs: !belong to! 3 subfamilies
TaLOXs: !expanded by! segmental duplication events
TaLOXs: !interact with! proteins related to MeJA signaling pathway
TaLOXs: !respond to! abiotic and biotic stresses
TaLOX5, 7, 10, 24, 29, 33: !up-regulated in! wheat aphid-resistant genotype
TaLOXs: !divergence and diversity of! bread wheat and its relative species