Successful germination and seedling establishment are important determinants of crop yields and plant survival in natural environments. Germination potential is compromised by suboptimal environmental conditions that result in seed ageing and high levels of genome damage. However, the mutagenic and growth inhibitory potential of DNA damage accumulated in seeds on subsequent seedling growth remains largely unknown. Arabidopsis seeds deficient in the chromosomal break repair factors DNA LIGASE 4 and DNA LIGASE 6 exhibited hypersensitivity to the effects of natural ageing, with reduced germination vigour and seedling biomass relative to wild type seed. Here, we identify that aged Arabidopsis seed display elevated levels of programmed cell death (PCD) in the root meristem which persists into seedling establishment, with higher levels of cell death in lines deficient in DNA double strand break repair. Reporter lines determined the effects of seed ageing on mutation levels and intrachromosomal recombination frequencies. Seed deterioration resulted in strikingly elevated levels of frameshift mutations and genome instability in germinated seedlings. Thus, elevated levels genome damage incurred in the seed stage of the plant life cycle potentially impacts significantly on subsequent plant development. Furthermore, the mutagenic effects of seed ageing has potentially long-term implications on the genome stability of plant populations and ecosystem fitness. Collectively, we identify genome damage accumulated in suboptimal quality seed impacts on subsequent plant growth and genome stability, with associated implications for crop yields and plant survival under changing climates.

DNA Ligase 4/6: !affects! Germination vigour 
DNA Ligase 4/6: !enhances! PCD 
Aged Arabidopsis seed: !exhibits! Elevated levels of PCD 
Aged Arabidopsis seed: !causes! Elevated levels of frameshift mutations 
Aged Arabidopsis seed: !induces! Genome instability 
Genome damage: !impacts! Plant development 
Genome damage: !affects! Genome stability of plant populations