Autophagy in plants is regulated by diverse signaling cascades in response to environmental changes. Fine-tuning of its activity is critical for the maintenance of cellular homeostasis under basal and stressed conditions. In this study, we compared the Arabidopsis autophagy-related (ATG) system transcriptionally under inorganic phosphate (Pi) deficiency versus nitrogen deficiency and showed that most ATG genes are only moderately upregulated by Pi starvation, with relatively stronger induction of AtATG8f and AtATG8h among the AtATG8 family. We found that Pi shortage increased the formation of GFP-ATG8f-labeled autophagic structures and the autophagic flux in the differential zone of the Arabidopsis root. However, the proteolytic cleavage of GFP-ATG8f and the vacuolar degradation of endogenous ATG8 proteins indicated that Pi limitation does not drastically alter the autophagic flux in the whole roots, implying a cell type-dependent regulation of autophagic activities. At the organismal level, the Arabidopsis atg mutants exhibited decreased shoot Pi concentrations and smaller meristem sizes under Pi sufficiency. Under Pi limitation, these mutants showed enhanced Pi uptake and impaired root cell division and expansion. Despite a reduced steady-state level of several PHOSPHATE TRANSPORTER 1s (PHT1s) in the atg root, cycloheximide treatment analysis suggested that the protein stability of PHT1;1/2/3 is comparable in the Pi-replete wild type and atg5-1. By contrast, the degradation of PHT1;1/2/3 is enhanced in the Pi-deplete atg5-1. Our findings reveal that both basal autophagy and Pi starvation-induced autophagy are required for the maintenance of Pi homeostasis and may modulate the expression of PHT1s through different mechanisms.

AtATG8f: !upregulated by! Pi starvation 
GFP-ATG8f: !forms! autophagic structures 
Atg mutants: !exhibit decreased! shoot Pi concentrations 
PHT1s: !stability of! comparable in Pi-replete wild type and atg5-1 
PHT1s: !degradation of! enhanced in Pi-deplete atg5-1 
Autophagy: !required for! maintenance of Pi homeostasis