White root rot disease in rubber trees, caused by the pathogenic fungi Rigidoporus microporus, is currently considered a major problem in rubber tree plantations worldwide. Only a few reports have mentioned the response of rubber trees occurring at the non-infection sites, which is crucial for the disease understanding and protecting the yield losses. Through a comparative proteomic study using the two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) technique, the present study reveals some distal-responsive proteins in rubber tree leaves during the plant-fungal pathogen interaction. From a total of 12 selected differentially expressed protein spots, several defense-related proteins such as molecular chaperones and ROS-detoxifying enzymes were identified. The expression of 6 candidate proteins was investigated at the transcript level by Reverse Transcription Quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). In silico, a highly-expressed uncharacterized protein LOC110648447 found in rubber trees was predicted to be a protein in the pathogenesis-related protein 10 (PR-10) class. In silico promoter analysis and structural-related characterization of this novel PR-10 protein suggest that it plays a potential role in defending rubber trees against R. microporus infection. The promoter contains WRKY-, MYB-, and other defense-related cis-acting elements. The structural model of the novel PR-10 protein predicted by I-TASSER showed a topology of the Bet v 1 protein family, including a conserved active site and a ligand-binding hydrophobic cavity. A novel protein in the PR-10 group increased sharply in rubber tree leaves during interaction with the white root rot pathogen, potentially contributing to host defense. The results of this study provide information useful for white root rot disease management of rubber trees in the future.

Molecular chaperones: !enhance! Defense
ROS-detoxifying enzymes: !enhance! Defense
Uncharacterized protein LOC110648447: !belongs to! PR-10 class
WRKY-, MYB-: !contain! cis-acting elements
Bet v 1 protein family: !structurally related to! Novel PR-10 protein 
Novel PR-10 protein: !increases sharply! During interaction with pathogen