Identifying available farmland suitable for agricultural machinery is the most promising way of optimizing agricultural production and increasing agricultural mechanization. Farmland consolidation suitable for agricultural machinery (FCAM) is implemented as an effective tool for increasing sustainable production and mechanized agriculture. By using the machine learning approach, this study assesses the suitability of farmland for agricultural machinery in land consolidation schemes based on four parameters, i.e., natural resource endowment, accessibility of agricultural machinery, socioeconomic level, and ecological limitations. And based on "suitability" and "potential improvement in farmland productivity", we classified land into four zones: the priority consolidation zone, the moderate consolidation zone, the comprehensive consolidation zone, and the reserve consolidation zone. The results showed that most of the farmland (76.41%) was either basically or moderately suitable for FCAM. Although slope was often an indicator that land was suitable for agricultural machinery, other factors, such as the inferior accessibility of tractor roads, continuous depopulation, and ecological fragility, contributed greatly to reducing the overall suitability of land for FCAM. Moreover, it was estimated that the potential productivity of farmland would be increased by 720.8 kg/ha if FCAM were implemented. Four zones constituted a useful basis for determining the implementation sequence and differentiating strategies for FCAM schemes. Consequently, this zoning has been an effective solution for implementing FCAM schemes. However, the successful implementation of FCAM schemes, and the achievement a modern and sustainable agriculture system, will require some additional strategies, such as strengthening farmland ecosystem protection and promoting R&D into agricultural machinery suitable for hilly terrain, as well as more financial support.

Farmland: !classified into! Four Zones 
Four Parameters: !assessed for! Suitability 
Slope: !indicates! Suitable for Agricultural Machinery 
Accessibility of Tractor Roads: !reduces! Overall Suitability 
Continuous Depopulation: !reduces! Overall Suitability 
Ecological Fragility: !reduces! Overall Suitability 
FCAM: !increases! Potential Productivity 
FCAM: !implemented as! Effective Tool 
Ecosystem Protection: !required for! Successful Implementation 
R&D: !promoted for! Agricultural Machinery 
Financial Support: !required for! Successful Implementation