Microplastics (MPs) and heavy metals (HMs) co-exist in sweet potato fields of China. As the main component of agricultural field mulch and one of the most polluting and harmful HMs, the effects of polyethylene microplastics (PE MPs) and cadmium (Cd) on sweet potato and soil environment are remains unclear. Here, pot and hydroponic experiments are used to explore the effects of original and weathered PE MPs on growth and Cd uptake of sweet potatoes. The results of pot experiments reveal that compared with the control (0%), 5% of weathered PE MPs can significantly increase soil electrical conductivity (EC); both 5% of the original PE MPs and weathered PE MPs can significantly reduce the concentration of Olsen phosphorus (P) and Olsen potassium (K) in soil, inhibit plant growth, but significantly increase Cd accumulation and glutathione (GSH) level in tissues of sweet potatoes, and also induce membrane lipid peroxidation. In addition, compared to 5% weathered PE MPs, 5% original PE MPs significantly reduce soil EC, growth and peroxidase level of sweet potatoes, but significantly increase Cd concentration in leaves and stems. The results of hydroponic experiment show that original PE MPs significantly increase the P, K, and Cd adsorption compared with weathered PE MPs, and Cd increases the original PE MPs accumulation in the root cortex but decrease PE MPs accumulation in shoots. To sum up, our study investigates the differences and reasons of the effects of original and weathered PE MPs on growth and Cd absorption of sweet potatoes.

Weathered PE MPs: !increase! soil EC 
Original PE MPs: !decrease! soil EC 
Weathered PE MPs: !reduce! Olsen P and K in soil 
Original PE MPs: !increase! Olsen P and K in soil 
Weathered/Original PE MPs: !inhibit! plant growth 
Weathered/Original PE MPs: !increase! Cd accumulation 
Weathered/Original PE MPs: !increase! GSH level 
Weathered/Original PE MPs: !induce! membrane lipid peroxidation 
Original PE MPs: !decrease! peroxidase level 
Original PE MPs: !increase! Cd concentration in leaves/stems 
Original PE MPs: !increase! P, K, and Cd adsorption 
Cd: !increase! original PE MPs accumulation in root cortex 
Cd: !decrease! PE MPs accumulation in shoots