Oil palm is the world's highest yielding oil crop and its palm oil has high nutritional value, making it an oilseed plant with important economic value and application prospects. After picking, oil palm fruits exposed to air will gradually become soft and accelerate the process of fatty acid rancidity, which will not only affect their flavor and nutritional value, but also produce substances harmful to the human body. As a result, studying the dynamic change pattern of free fatty acids and important fatty acid metabolism-related regulatory genes during oil palm fatty acid rancidity can provide a theoretical basis for improving palm oil quality and extending its shelf life. The fruit of two shell types of oil palm, Pisifera (MP) and Tenera (MT), were used to study the changes of fruit souring at different times points of postharvesting, combined with LC-MS/MS metabolomics and RNA-seq transcriptomics techniques to analyze the dynamic changes of free fatty acids during fruit rancidity, and to find out the key enzyme genes and proteins in the process of free fatty acid synthesis and degradation according to metabolic pathways. Metabolomic study revealed that there were 9 different types of free fatty acids at 0 hours of postharvest, 12 different types of free fatty acids at 24 hours of postharvest, and 8 different types of free fatty acids at 36 hours of postharvest. Transcriptomic research revealed substantial changes in gene expression between the three harvest phases of MT and MP. Combined metabolomics and transcriptomics analysis results show that the expression of SDR, FATA, FATB and MFP four key enzyme genes and enzyme proteins in the rancidity of free fatty acids are significantly correlated with Palmitic acid, Stearic acid, Myristic acid and Palmitoleic acid in oil palm fruit. In terms of binding gene expression, the expression of FATA gene and MFP protein in MT and MP was consistent, and both were expressed higher in MP. FATB fluctuates unevenly in MT and MP, with the level of expression growing steadily in MT and decreasing in MP before increasing. The amount of SDR gene expression varies in opposite directions in both shell types. The above findings suggest that these four enzyme genes and enzyme proteins may play an important role in regulating fatty acid rancidity and are the key enzyme genes and enzyme proteins that cause differences in fatty acid rancidity between MT and MP and other fruit shell types. Additionally, differential metabolite and differentially expressed genes were present in the three postharvest times of MT and MP fruits, with the difference occurring 24 hours postharvest being the most notable. As a result, 24 hours postharvest revealed the most obvious difference in fatty acid tranquility between MT and MP shell types of oil palm. The results from this study offer a theoretical underpinning for the gene mining of fatty acid rancidity of various oil palm fruit shell types and the enhancement of oilseed palm acid-resistant germplasm cultivation using molecular biology methods.

SDR: !represses! FATA
FATA: !enhances! Palmitic acid
FATB: !synthesizes! Stearic acid
MFP: !interacts with! Myristic acid
SDR: !localizes to! Palmitoleic acid
MT: !differs from! MP