Foxtail millet (<i>Setaria italica</i> L. beauv) is an important crop in underdeveloped countries; however, yield levels are low. The use of varied germplasm in a breeding approach is critical for increasing productivity. Foxtail millet can be cultivated effectively in a wide range of environmental circumstances but it is best suited to hot and dry climates. In the current study, multivariant traits were used to define 50 genotypes in the first year and 10 genotypes in the second year. The phenotypic correlations among all traits in the entire germplasm were assessed, and the data acquired for all quantitative characters were subjected to analysis of variance for augmented block design. Furthermore, WINDOWS STAT statistical software was used to carry out a principal component analysis (PCA). The presence of substantial variations in most symptoms was shown by analysis of variance. Genotypic coefficient of variation (GCV) projections for grain yields were the highest, followed by panicle lengths and biological yields. Plant height and leaf length had the highest PCV estimates, followed by leaf width. Low GCV and phenotypic coefficient of variation (PCV) were measured as leaf length and 50% flowering in days. According to the PCV study, direct selection based on characters, panicle weight, test weight, and straw weight had a high and positive effect on grain yield per plant in both the rainy and summer seasons, indicating the true relationship between these characters and grain yield per plant, which aids indirect selection for these traits and thus improves grain yield per plant. Variability in foxtail millet germplasm enables plant breeders to effectively select appropriate donor lines for foxtail millet genetic improvement. Based on the average performance of genotypes considered superior in terms of grain yield components under Prayagraj agroclimatic conditions, the best five genotypes were: Kangni-7 (GS62), Kangni-1 (G5-14), Kangni-6 (GS-55), Kangni-5 (GS-389), and Kangni-4 (GS-368).

Genotype: !correlates with! Phenotypic traits
Phenotypic traits: !affects! Grain yield
Grain yield: !enhanced by! Direct selection
Variability: !enables! Plant breeders
Plant breeders: !select! Donor lines