Chalk, an undesirable grain quality trait in rice, is primarily formed due to high temperatures during the grain-filling process. Owing to the disordered starch granule structure, air spaces and low amylose content, chalky grains are easily breakable during milling thereby lowering head rice recovery and its market price. Availability of multiple QTLs associated with grain chalkiness and associated attributes, provided us an opportunity to perform a meta-analysis and identify candidate genes and their alleles contributing to enhanced grain quality. From the 403 previously reported QTLs, 64 Meta-QTLs encompassing 5262 non-redundant genes were identified. MQTL analysis reduced the genetic and physical intervals and nearly 73% meta-QTLs were narrower than 5cM and 2Mb, revealing the hotspot genomic regions. By investigating expression profiles of 5262 genes in previously published datasets, 49 candidate genes were shortlisted on the basis of their differential regulation in at least two of the datasets. We identified non-synonymous allelic variations and haplotypes in 39 candidate genes across the 3K rice genome panel. Further, we phenotyped a subset panel of 60 rice accessions by exposing them to high temperature stress under natural field conditions over two Rabi cropping seasons. Haplo-pheno analysis uncovered haplotype combinations of two starch synthesis genes, <i>GBSSI</i> and <i>SSIIa</i>, significantly contributing towards the formation of grain chalk in rice. We, therefore, report not only markers and pre-breeding material, but also propose superior haplotype combinations which can be introduced using either marker-assisted breeding or CRISPR-Cas based prime editing to generate elite rice varieties with low grain chalkiness and high HRY traits.

QTLs: !associated with! grain chalkiness
Meta-QTLs: !encompassing! 5262 non-redundant genes
Expression profiles: !shortlisted! 49 candidate genes
Allelic variations: !identified in! 39 candidate genes
GBSSI/SSIIa: !contribute to! grain chalk formation