Symbiotic nodules formed on legume roots with rhizobia fix atmospheric N<sub>2</sub>. Bacteria reduce N<sub>2</sub> to NH<sub>4</sub> <sup>+</sup> that is assimilated into amino acids by the plant. In return, the plant provides photosynthates to fuel the symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Symbiosis is tightly adjusted to the whole plant nutritional demand and to the plant photosynthetic capacities, but regulatory circuits behind this control remain poorly understood. The use of split-root systems combined with biochemical, physiological, metabolomic, transcriptomic, and genetic approaches revealed that multiple pathways are acting in parallel. Systemic signaling mechanisms of the plant N demand are required for the control of nodule organogenesis, mature nodule functioning, and nodule senescence. N-satiety/N-deficit systemic signaling correlates with rapid variations of the nodules' sugar levels, tuning symbiosis by C resources allocation. These mechanisms are responsible for the adjustment of plant symbiotic capacities to the mineral N resources. On the one hand, if mineral N can satisfy the plant N demand, nodule formation is inhibited, and nodule senescence is activated. On the other hand, local conditions (abiotic stresses) may impair symbiotic activity resulting in plant N limitation. In these conditions, systemic signaling may compensate the N deficit by stimulating symbiotic root N foraging. In the past decade, several molecular components of the systemic signaling pathways controlling nodule formation have been identified, but a major challenge remains, that is, to understand their specificity as compared to the mechanisms of non-symbiotic plants that control root development and how they contribute to the whole plant phenotypes. Less is known about the control of mature nodule development and functioning by N and C nutritional status of the plant, but a hypothetical model involving the sucrose allocation to the nodule as a systemic signaling process, the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway, and the redox status as potential effectors of this signaling is emerging. This work highlights the importance of organism integration in plant biology.

N-satiety/N-deficit: !controls! nodule organogenesis 
N-satiety/N-deficit: !tunes! symbiosis 
sucrose allocation: !signals! systemic signaling 
oxidative pentose phosphate pathway: !regulates! redox status 
redox status: !affects! mature nodule development