Hypocotyl elongation is inhibited by light and promoted by darkness. The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) also inhibits hypocotyl elongation. However, details of the molecular mechanism that regulates the integrated effects of light and ABA signaling on hypocotyl elongation remain unclear. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs; >200 nt) do not encode proteins but play many physiological roles in organisms. Until now, only a few lncRNAs related to hypocotyl elongation have been reported. The lncRNAs BoNR8 (272 nt) and AtR8 (259 nt), both of which are transcribed by RNA polymerase III, are homologous lncRNAs that are abundantly present in cabbage and Arabidopsis, respectively. These lncRNAs shared 77% sequence identity and their predicted RNA secondary structures were similar; the non-conserved nucleotides in both sequences were positioned mainly in the stem-loop regions of the secondary structures. A previous study showed that BoNR8 regulated seed germination along with ABA, and that AtR8 may be involved in innate immune function in Arabidopsis. Our results show that the expression levels of BoNR8 and AtR8 were differentially affected by light and ABA, and that overexpression (OX) of both BoNR8 and AtR8 in Arabidopsis regulated hypocotyl elongation light- and ABA-dependently. The expression levels of light-related genes PHYB, COP1, HY5, and PIF4, and ABA-related genes ABI3 and ABI5 were altered in the AtR8-OX and BoNR8-OX lines, and, in an ABI3 defective mutant, hypocotyl elongation was greatly increased under dark with the addition of ABA. These results indicate that BoNR8 and AtR8 regulate hypocotyl elongation together with ABI3 and key downstream light signaling genes.

BoNR8: !regulates! seed germination
AtR8: !regulates! innate immune function
BoNR8: !affects! expression levels
AtR8: !affects! expression levels
Light: !inhibits! hypocotyl elongation
ABA: !inhibits! hypocotyl elongation
BoNR8: !regulates! hypocotyl elongation
AtR8: !regulates! hypocotyl elongation
PHYB: !altered by! BoNR8/AtR8 OX
COP1: !altered by! BoNR8/AtR8 OX
HY5: !altered by! BoNR8/AtR8 OX
PIF4: !altered by! BoNR8/AtR8 OX
ABI3: !altered by! BoNR8/AtR8 OX
ABI5: !altered by! BoNR8/AtR8 OX
ABI3: !increases! hypocotyl elongation