Iron deficiency is a major nutritional stress that severely impacts crop productivity worldwide. However, molecular intricacies and subsequent physiological and metabolic changes in response to Fe starvation, especially in leguminous crops like chickpea, remain elusive. In the present study, we investigated physiological, transcriptional, and metabolic reprogramming in two chickpea genotypes (H6013 and L4958) with contrasting seed iron concentrations upon Fe deficiency. Our findings revealed that iron starvation affected growth and physiological parameters of both chickpea genotypes. Comparative transcriptome analysis led to the identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the genotypes related to strategy I uptake, metal ions transporters, reactive oxygen species (ROS) associated genes, transcription factors, and protein kinases that could mitigate Fe deficiency. Our gene correlation network discovered several putative candidate genes like CIPK25, CKX3, WRKY50, NAC29, MYB4 and PAP18, which could facilitate the investigation of the molecular rationale underlying Fe tolerance in chickpea. Furthermore, the metabolite analysis also illustrated the differential accumulation of organic acids, amino acids and other metabolites associated with Fe mobilization in chickpea genotypes. Overall, our study demonstrated the comparative transcriptional dynamics upon Fe starvation. The outcomes of the current endeavour will enable the development of Fe deficiency tolerant chickpea cultivars.

Iron deficiency: !affects! Growth and physiological parameters 
Strategy I uptake: !related to! Differentially expressed genes 
Metal ions transporters: !associated with! Differentially expressed genes 
Reactive oxygen species: !associated with! Differentially expressed genes 
Transcription factors: !associated with! Differentially expressed genes 
Protein kinases: !associated with! Differentially expressed genes 
CIPK25: !correlated with! Putative candidate genes 
CKX3: !correlated with! Putative candidate genes 
WRKY50: !correlated with! Putative candidate genes 
NAC29: !correlated with! Putative candidate genes 
MYB4: !correlated with! Putative candidate genes 
PAP18: !correlated with! Putative candidate genes 
Organic acids: !accumulated in! Chickpea genotypes 
Amino acids: !accumulated in! Chickpea genotypes 
Metabolites: !accumulated in! Chickpea genotypes