Plants respond to changing light intensity in the short term through regulation of light harvesting, electron transfer, and metabolism to mitigate redox stress. A sustained shift in light intensity leads to a long-term acclimation response (LTR). This involves adjustment in the stoichiometry of photosynthetic complexes through de novo synthesis and degradation of specific proteins associated with the thylakoid membrane. The light-harvesting complex II (LHCII) serine/threonine kinase STN7 plays a key role in short-term light harvesting regulation and was also suggested to be crucial to the LTR. Arabidopsis plants lacking STN7 (stn7) shifted to low light experience higher photosystem II (PSII) redox pressure than the wild type or those lacking the cognate phosphatase TAP38 (tap38), while the reverse is true at high light, where tap38 suffers more. In principle, the LTR should allow optimisation of the stoichiometry of photosynthetic complexes to mitigate these effects. We used quantitative label-free proteomics to assess how the relative abundance of photosynthetic proteins varied with growth light intensity in wild-type, stn7, and tap38 plants. All plants were able to adjust photosystem I, LHCII, cytochrome b<sub>6</sub> f, and ATP synthase abundance with changing white light intensity, demonstrating neither STN7 nor TAP38 is crucial to the LTR per se. However, stn7 plants grown for several weeks at low light (LL) or moderate light (ML) still showed high PSII redox pressure and correspondingly lower PSII efficiency, CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation, and leaf area compared to wild-type and tap38 plants, hence the LTR is unable to fully ameliorate these symptoms. In contrast, under high light growth conditions the mutants and wild type behaved similarly. These data are consistent with the paramount role of STN7-dependent LHCII phosphorylation in tuning PSII redox state for optimal growth in LL and ML conditions.

STN7: !regulates! Light harvesting 
STN7: !affects! PSII redox pressure 
PSII: !affected by! STN7 
LHCII: !phosphorylated by! STN7 
TAP38: !cognate phosphatase of! STN7 
PSI, LHCII, cytochrome b<sub>6</sub> f, ATP synthase: !abundance adjusted by! changing light intensity 
stn7 plants: !experience higher! PSII redox pressure 
tap38 plants: !experience higher! PSII redox pressure