Potassium (K) is one of the most important macronutrients for plant development and growth. The influence mechanism of different potassium stresses on the molecular regulation and metabolites of apple remains largely unknown. In this research, physiological, transcriptome, and metabolite analyses were compared under different K conditions in apple seedlings. The results showed that K deficiency and excess conditions influenced apple phenotypic characteristics, soil plant analytical development (SPAD) values, and photosynthesis. Hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) content, peroxidase (POD) activity, catalase (CAT) activity, abscisic acid (ABA) content, and indoleacetic acid (IAA) content were regulated by different K stresses. Transcriptome analysis indicated that there were 2,409 and 778 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in apple leaves and roots under K deficiency conditions in addition to 1,393 and 1,205 DEGs in apple leaves and roots under potassium excess conditions, respectively. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment showed that the DEGs were involved in flavonoid biosynthesis, photosynthesis, and plant hormone signal transduction metabolite biosynthetic processes in response to different K conditions. There were 527 and 166 differential metabolites (DMAs) in leaves and roots under low-K stress as well as 228 and 150 DMAs in apple leaves and roots under high-K stress, respectively. Apple plants regulate carbon metabolism and the flavonoid pathway to respond to low-K and high-K stresses. This study provides a basis for understanding the metabolic processes underlying different K responses and provides a foundation to improve the utilization efficiency of K in apples.

K: !influences! apple phenotypic characteristics
K: !regulates! H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> content
K: !regulates! POD activity
K: !regulates! CAT activity
K: !regulates! ABA content
K: !regulates! IAA content
DEGs: !involved in! flavonoid biosynthesis
DEGs: !involved in! photosynthesis
DEGs: !involved in! plant hormone signal transduction metabolite biosynthetic processes
DMAs: !regulated by! low-K stress
DMAs: !regulated by! high-K stress
carbon metabolism: !responds to! low-K and high-K stresses
flavonoid pathway: !responds to! low-K and high-K stresses