Cyanide is a toxic chemical that inhibits cellular respiration. In plants, cyanide can be produced by themselves, especially under stressful conditions. Cyanoalanine synthase (CAS) is a key enzyme involved in plant cyanide detoxification. There are three genes encoding CAS in Arabidopsis thaliana, but the roles of these genes in the plant's response to stress are less studied. In addition, it is known that alternative oxidase (AOX) mediates cyanide-resistant respiration, but the relationship between CAS and AOX in regulating the plant stress response remains largely unknown. Here, the effects of the overexpression or mutation of these three CAS genes on salt stress tolerance were investigated. The results showed that under normal conditions, the overexpression or mutation of the CAS genes had no significant effect on the seed germination and growth of Arabidopsis thaliana compared with wild type (WT). However, under 50, 100, and 200 mM NaCl conditions, the seeds overexpressing CAS genes showed stronger salt stress resistance, i.e., higher germination speed than WT seeds, especially those that overexpressed the CYS-C1 and CYS-D1 genes. In contrast, the seeds with CAS gene mutations exhibited salt sensitivity, and their germination ability and growth were significantly damaged by 100 and 200 mM NaCl. Importantly, this difference in salt stress resistance became more pronounced in CAS-OE, WT, and mutant seeds with increasing salt concentration. The CAS-OE seeds maintained higher respiration rates than the WT and CAS mutant seeds under salt stress conditions. The cyanide contents in CAS mutant seeds were approximately 3 times higher than those in WT seeds and more than 5 times higher than those in CAS-OE seeds. In comparison, plants overexpressing CYS-C1 had the fastest detoxification of cyanide and the best salt tolerance, followed by those overexpressing CYS-D1 and CYS-D2. Furthermore, less hydrogen sulfide (H<sub>2</sub>S) was observed in CAS-OE seedlings than in WT seedlings under long-term salt stress conditions. Nonetheless, the lack of AOX impaired CAS-OE-mediated plant salt stress resistance, suggesting that CAS and AOX interact to improve salt tolerance is essential. The results also showed that CAS and AOX contributed to the reduction in oxidative damage by helping maintain relatively high levels of antioxidant enzyme activity. In summary, the findings of the present study suggest that overexpression of Arabidopsis CAS family genes plays a positive role in salt stress tolerance and highlights the contribution of AOX to CAS-mediated plant salt resistance, mainly by reducing cyanide and H<sub>2</sub>S toxicity.

CAS: !enhances! salt stress tolerance
CAS: !interacts with! AOX
AOX: !improves! CAS-mediated plant salt resistance
CAS: !reduces! cyanide and H<sub>2</sub>S toxicity
CAS: !maintains! antioxidant enzyme activity