Plants are sessile organisms that face environmental threats throughout their life cycle, but increasing global warming poses an even more existential threat. Despite these unfavorable circumstances, plants try to adapt by developing a variety of strategies coordinated by plant hormones, resulting in a stress-specific phenotype. In this context, ethylene and jasmonates (JAs) present a fascinating case of synergism and antagonism. Here, Ethylene Insensitive 3/Ethylene Insensitive-Like Protein1 (EIN3/EIL1) and Jasmonate-Zim Domain (JAZs)-MYC2 of the ethylene and JAs signaling pathways, respectively, appear to act as nodes connecting multiple networks to regulate stress responses, including secondary metabolites. Secondary metabolites are multifunctional organic compounds that play crucial roles in stress acclimation of plants. Plants that exhibit high plasticity in their secondary metabolism, which allows them to generate near-infinite chemical diversity through structural and chemical modifications, are likely to have a selective and adaptive advantage, especially in the face of climate change challenges. In contrast, domestication of crop plants has resulted in change or even loss in diversity of phytochemicals, making them significantly more vulnerable to environmental stresses over time. For this reason, there is a need to advance our understanding of the underlying mechanisms by which plant hormones and secondary metabolites respond to abiotic stress. This knowledge may help to improve the adaptability and resilience of plants to changing climatic conditions without compromising yield and productivity. Our aim in this review was to provide a detailed overview of abiotic stress responses mediated by ethylene and JAs and their impact on secondary metabolites.

EIN3/EIL1: !regulates! Stress Responses 
JAZs-MYC2: !regulates! Stress Responses 
Ethylene: !connects! Multiple Networks 
JAs: !connects! Multiple Networks 
Secondary Metabolites: !play crucial roles in! Stress Acclimation 
Domestication: !results in change or loss of! Phytochemicals 
Abiotic Stress: !impacts! Secondary Metabolites