Salt stress has a detrimental impact on crop yield, quality, and profitability. The tau-like glutathione transferases (GSTs) represent a significant group of enzymes that play a crucial role in plant stress responses, including salt stress. In this study, we identified a tau-like glutathione transferase family gene from soybean named <i>GmGSTU23</i>. Expression pattern analysis revealed that <i>GmGSTU23</i> was predominantly expressed in the roots and flowers and exhibited a concentration-time-specific pattern in response to salt stress. Transgenic lines were generated and subjected to phenotypic characterization under salt stress. The transgenic lines exhibited increased salt tolerance, root length, and fresh weight compared to the wild type. Antioxidant enzyme activity and malondialdehyde content were subsequently measured, and the data revealed no significant differences between the transgenic and wild-type plants in the absence of salt stress. However, under salt stress, the wild-type plants exhibited significantly lower activities of SOD, POD, and CAT than the three transgenic lines, whereas the activity of APX and the content of MDA showed the opposite trend. We identified changes in glutathione pools and associated enzyme activity to gain insights into the underlying mechanisms of the observed phenotypic differences. Notably, under salt stress, the transgenic Arabidopsis's GST activity, GR activity, and GSH content were significantly higher than those of the wild type. In summary, our findings suggest that <i>GmGSTU23</i> mediates the scavenging of reactive oxygen species and glutathione by enhancing the activity of glutathione transferase, thereby conferring enhanced tolerance to salt stress in plants.

GmGSTU23: !enhances! Salt tolerance
GmGSTU23: !enhances! Glutathione transferase activity
GmGSTU23: !scavenges! Reactive oxygen species
Wild type: !exhibits lower! SOD, POD, CAT activity
Wild type: !exhibits lower! GSH content
Transgenic lines: !exhibit higher! SOD, POD, CAT activity
Transgenic lines: !exhibit higher! GSH content