Understanding the normal variation of the sugarcane rhizosphere fungal community throughout its life cycle is essential for the development of agricultural practices for fungal and ecological health associated with the microbiota. Therefore, we performed high-throughput sequencing of 18S rDNA of soil samples using the Illumina sequencing platform for correlation analysis of rhizosphere fungal community time series, covering information from 84 samples in four growth periods. The results revealed that the sugarcane rhizosphere fungi possessed the maximum fungal richness in Tillering. Rhizosphere fungi were closely associated with sugarcane growth, including Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and Chytridiomycota, which showed high abundance in a stage-specific manner. Through the Manhattan plots, 10 fungal genera showed a decreasing trend throughout the sugarcane growth, and two fungal genera were significantly enriched at three stages of sugarcane growth (<i>p</i> < 0.05) including <i>Pseudallescheria</i> (Microascales, Microascaceae) and <i>Nectriaceae</i> (Hypocreales, Nectriaceae). In addition, soil pH, soil temperature, total nitrogen, and total potassium were critical drivers of fungal community structure at different stages of sugarcane growth. We also found that sugarcane disease status showed a significant and strong negative effect on selected soil properties by using structural equation modeling (SEM), suggesting that poor soil increases the likelihood of sugarcane disease. In addition, the assembly of sugarcane rhizosphere fungal community structure was mainly influenced by stochastic factors, but after the sugarcane root system became stable (Maturity), the stochastic contribution rate decreased to the lowest value. Our work provides a more extensive and solid basis for the biological control of sugarcane potential fungal diseases.

Sugarcane: !associated with! Fungal Community 
Fungal Community: !enriched at! 3 Stages 
Soil pH: !influences! Fungal Community Structure 
Soil Temperature: !influences! Fungal Community Structure 
Total Nitrogen: !influences! Fungal Community Structure 
Total Potassium: !influences! Fungal Community Structure 
Sugarcane Disease Status: !negatively affects! Soil Properties 
Stochastic Factors: !influence! Assembly of Sugarcane Rhizosphere Fungal Community