Crop wild relatives (CWRs), landraces and exotic germplasm are important sources of genetic variability, alien alleles, and useful crop traits that can help mitigate a plethora of abiotic and biotic stresses and crop yield reduction arising due to global climatic changes. In the pulse crop genus <i>Lens</i>, the cultivated varieties have a narrow genetic base due to recurrent selections, genetic bottleneck and linkage drag. The collection and characterization of wild <i>Lens</i> germplasm resources have offered new avenues for the genetic improvement and development of stress-tolerant, climate-resilient lentil varieties with sustainable yield gains to meet future food and nutritional requirements. Most of the lentil breeding traits such as high-yield, adaptation to abiotic stresses and resistance to diseases are quantitative and require the identification of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for marker assisted selection and breeding. Advances in genetic diversity studies, genome mapping and advanced high-throughput sequencing technologies have helped identify many stress-responsive adaptive genes, quantitative trait loci (QTLs) and other useful crop traits in the CWRs. The recent integration of genomics technologies with plant breeding has resulted in the generation of dense genomic linkage maps, massive global genotyping, large transcriptomic datasets, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), expressed sequence tags (ESTs) that have advanced lentil genomic research substantially and allowed for the identification of QTLs for marker-assisted selection (MAS) and breeding. Assembly of lentil and its wild species genomes (~4Gbp) opens up newer possibilities for understanding genomic architecture and evolution of this important legume crop. This review highlights the recent strides in the characterization of wild genetic resources for useful alleles, development of high-density genetic maps, high-resolution QTL mapping, genome-wide studies, MAS, genomic selections, new databases and genome assemblies in traditionally bred genus <i>Lens</i> for future crop improvement amidst the impending global climate change.

CWRs: !provide! genetic variability
Landraces: !provide! alien alleles
Exotic germplasm: !provide! useful crop traits
Genetic diversity studies: !help identify! stress-responsive adaptive genes
Genome mapping: !help identify! QTLs
High-throughput sequencing technologies: !help identify! QTLs
Genomics technologies: !integrate with! plant breeding
Genetic maps: !generate! dense genomic linkage maps
Transcriptomic datasets: !generate! single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
Expressed sequence tags (ESTs): !generate! large transcriptomic datasets
Lentil and wild species genomes: !assemble! (~4Gbp)