Clubroot disease, caused by Plasmodiophora brassicae Woronin, results in severe yield losses in Brassica crops, including canola. Silicon (Si) mitigates several stresses and enhances plant resistance to phytopathogens. We investigated the effects of Si on clubroot disease symptoms in canola at two concentrations of Si, Si: soil in 1:100 w/w (Si1.0) and Si: soil in 1:200 w/w (Si0.5) under greenhouse conditions. In addition, the effects of Si on P. brassicae-induced gene expression, endogenous levels of phytohormones and metabolites were studied using 'omics' approaches. Si application reduced clubroot symptoms and improved plant growth parameters. Gene expression analysis revealed increased transcript-level responses in Si1.0 compared to Si0.5 plants at 7-, 14- and 21-days post-inoculation (dpi). Pathogen-induced transcript-level changes were affected by Si treatment, with genes related to antioxidant activity (e.g., POD, CAT), phytohormone biosynthesis and signalling (e.g., PDF1.2, NPR1, JAZ, IPT, TAA), nitrogen metabolism (e.g., NRT, AAT) and secondary metabolism (e.g., PAL, BCAT4) exhibiting differential expression. Endogenous levels of phytohormones (e.g., auxin, cytokinin), a majority of the amino acids and secondary metabolites (e.g., glucosinolates) were increased at 7 dpi, followed by a decrease at 14- and 21 dpi due to Si-treatment. Stress hormones such as abscisic acid (ABA), salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA) also decreased at the later time points in Si0.5, and Si1.0 treated plants. Si appears to improve clubroot symptoms while enhancing plant growth and associated metabolic processes, including nitrogen metabolism and secondary metabolite biosynthesis.

Si: !mitigates! Stress 
Si: !enhances! Resistance 
P. brassicae: !induces! Gene Expression 
Gene: !affects! Antioxidant Activity 
Gene: !affects! Phytohormone Biosynthesis 
Gene: !affects! Nitrogen Metabolism 
Gene: !affects! Secondary Metabolism 
Si: !increases! Endogenous Phytohormones 
Si: !decreases! Stress Hormones