Cool-season pasture grasses contain arabinoxylans (AX) as their major cell wall hemicellulosic polysaccharide. AX structural differences may influence enzymatic degradability, but this relationship has not been fully explored in the AX from the vegetative tissues of cool-season forages, primarily because only limited AX structural characterization has been performed in pasture grasses. Structural profiling of forage AX is a necessary foundation for future work assessing enzymatic degradability and may also be useful for assessing forage quality and suitability for ruminant feed. The main objective of this study was to optimize and validate a high-performance anion-exchange chromatography with pulsed amperometric detection (HPAEC-PAD) method for the simultaneous quantification of 10 endoxylanase-released xylooligosaccharides (XOS) and arabinoxylan oligosaccharides (AXOS) in cool-season forage cell wall material. The following analytical parameters were determined or optimized: chromatographic separation and retention time (RT), internal standard suitability, working concentration range (CR), limit of detection (LOD), limit of quantification (LOQ), relative response factor (RRF), and quadratic calibration curves. The developed method was used to profile the AX structure of four cool-season grasses commonly grown in pastures (timothy, <i>Phleum pratense</i> L.; perennial ryegrass, <i>Lolium perenne</i> L.; tall fescue, <i>Schedonorus arundinaceus</i> (Schreb.) Dumort.; and Kentucky bluegrass, <i>Poa pratensis</i> L.). In addition, the cell wall monosaccharide and ester-linked hydroxycinnamic acid contents were determined for each grass. The developed method revealed unique structural aspects of the AX structure of these forage grass samples that complemented the results of the cell wall monosaccharide analysis. For example, xylotriose, representing an unsubstituted portion of the AX polysaccharide backbone, was the most abundantly-released oligosaccharide in all the species. Perennial rye samples tended to have greater amounts of released oligosaccharides compared to the other species. This method is ideally suited to monitor structural changes of AX in forages as a result of plant breeding, pasture management, and fermentation of plant material.

Arabinoxylans: !affects! Enzymatic Degradability 
High-Performance Anion-Exchange Chromatography: !quantifies! Xylooligosaccharides & Arabinoxylan Oligosaccharides 
Cell Wall Monosaccharide: !determines! Forage Quality 
Xylotriose: !represents! Unsubstituted Portion of Arabinoxylan Polysaccharide Backbone 
Perennial Rye: !tends to have! Greater Amounts of Released Oligosaccharides