Leaf stomatal and anatomical traits strongly influence plant productivity. Understanding the environmental adaptation mechanisms of leaf stomatal and anatomical traits and their relationship with ecosystem productivity is essential to better understand and predict the long-term adaptation strategies to climate change of moso bamboo forests. Here, we selected 6 sites within the moso bamboo distribution area, measured 3 leaf stomatal traits and 10 leaf anatomical traits of unmanaged moso bamboo stands. We explored the spatial variation characteristics of these traits and their response to environmental changes, assessed the relationships among these traits at regional scales through network analysis, and tested the direct and indirect effects of environmental, leaf stomatal and anatomical traits on gross primary productivity (GPP) of bamboo stands using structural equation modeling (SEM). The results showed that both climate and soil factors significantly affected leaf stomatal and anatomical traits of moso bamboo. Solar radiation (SR) and mean annual precipitation (MAP) out of the climatic factors were the key drivers of variation in leaf stomatal and anatomical traits, respectively. Soil moisture and nutrients out of the soil properties significantly affected both leaf stomatal and anatomical traits of moso bamboo. Network analysis further indicated that there was a significant correlation between leaf stomata and anatomical traits. Stomatal size (SS) showed the highest centrality value at the regional scale, indicating that it plays a key role in adjusting the adaptation of plants to external environmental conditions. SEM analysis showed that environment did not directly but indirectly affect GPP <i>via</i> stomatal performance. The environment explained 53.3% and 39.2% of the variation in leaf stomatal and anatomical traits, respectively, and leaf stomatal traits explained 20.8% of the regional variation in GPP. Our results demonstrate a direct effect of leaf stomatal traits rather than leaf anatomical traits on bamboo ecosystem productivity, which provides new insights into model predictions of bamboo forests under global climate change.

SR: !affects! Leaf stomatal traits
MAP: !affects! Leaf anatomical traits
Soil moisture: !affects! Leaf stomatal and anatomical traits
Soil nutrients: !affects! Leaf stomatal and anatomical traits
Stomatal size: !localizes to! Regional scale
Environment: !enhances! Stomatal performance
Leaf stomatal traits: !influences! GPP
Leaf anatomical traits: !represses! GPP