Chestnut (<i>Castanea mollissima</i> BL.) is an important woody grain, and its flower formation has a significant impact on fruit yield and quality. Some chestnut species in northern China re-flower in the late summer. On the one hand, the second flowering consumes a lot of nutrients in the tree, weakening the tree and thus affecting flowering in the following year. On the other hand, the number of female flowers on a single bearing branch during the second flowering is significantly higher than that of the first flowering, which can bear fruit in bunches. Therefore, these can be used to study the sex differentiation of chestnut. In this study, the transcriptomes, metabolomes, and phytohormones of male and female chestnut flowers were determined during spring and late summer. We aimed to understand the developmental differences between the first and secondary flowering stages in chestnuts. We analysed the reasons why the number of female flowers is higher in the secondary flowering than in the first flowering and found ways to increase the number of female flowers or decrease the number of male flowers in chestnuts. Transcriptome analysis of male and female flowers in different developmental seasons revealed that EREBP-like mainly affected the development of secondary female flowers and HSP20 mainly affected the development of secondary male flowers. KEGG enrichment analysis showed that 147 common differentially-regulated genes were mainly enriched from circadian rhythm-plant, carotenoid biosynthesis, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, and plant hormone signal transduction pathways. Metabolome analysis showed that the main differentially accumulated metabolites in female flowers were flavonoids and phenolic acids, whereas the main differentially accumulated metabolites in male flowers were lipids, flavonoids, and phenolic acids. These genes and their metabolites are positively correlated with secondary flower formation. Phytohormone analysis showed that abscisic and salicylic acids were negatively correlated with secondary flower formation. MYB305, a candidate gene for sex differentiation in chestnuts, promoted the synthesis of flavonoid substances and thus increased the number of female flowers. We constructed a regulatory network for secondary flower development in chestnuts, which provides a theoretical basis for the reproductive development mechanism of chestnuts. This study has important practical implications for improving chestnut yield and quality.

EREBP-like: !affects! secondary female flowers
HSP20: !affects! secondary male flowers
MYB305: !promotes! flavonoid synthesis
abscisic acid: !negatively correlates with! secondary flower formation
salicylic acid: !negatively correlates with! secondary flower formation