The expansion of agriculture is responsible for the mass conversion of biologically diverse natural environments into managed agroecosystems dominated by a handful of genetically homogeneous crop species. Agricultural ecosystems typically have very different abiotic and ecological conditions from those they replaced and create potential niches for those species that are able to exploit the abundant resources offered by crop plants. While there are well-studied examples of crop pests that have adapted into novel agricultural niches, the impact of agricultural intensification on the evolution of crop mutualists such as pollinators is poorly understood. We combined genealogical inference from genomic data with archaeological records to demonstrate that the Holocene demographic history of a wild specialist pollinator of <i>Cucurbita</i> (pumpkins, squashes, and gourds) has been profoundly impacted by the history of agricultural expansion in North America. Populations of the squash bee <i>Eucera pruinosa</i> experienced rapid growth in areas where agriculture intensified within the past 1,000 y, suggesting that the cultivation of <i>Cucurbita</i> in North America has increased the amount of floral resources available to these bees. In addition, we found that roughly 20% of this bee species' genome shows signatures of recent selective sweeps. These signatures are overwhelmingly concentrated in populations from eastern North America where squash bees were historically able to colonize novel environments due to human cultivation of <i>Cucurbita pepo</i> and now exclusively inhabit agricultural niches. These results suggest that the widespread cultivation of crops can prompt adaptation in wild pollinators through the distinct ecological conditions imposed by agricultural environments.

Agriculture: !creates! Niches
Crop plants: !provide! Resources
Agricultural intensification: !impacts! Pollinator evolution
Holocene demographic history: !influenced by! Agricultural expansion
Squash bee: !experiences! Rapid growth
Cucurbita: !cultivated in! North America
Squash bee genome: !shows! Selective sweeps
Eastern North America: !hosts! Colonization of novel environments
Cultivation of crops: !prompts! Adaptation in wild pollinators