Cassava mosaic disease (CMD) of cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) has expanded across many continents. Sri Lankan cassava mosaic virus (SLCMV; family Geminiviridae), which is the predominant cause of CMD in Thailand, has caused agricultural and economic damage in many Southeast Asia countries such as Vietnam, Loas, and Cambodia. The recent SLCMV epidemic in Thailand was commonly found in cassava plantations. Current understanding of plant-virus interactions for SLCMV and cassava is limited. Accordingly, this study explored the metabolic profiles of SLCMV-infected and healthy groups of tolerant (TME3 and KU50) and susceptible (R11) cultivars of cassava. Findings from the study may help to improve cassava breeding, particularly when combined with future transcriptomic and proteomic research. SLCMV-infected and healthy leaves were subjected to metabolite extraction followed by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography high-resolution mass spectrometry (UHPLC-HRMS/MS). The resulting data were analyzed using Compound Discoverer software, the mzCloud, mzVault, and ChemSpider databases, and published literature. Of the 85 differential compounds (SLCMV-infected vs healthy groups), 54 were differential compounds in all three cultivars. These compounds were analyzed using principal component analysis (PCA), hierarchical clustering dendrogram analysis, heatmap analysis, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway annotation. Chlorogenic acid, DL-carnitine, neochlorogenic acid, (E)-aconitic acid, and ascorbyl glucoside were differentially expressed only in TME3 and KU50, with chlorogenic acid, (E)-aconitic acid, and neochlorogenic acid being downregulated in both SLCMV-infected TME3 and KU50, DL-carnitine being upregulated in both SLCMV-infected TME3 and KU50, and ascorbyl glucoside being downregulated in SLCMV-infected TME3 but upregulated in SLCMV-infected KU50. Furthermore, 7-hydroxycoumarine was differentially expressed only in TME3 and R11, while quercitrin, guanine, N-acetylornithine, uridine, vorinostat, sucrose, and lotaustralin were differentially expressed only in KU50 and R11. Metabolic profiling of three cassava landrace cultivars (TME3, KU50, and R11) was performed after SLCMV infection and the profiles were compared with those of healthy samples. Certain differential compounds (SLCMV-infected vs healthy groups) in different cultivars of cassava may be involved in plant-virus interactions and could underlie the tolerance and susceptible responses in this important crop.

SLCMV: !causes! CMD
SLCMV: !infects! cassava
metabolites: !differ between! SLCMV-infected and healthy groups
chlorogenic acid: !downregulated in! SLCMV-infected TME3 and KU50
DL-carnitine: !upregulated in! SLCMV-infected TME3 and KU50
ascorbyl glucoside: !downregulated in! SLCMV-infected TME3, !upregulated in! SLCMV-infected KU50
7-hydroxycoumarine: !differentially expressed in! TME3 and R11
quercitrin: !differentially expressed in! KU50 and R11
guanine: !differentially expressed in! KU50 and R11
N-acetylornithine: !differentially expressed in! KU50 and R11
uridine: !differentially expressed in! KU50 and R11
vorinostat: !differentially expressed in! KU50 and R11
sucrose: !differentially expressed in!