Phenolic acids and flavonoids are large groups of secondary metabolites ubiquitous in the plant kingdom. They are currently in the spotlight due to the numerous health benefits associated with their consumption, as well as for their vital roles in plant biological processes and in plant-environment interaction. Tomato, eggplant and pepper are in the top ten most consumed vegetables in the world, and their fruit accumulation profiles have been extensively characterized, showing substantial differences. A broad array of genetic and genomic tools has helped to identify QTLs and candidate genes associated with the fruit biosynthesis of phenolic acids and flavonoids. The aim of this review was to synthesize the available information making it easily available for researchers and breeders. The phenylpropanoid pathway is tightly regulated by structural genes, which are conserved across species, along with a complex network of regulatory elements like transcription factors, especially of MYB family, and cellular transporters. Moreover, phenolic compounds accumulate in tissue-specific and developmental-dependent ways, as different paths of the metabolic pathway are activated/deactivated along with fruit development. We retrieved 104 annotated putative orthologues encoding for key enzymes of the phenylpropanoid pathway in tomato (37), eggplant (29) and pepper (38) and compiled 267 QTLs (217 for tomato, 16 for eggplant and 34 for pepper) linked to fruit phenolic acids, flavonoids and total phenolics content. Combining molecular tools and genetic variability, through both conventional and genetic engineering strategies, is a feasible approach to improve phenolics content in tomato, eggplant and pepper. Finally, although the phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathway has been well-studied in the Solanaceae, more research is needed on the identification of the candidate genes behind many QTLs, as well as their interactions with other QTLs and genes.

Phenolic acids: !associated with! health benefits 
Flavonoids: !associated with! health benefits 
QTLs: !linked to! fruit phenolic acids, flavonoids and total phenolics content 
Structural genes: !regulate! phenylpropanoid pathway 
Transcription factors: !regulate! phenylpropanoid pathway 
Cellular transporters: !regulate! phenylpropanoid pathway 
Phenolic compounds: !accumulate in! tissue-specific and developmental-dependent ways 
Molecular tools: !combined with! genetic variability 
Conventional strategies: !improve! phenolics content 
Genetic engineering strategies: !improve! phenolics content