Dry matter accumulation (DMA) and dry matter partitioning (DMP) are important physiological processes determining crop yield formation. Deep understanding of the DMA and DMP processes and their responses to drought are limited by difficulty in acquiring total root biomass. Pot experiments with treatments quitting and ceasing ear growth (QC) and controlling soil water (WC) during vegetative (VP) and reproductive (RP) growth stages of maize (Zea mays) were conducted in Jinzhou in 2019 and 2020 to investigate the effects of drought and rewatering on DMW and DMP of different organs. The response of DMW of reproductive organ to drought was more sensitive than those of vegetative organs, and was maintained after rehydration. Drought during VP (VPWC) reduced more sharply DMW of stalk than of leaves, and that during RP (RPWC) decreased more substantially leaves DMW. The effect of drought on DMPR was inconsistent with that on DMW for each organ. The DMP patterns of maize in different growth stages have adaptability to some level of water stress, and their responses increased with drought severity. Drought increased significantly DMP rates (DMPRs) of vegetative organs and reduced the ear DMPR and harvest index (HI), attributing to the suppressed photosynthates partitioning into ear and dry matter redistribution (DMRD) of vegetative organs, especially for stalk DMRD decreasing 26%. The persistence of drought impact was related to its occurrence stage and degree as well as the duration during rewatering to maturity. The aftereffect of drought during different growth periods on DMP were various, and that of VPWC enlarged and drastically induced the reduction of HI, also was larger than that of RPWC which demonstrated obvious alleviation in the previous responses of DMP and HI. Root-shoot ratio (RSR) increased under VPWC and RPWC and subsequent rehydration. The DMWs of stalk, roots and leaves were affected by VPWC in order from large to small, and were close to or larger than the controls after rehydration, indicating the compensation effect of rewatering after drought. The DMPRs, RSR AND HI are the important parameters in agricultural production, and are often used as the constants, but in fact they vary with plant growth. In addition, the interannual differences in ear and stalk DMPRs in response to drought were probably caused by the difference in degree and occurrence stage of drought, further reflecting the variation in response of allometry growth among organs to the environment. Besides, the persistence of drought impact was related to the occurrence stage and degree of drought, which is also associated with the duration during rewatering to maturity. Notably, the effect of drought on DMW was inconsistent with that on DMPR for each organ meaning that the two variables should be discussed separately. The QC did not affect total DMW but increased RSR, changed and intensified the effect and aftereffect of RPWC on DMP, respectively, indicating that the DMP pattern and its response to drought occur change under the condition of QC.

DMA: !determines! crop yield
DMP: !responds to! drought
DMW: !more sensitive to! reproductive organ
DMPR: !inconsistent with! DMW
VPWC: !reduces more sharply! stalk DMW
RPWC: !decreases substantially! leaves DMW
DMPR: !increases! with drought severity
DMRD: !decreases! 26%
Drought: !persistence related to! occurrence stage & degree
QC: !intensifies! effect of RPWC on DMP