Oat (<i>Avena sativa</i> L.) is an important cereal crop grown worldwide for grain and forage, owing to its high adaptability to diverse environments. However, the genetic and genomics research of oat is lagging behind that of other staple cereal crops. In this study, a collection of 288 oat lines originating worldwide was evaluated using 2,213 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers obtained from an oat iSelect 6K-beadchip array to study its genetic diversity, population structure, and linkage disequilibrium (LD) as well as the genotype-phenotype association for hullessness and lemma color. The average gene diversity and polymorphic information content (PIC) were 0.324 and 0.262, respectively. The first three principal components (PCs) accounted for 30.33% of the genetic variation, indicating that the population structure of this panel of oat lines was stronger than that reported in most previous studies. In addition, accessions could be classified into two subpopulations using a Bayesian clustering approach, and the clustering pattern of accessions was closely associated with their region of origin. Additionally, evaluation of LD decay using 2,143 mapped markers revealed that the intrachromosomal whole-genome LD decayed rapidly to a critical r<sup>2</sup> value of 0.156 for marker pairs separated by a genetic distance of 1.41 cM. Genome-wide association study (GWAS) detected six significant associations with the hullessness trait. Four of these six markers were located on the Mrg21 linkage group between 194.0 and 205.7 cM, while the other two significant markers mapped to Mrg05 and Mrg09. Three significant SNPs, showing strong association with lemma color, were located on linkage groups Mrg17, Mrg18, and Mrg20. Our results discerned relevant patterns of genetic diversity, population structure, and LD among members of a worldwide collection of oat landraces and cultivars proposed to be 'typical' of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. These results have important implications for further studies on association mapping and practical breeding in high-altitude oat.

SNP: !detected! genetic diversity
SNP: !associated with! hullessness trait
SNP: !associated with! lemma color
population structure: !stronger than! previous studies
LD: !decayed to! critical r2 value
GWAS: !detected! six significant associations