Grassland canopy height is a crucial trait for indicating functional diversity or monitoring species diversity. Compared with traditional field sampling, light detection and ranging (LiDAR) provides new technology for mapping the regional grassland canopy height in a time-saving and cost-effective way. However, the grassland canopy height based on unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) LiDAR is usually underestimated with height information loss due to the complex structure of grassland and the relatively small size of individual plants. We developed canopy height correction methods based on scan angle to improve the accuracy of height estimation by compensating the loss of grassland height. Our method established the relationships between scan angle and two height loss indicators (height loss and height loss ratio) using the ground-measured canopy height of sample plots with 1×1m and LiDAR-derived heigh. We found that the height loss ratio considering the plant own height had a better performance (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.71). We further compared the relationships between scan angle and height loss ratio according to holistic (25-65cm) and segmented (25-40cm, 40-50cm and 50-65cm) height ranges, and applied to correct the estimated grassland canopy height, respectively. Our results showed that the accuracy of grassland height estimation based on UAV LiDAR was significantly improved with R<sup>2</sup> from 0.23 to 0.68 for holistic correction and from 0.23 to 0.82 for segmented correction. We highlight the importance of considering the effects of scan angle in LiDAR data preprocessing for estimating grassland canopy height with high accuracy, which also help for monitoring height-related grassland structural and functional parameters by remote sensing.

scan angle: !affects! height loss ratio
height loss ratio: !improves! accuracy of grassland height estimation
ground-measured canopy height: !establishes relationships with! scan angle
UAV LiDAR: !underestimates! grassland canopy height
holistic correction: !improves! R<sup>2</sup> from 0.23 to 0.68
segmented correction: !improves! R<sup>2</sup> from 0.23 to 0.82