It is difficult for laser scanning confocal microscopy to obtain high- or ultra-high-resolution laser confocal images directly, which affects the deep mining and use of the embedded information in laser confocal images and forms a technical bottleneck in the in-depth exploration of the microscopic physiological and biochemical processes of plants. The super-resolution reconstruction model (SRGAN), which is based on a generative adversarial network and super-resolution reconstruction model (SRResNet), which is based on a residual network, was used to obtain single and secondary super-resolution reconstruction images of laser confocal images of the root cells of the hyperaccumulator <i>Solanum nigrum</i>. Using the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), structural similarity (SSIM) and mean opinion score (MOS), the models were evaluated by the image effects after reconstruction and were applied to the recognition of endocytic vesicles in <i>Solanum</i> nigrum root cells. The results showed that the single reconstruction and the secondary reconstruction of SRGAN and SRResNet improved the resolution of laser confocal images. PSNR, SSIM, and MOS were clearly improved, with a maximum PSNR of 47.690. The maximum increment of PSNR and SSIM of the secondary reconstruction images reached 21.7% and 2.8%, respectively, and the objective evaluation of the image quality was good. However, overall MOS was less than that of the single reconstruction, the perceptual quality was weakened, and the time cost was more than 130 times greater. The reconstruction effect of SRResNet was better than that of SRGAN. When SRGAN and SRResNet were used for the recognition of endocytic vesicles in <i>Solanum nigrum</i> root cells, the clarity of the reconstructed images was obviously improved, the boundary of the endocytic vesicles was clearer, and the number of identified endocytic vesicles increased from 6 to 9 and 10, respectively, and the mean fluorescence intensity was enhanced by 14.4% and 7.8%, respectively. Relevant research and achievements are of great significance for promoting the application of deep learning methods and image super-resolution reconstruction technology in laser confocal image studies.

SRGAN: !improves! Resolution
SRResNet: !improves! Resolution
SRGAN: !enhances! Recognition of endocytic vesicles
SRResNet: !enhances! Recognition of endocytic vesicles
PSNR: !increases! With SRGAN and SRResNet
SSIM: !increases! With SRGAN and SRResNet
MOS: !decreases! With secondary reconstruction