Low temperature (LT) stress is one of the major environmental stress factors affecting the growth and yield of maize (Zea mays L.). Hence, it is important to unravel the molecular mechanisms behind LT stress tolerance to improve molecular breeding in LT tolerant genotypes. In the present study, two maize genotypes viz. Gurez local from Kashmir Himalaya and tropical grown GM6, were dissected for their LT stress response in terms of accumulation of differentially regulated proteins (DRPs). Leaf proteome analysis at three-leaf stage of maize seedlings subjected to LT stress of 6 °C for a total of 12 h duration was performed using two dimensional gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) followed by subsequent identification of the proteins involved. After MALDI-TOF (Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight) and bioinformatics analysis, 19 proteins were successfully identified in Gurez local, while as 10 proteins were found to get successful identification in GM6. The interesting observations from the present investigation is the identification of three novel proteins viz. threonine dehydratase biosynthetic chloroplastic, thylakoidal processing peptidase 1 chloroplastic, and nodulin-like protein, whose role in abiotic stress tolerance, in general, and LT stress, in particular, has not been reported so far. It is important to highlight here that most of LT responsive proteins including the three novel proteins were identified from Gurez local only, owing to its exceptional LT tolerance. From the protein profiles, obtained in both genotypes immediately after LT stress perception, it was inferred that stress responsive protein accumulation and their expression fashion help the Gurez local in seedling establishment and withstand unfavorable conditions as compared to GM6. This was inferred from the findings of pathway enrichment analysis like regulation of seed growth, timing of floral transition, lipid glycosylation, and aspartate family amino acid catabolic processes, besides other key stress defense mechanisms. However, in GM6, metabolic pathways enriched were found to be involved in more general processes including cell cycle DNA replication and regulation of phenylpropanoid metabolism. Furthermore, majority of the qRT-PCR results of the selected proteins demonstrated positive correlation between protein levels and transcript abundance, thereby strengthening our findings. In conclusion, our findings reported majority of the identified proteins in Gurez local exhibiting up-regulated pattern under LT stress as compared to GM6. Furthermore, three novel proteins induced by LT stress were found in Gurez local, requiring further functional validation. Therefore, our results offer more insights for elucidating the molecular networks mediating LT stress tolerance in maize.

Gurez local: !accumulates! LT responsive proteins
GM6: !accumulates! LT responsive proteins
Gurez local: !induces! three novel proteins
LT stress: !regulates! seed growth
LT stress: !regulates! floral transition
LT stress: !regulates! lipid glycosylation
LT stress: !regulates! aspartate family amino acid catabolic processes
LT stress: !regulates! cell cycle DNA replication
LT stress: !regulates! phenylpropanoid metabolism
Protein levels: !correlate with! transcript abundance