Phosphorus (P) deficiency in desert ecosystems is widespread. Generally, desert species may allocate an enormous proportion of photosynthetic carbon to their root systems to adjust their P-acquisition strategies. However, root P-acquisition strategies of deep-rooted desert species and the coordination response of root traits at different growth stages to differing soil P availability remains unclear. In this study, a two-year pot experiment was performed with four soil P-supply treatments (0, 0.9, 2.8, and 4.7 mg P kg<sup>-1</sup> y<sup>-1</sup> for the control, low-, intermediate-, and high-P supply, respectively). Root morphological and physiological traits of one- and two-year-old Alhagi sparsifolia seedlings were measured. For two-year-old seedlings, control or low-P supply significantly increased their leaf Mn concentration, coarse and fine roots' specific root length (SRL), specific root surface area (SRSA), and acid phosphatase activity (APase), but SRL and SRSA of one-year-old seedlings were higher under intermediate-P supply treatment. Root morphological traits were closely correlated with root APase activity and leaf Mn concentration. One-year-old seedlings had higher root APase activity, leaf Mn concentration, and root tissue density (RTD), but lower SRL and SRSA. Two-year-old seedlings had higher root APase activity, leaf Mn concentration, SRL and SRSA, but a lower RTD. Root APase activity was significantly positively correlated with the leaf Mn concentration, regardless of coarse or fine roots. Furthermore, root P concentrations of coarse and fine roots were driven by different root traits, with root biomass and carboxylates secretion particularly crucial root traits for the root P-acquisition of one- and two-year-old seedlings. Variation of root traits at different growth stages are coordinated with root P concentrations, indicating a trade-off between root traits and P-acquisition strategies. Alhagi sparsifolia developed two P-activation strategies, increasing P-mobilizing phosphatase activity and carboxylates secretion, to acclimate P-impoverished in soil. The adaptive variation of root traits at different growth stages and diversified P-activation strategies are conducive to maintaining the desert ecosystem productivity.

root trait: !correlated with! root APase activity
root trait: !correlated with! leaf Mn concentration
root P concentration: !driven by! root biomass
root P concentration: !driven by! carboxylates secretion
P-activation strategy: !increases! P-mobilizing phosphatase activity
P-activation strategy: !increases! carboxylates secretion