The keys to alkali-stress resistance of barren-tolerant wild soybean lay in enhanced reutilization of reserves in cotyledons as well as improved antioxidant protection and organic acid accumulation in young roots. Soil alkalization of farmlands is increasingly serious, adversely restricting crop growth and endangering food security. Here, based on integrated analysis of transcriptomics and metabolomics, we systematically investigated changes in cotyledon weight and young root growth in response to alkali stress in two ecotypes of wild soybean after germination to reveal alkali-resistance mechanisms in barren-tolerant wild soybean. Compared with barren-tolerant wild soybean, the dry weight of common wild soybean cotyledons under alkali stress decreased slowly and the length of young roots shortened. In barren-tolerant wild soybean, nitrogen-transport amino acids asparagine and glutamate decreased in cotyledons but increased in young roots, and nitrogen-compound transporter genes and genes involved in asparagine metabolism were significantly up-regulated in both cotyledons and young roots. Moreover, isocitric, succinic, and L-malic acids involved in the glyoxylate cycle significantly accumulated and the malate synthetase gene was up-regulated in barren-tolerant wild soybean cotyledons. In barren-tolerant wild soybean young roots, glutamate and glycine related to glutathione metabolism increased significantly and the glutathione reductase gene was up-regulated. Pyruvic acid and citric acid involved in pyruvate-citrate metabolism increased distinctly and genes encoding pyruvate decarboxylase and citrate synthetase were up-regulated. Integrated analysis showed that the keys to alkali-stress resistance of barren-tolerant wild soybean lay in enhanced protein decomposition, amino acid transport, and lipolysis in cotyledons as well as improved antioxidant protection and organic acid accumulation in young roots. This study provides new ideas for the exploitation and utilization of wild soybean resources.

Gene: !enhances! Protein decomposition 
Gene: !enhances! Amino acid transport 
Gene: !enhances! Lipolysis 
Gene: !enhances! Antioxidant protection 
Gene: !enhances! Organic acid accumulation