Drought stress is one of the most serious environmental stress factors constraining crop production across the globe. Among cereals, wheat grains are very sensitive to drought as a small degree of stress can affect the enzymatic system. This study aimed to investigate whether nitrogen and pre-anthesis drought priming could enhance the action of major regulatory enzymes involved in starch accumulation and protein synthesis in bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). For this purpose, cultivars YM-158 (medium gluten) and YM-22 (low gluten) were grown in rain-controlled conditions under two nitrogen levels, i.e., N180 (N1) and N300 (N2). Drought priming was applied at the jointing stage and drought stress was applied seven days after anthesis. Drought stress reduced starch content but enhanced protein content in grains. N2 and primed plants kept higher contents of non-structural carbohydrates, fructans, and sucrose; with higher activity of sucrose-phosphate synthase in flag leaves. Furthermore, N2 and priming treatments showed higher sink ability to develop grains by showing higher sucrose-to-starch conversion activities of adenosine diphosphate-glucose pyrophosphorylase, uridine diphosphate glucose pyrophosphorylase, sucrose-synthase, soluble-starch synthase, starch branching enzyme and granule-bound starch synthase as compared to N1 and non-primed treatments. The application of N2 and primed treatment showed a greater ability to maintain grain filling in both cultivars as compared to N1 and non-primed crops. Our study suggested that high nitrogen has the potential to enhance the effect of pre-drought priming to change source-sink relationships and grain yield of wheat under drought stress during the filling process. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

N2: !enhances! pre-drought priming 
pre-drought priming: !maintains! grain filling 
N2: !increases! sink ability 
sink ability: !converts! sucrose to starch 
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !synthesizes! starch 
UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase: !synthesizes! starch 
sucrose synthase: !synthesizes! starch 
soluble starch synthase: !synthesizes! starch 
starch branching enzyme: !synthesizes! starch 
granule-bound starch synthase: !synthesizes! starch