In maize, intrinsic hormone activities and sap fluxes facilitate organogenesis patterning and plant holistic development; these hormone movements should be a primary focus of developmental biology and agricultural optimization strategies. Maize (Zea mays) is an important crop plant with distinctive life history characteristics and structural features. Genetic studies have extended our knowledge of maize developmental processes, genetics, and molecular ecophysiology. In this review, the classical life cycle and life history strategies of maize are analyzed to identify spatiotemporal organogenesis properties and develop a definitive understanding of maize development. The actions of genes and hormones involved in maize organogenesis and sex determination, along with potential molecular mechanisms, are investigated, with findings suggesting central roles of auxin and cytokinins in regulating maize holistic development. Furthermore, investigation of morphological and structural characteristics of maize, particularly node ubiquity and the alternate attachment pattern of lateral organs, yields a novel regulatory model suggesting that maize organ initiation and subsequent development are derived from the stimulation and interaction of auxin and cytokinin fluxes. Propositions that hormone activities and sap flow pathways control organogenesis are thoroughly explored, and initiation and development processes of distinctive maize organs are discussed. Analysis of physiological factors driving hormone and sap movement implicates cues of whole-plant activity for hormone and sap fluxes to stimulate maize inflorescence initiation and organ identity determination. The physiological origins and biogenetic mechanisms underlying maize floral sex determination occurring at the tassel and ear spikelet are thoroughly investigated. The comprehensive outline of maize development and morphogenetic physiology developed in this review will enable farmers to optimize field management and will provide a reference for de novo crop domestication and germplasm improvement using genome editing biotechnologies, promoting agricultural optimization.

Gene: !affects! Hormone activities 
Hormone activities: !stimulate! Maize organogenesis 
Auxin: !interacts with! Cytokinins 
Cytokinins: !regulate! Maize holistic development 
Sap fluxes: !facilitate! Organogenesis patterning 
Gene: !determines! Floral sex