Plant growth often encounters diverse abiotic stresses. As a global resource-based ecological problem, salinity is widely distributed and one of the major abiotic stresses affecting crop yields worldwide. Sorghum, a cereal crop with medium salt tolerance and great value for the development and utilization of salted soils, is an important source of food, brewing, energy, and forage production. However, in soils with high salt concentrations, sorghum experiences low emergence and suppressed metabolism. It has been demonstrated that the effects of salt stress on germination and seedling growth can be effectively mitigated to a certain extent by the exogenous amendment of hormonal gibberellin (GA). At present, most of the studies on sorghum salt tolerance at home and abroad focus on morphological and physiological levels, including the transcriptome analysis of the exogenous hormone on sorghum salt stress tolerance, the salt tolerance metabolism pathway, and the mining of key salt tolerance regulation genes. The high-throughput sequencing technology is increasingly widely used in the study of crop resistance, which is of great significance to the study of plant resistance gene excavation and mechanism. In this study, we aimed to review the effects of the exogenous hormone GA on leaf morphological traits of sorghum seedlings and further analyze the physiological response of sorghum seedling leaves and the regulation of sorghum growth and development. This review not only focuses on the role of GA but also explores the signal transduction pathways of GA and the performance of their responsive genes under salt stress, thus helping to further clarify the mechanism of regulating growth and production under salt stress. This will serve as a reference for the molecular discovery of key genes related to salt stress and the development of new sorghum varieties.

GA: !affects! Leaf morphological traits 
GA: !regulates! Sorghum growth and development 
Salt stress: !mitigates! Germination and seedling growth 
High-throughput sequencing: !used to! Study crop resistance 
Signal transduction pathways: !related to! GA response 
Key genes: !related to! Salt stress