Wheat is a major cereal that can narrow the gap between the increasing human population and food production. In this connection, assessing genetic diversity and conserving wheat genetic resources for future exploitation is very important for breeding new cultivars that may withstand the expected climate change. The current study evaluates the genetic diversity in selected wheat cultivars using ISSR and SCoT markers, the rbcL and matK chloroplast DNA barcoding, and grain surface sculpture characteristics. We anticipate that these objectives may prioritize using the selected cultivars to improve wheat production. The selected collection of cultivars may lead to the identification of cultivars adapted to a broad spectrum of climatic environments. Multivariate clustering analyses of the ISSR and SCoT DNA fingerprinting polymorphism grouped three Egyptian cultivars with cultivar El-Nielain from Sudan, cultivar Aguilal from Morocco, and cultivar Attila from Mexico. In the other group, cultivar Cook from Australia and cultivar Chinese-166 were differentiated from four other cultivars: cultivar Cham-10 from Syria, cultivar Seri-82 from Mexico, cultivar Inqalab-91 from Pakistan, and cultivar Sonalika from India. In the PCA analysis, the Egyptian cultivars were distinct from the other studied cultivars. The rbcL and matK sequence variation analysis indicated similarities between Egyptian cultivars and cultivar Cham-10 from Syria and cultivar Inqalab-91 from Pakistan, whereas cultivar Attila from Mexico was distinguished from all other cultivars. Combining the data of ISSR and SCoT with the rbcL and matK results retained the close resemblance among the two Egyptian cultivars EGY1: Gemmeiza-9 and EGY3: Sakha-93, and the Moroccan cultivar Aguilal, and the Sudanese cultivar El-Nielain and between Seri-82, Inqalab-91, and Sonalika cultivars. The analysis of all data distinguished cultivar Cham-10 from Syria from all other cultivars, and the analysis of grain traits indicated a close resemblance between cv. Cham-10 from and the two Egyptian cultivars Gemmeiza-9 and Sakha-93. The analysis of rbcL and matK chloroplast DNA barcoding agrees with the ISSR and the SCoT markers in supporting the close resemblance between the Egyptian cultivars, particularly Gemmeiza-9 and Sakha-93. The ISSR and SCoT data analyses significantly expressed high differentiation levels among the examined cultivars. Cultivars with closer resemblance may be recommended for breeding new wheat cultivars adapted to various climatic environments.

ISSR/SCoT: !grouped! Egyptian cultivars 
rbcL/matK: !similarities between! Egyptian, Syrian, Pakistani cultivars 
EGY1/EGY3: !close resemblance to! Moroccan, Sudanese cultivars 
Seri-82/Inqalab-91/Sonalika: !close resemblance to! each other 
Cham-10: !distinguished from! all other cultivars 
Grain traits: !close resemblance between! Cham-10 and EGY1/EGY3 
rbcL/matK: !agrees with! ISSR/SCoT 
ISSR/SCoT: !expressed high differentiation levels among! examined cultivars