Studying the genetic characteristics of tea plant (Camellia spp.) leaf traits is essential for improving yield and quality through breeding and selection. Guizhou Plateau, an important part of the original center of tea plants, has rich genetic resources. However, few studies have explored the associations between tea plant leaf traits and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers in Guizhou. In this study, we used the genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) method to identify 100,829 SNP markers from 338 accessions of tea germplasm in Guizhou Plateau, a region with rich genetic resources. We assessed population structure based on high-quality SNPs, constructed phylogenetic relationships, and performed genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Four inferred pure groups (G-I, G-II, G-III, and G-IV) and one inferred admixture group (G-V), were identified by a population structure analysis, and verified by principal component analyses and phylogenetic analyses. Through GWAS, we identified six candidate genes associated with four leaf traits, including mature leaf size, texture, color and shape. Specifically, two candidate genes, located on chromosomes 1 and 9, were significantly associated with mature leaf size, while two genes, located on chromosomes 8 and 11, were significantly associated with mature leaf texture. Additionally, two candidate genes, located on chromosomes 1 and 2 were identified as being associated with mature leaf color and mature leaf shape, respectively. We verified the expression level of two candidate genes was verified using reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and designed a derived cleaved amplified polymorphism (dCAPS) marker that co-segregated with mature leaf size, which could be used for marker-assisted selection (MAS) breeding in Camellia sinensis. In the present study, by using GWAS approaches with the 338 tea accessions population in Guizhou, we revealed a list of SNPs markers and candidate genes that were significantly associated with four leaf traits. This work provides theoretical and practical basis for the genetic breeding of related traits in tea plant leaves.

GBS: !identifies! SNP markers
Population structure analysis: !identifies! pure groups
GWAS: !identifies! candidate genes
candidate genes: !associated with! leaf traits
RT-qPCR: !verifies! expression level
dCAPS marker: !co-segregates with! mature leaf size