Synergetic elongation of mesocotyl and coleoptile are crucial in governing maize seedlings emergence, especially for the maize sown in deep soil. Studying the genomic regions controlling maize deep-sowing tolerance would aid the development of new varieties that are resistant to harsh conditions, such as drought and low temperature during seed germination. Using 346 F<sub>2:3</sub> maize population families from W64A × K12 cross at three sowing depths, we identified 33 quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for the emergence rate, mesocotyl, coleoptile, and seedling lengths via composite interval mapping (CIM). These loci explained 2.89% to 14.17% of phenotypic variation in a single environment, while 12 of 13 major QTLs were identified at two or more sowing environments. Among those, four major QTLs in Bin 1.09, Bin 4.08, Bin 6.01, and Bin 7.02 supported pleiotropy for multiple deep-sowing tolerant traits. Meta-analysis identified 17 meta-QTLs (MQTLs) based on 130 original QTLs from present and previous studies. RNA-Sequencing of mesocotyl and coleoptile in both parents (W64A and K12) at 3 cm and 20 cm sowing environments identified 50 candidate genes expressed differentially in all major QTLs and MQTLs regions: six involved in the circadian clock, 27 associated with phytohormones biosynthesis and signal transduction, seven controlled lignin biosynthesis, five regulated cell wall organization formation and stabilization, three were responsible for sucrose and starch metabolism, and two in the antioxidant enzyme system. These genes with highly interconnected networks may form a complex molecular mechanism of maize deep-sowing tolerance. Findings of this study will facilitate the construction of molecular modules for deep-sowing tolerance in maize. The major QTLs and MQTLs identified could be used in marker-assisted breeding to develop elite maize varieties.

Synergetic elongation: !governs! maize seedlings emergence
QTLs: !explain! phenotypic variation
Meta-analysis: !identifies! MQTLs
RNA-Sequencing: !identifies! candidate genes
Circadian clock: !involved in! phytohormones biosynthesis
Lignin biosynthesis: !controlled by! cell wall organization
Sucrose/starch metabolism: !regulated by! antioxidant enzyme system
Molecular mechanism: !forms! deep-sowing tolerance