In coastal saline lands, organic matter is scarce and saline stress is high. Exploring the promotion effect of intervention with organic acid from biological materials on soil improvement and thus forage output and determining the related mechanism are beneficial to the potential cultivation and resourceful, high-value utilization of coastal mudflats as back-up arable land. Three exogenous organic acids [humic acid (H), fulvic acid (F), and citric acid (C)] were combined with four kinds of biomass materials [cottonseed hull (CH), cow manure (CM), grass charcoal (GC), and pine needle (PN)] and applied to about 0.3% of medium-salt mudflat soil. The salinity and nutrient dynamics of the soil and the growth and physiological differences of sweet sorghum at the seedling, elongation, and heading stages were observed under different treatments to screen for efficient combinations and analyze the intrinsic causes and influencing mechanisms. The soil salinity, nutrient dynamics, and forage grass biological yield during sweet sorghum cultivation in saline soils differed significantly (<i>p</i> < 0.05) depending on the type of organic acid-biomass composite applied. Citric acid-pine needle composite substantially reduced the soil salinity and increased the soil nutrient content at the seedling stage and improved the root vigor and photosynthesis of sweet sorghum by increasing its stress tolerance, allowing plant morphological restructuring for a high biological yield. The improvement effect of fulvic acid-pine needle or fulvic acid-cow manure composite was manifested at the elongation and heading stages. Citric acid-pine needle composite promoted the growth of saline sweet sorghum seedlings, and the effect of fulvic acid-pine needle composite lasted until the middle and late stages.

humic acid: !combined with! biomass materials 
fulvic acid: !combined with! biomass materials 
citric acid: !combined with! biomass materials 
biomass materials: !combined with! humic acid 
biomass materials: !combined with! fulvic acid 
biomass materials: !combined with! citric acid 
soil salinity: !reduced by! citric acid-pine needle composite 
soil nutrient content: !increased by! citric acid-pine needle composite 
root vigor: !improved by! citric acid-pine needle composite 
photosynthesis: !improved by! citric acid-pine needle composite 
stress tolerance: !increased by! citric acid-pine needle composite 
plant morphological restructuring: !promoted by! citric acid-pine needle composite 
biological yield: !increased by! citric acid-pine needle composite 
growth of saline sweet sorghum seedlings: !promoted by! citric acid-pine needle composite 
effect of fulvic acid-pine needle composite: !lasted until! middle and late stages