Tomato is a globally grown vegetable crop with high economic and nutritional values. Tomato production is being threatened by weeds. This effect is more pronounced in the early stages of tomato plant growth. Thus weed management in the early stages of tomato plant growth is very critical. The increasing labor cost of manual weeding and the negative impact on human health and the environment caused by the overuse of herbicides are driving the development of smart weeders. The core task that needs to be addressed in developing a smart weeder is to accurately distinguish vegetable crops from weeds in real time. In this study, a new approach is proposed to locate tomato and pakchoi plants in real time based on an integrated sensing system consisting of camera and color mark sensors. The selection scheme of reference, color, area, and category of plant labels for sensor identification was examined. The impact of the number of sensors and the size of the signal tolerance region on the system recognition accuracy was also evaluated. The experimental results demonstrated that the color mark sensor using the main stem of tomato as the reference exhibited higher performance than that of pakchoi in identifying the plant labels. The scheme of applying white topical markers on the lower main stem of the tomato plant is optimal. The effectiveness of the six sensors used by the system to detect plant labels was demonstrated. The computer vision algorithm proposed in this study was specially developed for the sensing system, yielding the highest overall accuracy of 95.19% for tomato and pakchoi localization. The proposed sensor-based system is highly accurate and reliable for automatic localization of vegetable plants for weed control in real time.

Camera: !identifies! Plant Labels 
Color Mark Sensor: !uses! Main Stem of Tomato 
White Topical Markers: !applied to! Lower Main Stem of Tomato Plant 
Sensing System: !detects! Plant Labels 
Computer Vision Algorithm: !developed for! Sensing System 
System: !yields! Highest Overall Accuracy