Leaf area index (LAI) is an essential indicator for crop growth monitoring and yield prediction. Real-time, non-destructive, and accurate monitoring of crop LAI is of great significance for intelligent decision-making on crop fertilization, irrigation, as well as for predicting and warning grain productivity. This study aims to investigate the feasibility of using spectral and texture features from unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) multispectral imagery combined with machine learning modeling methods to achieve maize LAI estimation. In this study, remote sensing monitoring of maize LAI was carried out based on a UAV high-throughput phenotyping platform using different varieties of maize as the research target. Firstly, the spectral parameters and texture features were extracted from the UAV multispectral images, and the Normalized Difference Texture Index (NDTI), Difference Texture Index (DTI) and Ratio Texture Index (RTI) were constructed by linear calculation of texture features. Then, the correlation between LAI and spectral parameters, texture features and texture indices were analyzed, and the image features with strong correlation were screened out. Finally, combined with machine learning method, LAI estimation models of different types of input variables were constructed, and the effect of image features combination on LAI estimation was evaluated. The results revealed that the vegetation indices based on the red (650 nm), red-edge (705 nm) and NIR (842 nm) bands had high correlation coefficients with LAI. The correlation between the linearly transformed texture features and LAI was significantly improved. Besides, machine learning models combining spectral and texture features have the best performance. Support Vector Machine (SVM) models of vegetation and texture indices are the best in terms of fit, stability and estimation accuracy (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.813, RMSE = 0.297, RPD = 2.084). The results of this study were conducive to improving the efficiency of maize variety selection and provide some reference for UAV high-throughput phenotyping technology for fine crop management at the field plot scale. The results give evidence of the breeding efficiency of maize varieties and provide a certain reference for UAV high-throughput phenotypic technology in crop management at the field scale.

UAV: !extracts! spectral parameters 
UAV: !extracts! texture features 
texture features: !linearly transformed to! NDTI, DTI, RTI 
LAI: !correlated with! spectral parameters 
LAI: !correlated with! texture features 
LAI: !correlated with! texture indices 
machine learning: !combines with! spectral and texture features 
SVM: !best model for! LAI estimation