Switch defective/sucrose non-fermentable (SWI/SNF) complexes are evolutionarily conserved multi-subunit machines that play vital roles in chromatin architecture regulation for modulating gene expression via sliding or ejection of nucleosomes in eukaryotes. In plants, perturbations of SWI/SNF subunits often result in severe developmental disorders. However, the subunit composition, pathways of assembly, and genomic targeting of the plant SWI/SNF complexes are poorly understood. Here, we report the organization, genomic targeting and assembly of three distinct SWI/SNF complexes in Arabidopsis thaliana: BRAHMA-Associated SWI/SNF complexes (BAS), SPLAYED-Associated SWI/SNF complexes (SAS), and MINUSCULE-Associated SWI/SNF complexes (MAS). We show that BAS complexes are equivalent to human ncBAF, whereas SAS and MAS complexes evolve in multiple subunits unique to plants, suggesting plant-specific functional evolution of SWI/SNF complexes. We further show overlapping and specific genomic targeting of the three plant SWI/SNF complexes on chromatin and reveal that SAS complexes are necessary for the correct genomic localization of the BAS complexes. Finally, we define the role of the core module subunit in the assembly of plant SWI/SNF complexes and highlight that ATPase module subunit is required for global complex stability and the interaction of core module subunits in Arabidopsis SAS and BAS complexes. Together, our work highlights the divergence of SWI/SNF chromatin remodelers during eukaryote evolution and provides a comprehensive landscape for understanding plant SWI/SNF complex organization, assembly, genomic targeting, and function.

BRAHMA-Associated SWI/SNF complexes: !equivalent to! human ncBAF
SPLAYED-Associated SWI/SNF complexes: !evolve in! multiple subunits 
BAS complexes: !target! chromatin 
SAS complexes: !necessary for! correct genomic localization of BAS complexes 
core module subunit: !assembles! plant SWI/SNF complexes 
ATPase module subunit: !stabilizes! global complex 
ATPase module subunit: !interacts with! core module subunits