Polyprenylated xanthones are natural products with a multitude of biological and pharmacological activities. However, their biosynthetic pathway is not completely understood. In this study, metabolic profiling revealed the presence of 4-prenylated 1,3,5,6-tetrahydroxyxanthone derivatives in St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) root extracts. Transcriptomic data mining led to the detection of five variants of xanthone 4-prenyltransferase (HpPT4px) comprising four long variants (HpPT4px-v1 to HpPT4px-v4) and one short variant (HpPT4px-sh). The full-length sequences of all five variants were cloned and heterologously expressed in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Microsomes containing HpPT4px-v2, HpPT4px-v4, and HpPT4px-sh catalyzed the addition of a prenyl group at the C-4 position of 1,3,5,6-tetrahydroxyxanthone, 1,3,5-trihydroxyxanthone, and 1,3,7-trihydroxyxanthone, whereas microsomes harboring HpPT4px-v1 and HpPT4px-v3 additionally accepted 1,3,6,7-tetrahydroxyxanthone. HpPT4px-v1 produced in Nicotiana benthamiana displayed the same activity as in yeast, while HpPT4px-sh was inactive. The kinetic parameters of HpPT4px-v1 and HpPT4px-sh chosen as representative variants indicated 1,3,5,6-tetrahydroxyxanthone as the preferred acceptor substrate, rationalizing that HpPT4px catalyzes the first prenylation step in the biosynthesis of polyprenylated xanthones in H. perforatum. Dimethylallyl pyrophosphate was the exclusive prenyl donor. Expression of the HpPT4px transcripts was highest in roots and leaves, raising the question of product translocation. C-terminal yellow fluorescent protein fusion of HpPT4px-v1 localized to the envelope of chloroplasts in N. benthamiana leaves, whereas short, truncated, and masked signal peptides led to the disruption of plastidial localization. These findings pave the way for a better understanding of the prenylation of xanthones in plants and the identification of additional xanthone-specific prenyltransferases.

HpPT4px: !catalyzes! prenylation of xanthones 
HpPT4px: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
Dimethylallyl pyrophosphate: !donates! prenyl group 
1,3,5,6-tetrahydroxyxanthone: !accepts! prenyl group 
HpPT4px: !synthesizes! 4-prenylated 1,3,5,6-tetrahydroxyxanthone derivatives 
HpPT4px: !enhances! biosynthesis of polyprenylated xanthones 
Transcriptomic data mining: !detects! five variants of HpPT4px