RWP-RKs are plant specific transcription factors, which are widely distributed in plants in the form of polygenic families and play key role in nitrogen absorption and utilization, and are crucial to plant growth and development. However, the genome-wide identification and function of RWP-RK in Compositae plants are widely unknown. In this study, 101 RWP-RKs in Chrysanthemum lavandulifolium were identified and tandem repeat was an important way for the expansion of RWP-RKs in Compositae species. 101 RWP-RKs contain 38 NIN-like proteins (NLPs) and 31 RWP- RK domain proteins (RKDs), as well as 32 specific expansion members. qRT-PCR results showed that 7 ClNLPs in leaves were up-regulated at the floral transition stage, 10 ClNLPs were negatively regulated by low nitrate conditions, and 3 of them were up-regulated by optimal nitrate conditions. In addition, the flowering time of Chrysanthemum lavandulifolium was advanced under optimal nitrate conditions, the expression level of Cryptochromes (ClCRYs), phytochrome C (ClPHYC) and the floral integration genes GIGANTEA (ClGI), CONSTANS-LIKE (ClCOL1, ClCOL4, ClCOL5), FLOWERING LOCUS T (ClFT), FLOWERING LOCUS C (ClFLC), SUPPRESSOR OF OVER-EXPRESSION OF CONSTANS 1 (ClSOC1) also were up-regulated. The expression level of ClCRY1a, ClCRY1c, ClCRY2a and ClCRY2c in the vegetative growth stage induced by optimal nitrate reached the expression level induced by short-day in the reproductive growth stage, which supplemented the induction effect of short-day on the transcription level of floral-related genes in advance. It was speculated that ClNLPs may act on the photoperiodic pathway under optimal nitrate environment, and ultimately regulate the flowering time by up-regulating the transcription level of ClCRYs. These results provide new perspective for exploring the mechanism of nitrate/nitrogen affecting flowering in higher plants.

RWP-RKs: !play key role in! nitrogen absorption and utilization 
RWP-RKs: !widely distributed in! plants 
ClNLPs: !up-regulated at! floral transition stage 
ClNLPs: !negatively regulated by! low nitrate conditions 
ClNLPs: !up-regulated by! optimal nitrate conditions 
ClNLPs: !act on! photoperiodic pathway 
ClNLPs: !regulate! flowering time