Gene duplication is a source of evolutionary novelty. DNA methylation may play a role in the evolution of duplicate genes (paralogs) through its association with gene expression. While this relationship has been examined to varying extents in a few individual species, the generalizability of these results at either a broad phylogenetic scale with species of differing duplication histories or across a population remains unknown. We applied a comparative epigenomics approach to 43 angiosperm species across the phylogeny and a population of 928 Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) accessions, examining the association of DNA methylation with paralog evolution. Genic DNA methylation was differentially associated with duplication type, the age of duplication, sequence evolution, and gene expression. Whole genome duplicates were typically enriched for CG-only gene-body methylated or unmethylated genes, while single-gene duplications were typically enriched for non-CG methylated or unmethylated genes. Non-CG methylation, in particular, was characteristic of more recent single-gene duplicates. Core angiosperm gene families differentiated into those which preferentially retain paralogs and 'duplication-resistant' families, which convergently reverted to singletons following duplication. Duplication-resistant families that still have paralogous copies were, uncharacteristically for core angiosperm genes, enriched for non-CG methylation. Non-CG methylated paralogs had higher rates of sequence evolution, higher frequency of presence-absence variation, and more limited expression. This suggests that silencing by non-CG methylation may be important to maintaining dosage following duplication and be a precursor to fractionation. Our results indicate that genic methylation marks differing evolutionary trajectories and fates between paralogous genes and have a role in maintaining dosage following duplication.

Gene: !affects! Duplication type
DNA methylation: !associates with! Gene expression
Duplication type: !enriches for! CG-only gene-body methylated/unmethylated genes
Single-gene duplication: !enriches for! Non-CG methylated/unmethylated genes
Non-CG methylation: !characteristic of! Recent single-gene duplicates
Core angiosperm gene families: !differentiate into! Those which retain paralogs/'duplication-resistant' families
Duplication-resistant families: !enriched for! Non-CG methylation
Non-CG methylated paralogs: !have higher rates of! Sequence evolution
Non-CG methylated paralogs: !have higher frequency of! Presence-absence variation
Non-CG methylated paralogs: !have more limited! Expression
Genic methylation: !marks differing evolutionary trajectories and fates between! Paralogous genes