Low selenium (Se) concentrations in soils and plants pose a health risk for ruminants consuming locally-grown forages. Previous studies have shown that Se concentrations in forages can be increased using soil-applied selenate amendments. However, the effects of foliar selenate amendments applied with traditional nitrogen-phosphorus-potassium-sulfur (NPKS) fertilizers on forage yields, and nutrient contents, and agronomic efficiencies are unknown. Using a split plot design, we determined the effects of springtime sodium selenate foliar amendment rates (0, 45, and 90 g Se ha<sup>-1</sup>) and NPKS application (none, NPK for grasses/PK for alfalfa, and NPKS/PKS fertilization at amounts adapted to meet local forage and soil requirements) on forage growth and N, S, and Se concentrations, yields, and agronomic efficiencies. This 2-year study was conducted across Oregon on four representative forage fields: orchardgrass (<i>Dactylis glomerata</i> L.) in Terrebonne (central Oregon), grass-clover mixture in Roseburg (southwestern Oregon), and both grass mixture and alfalfa (<i>Medicago sativa</i> L.) fields in Union (eastern Oregon). Grasses grew poorly and were low in N content without NPK fertilization. Fertilization with NPK/PK promoted forage growth, increased forage N concentrations, and had to be co-applied with S when plant available S was low. Without Se amendment, forage Se concentrations were low and further decreased with NPKS/PKS fertilization. Selenate amendment linearly increased forage Se concentration without adversely affecting forage yields, N and S concentrations, or N and S agronomic efficiencies. Importantly, S fertilization did not interfere with Se uptake in Se amended plots. In conclusion, co-application of NPKS/PKS fertilizers and foliar sodium selenate in springtime is an effective strategy to increase forage total Se concentrations, while maintaining optimal growth and quality of Oregon forages.

NPK/PK: !promotes! forage growth
NPK/PK: !increases! forage N concentrations
Selenate amendment: !linearly increases! forage Se concentration
Selenate amendment: !maintains! forage growth and quality
S fertilization: !does not interfere with! Se uptake