Maize has a high demand for nitrogen during the growth period. The study of metabolic changes in maize can provide a theoretical basis for rational nitrogen nutrition regulation. In order to investigate the changes of different metabolites and their metabolic pathways in maize leaves under nitrogen stress, we used ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-QTOF-MS) for metabolomic analysis of maize leaves under different nitrogen treatments at three critical growth stages (V4, V12 and R1) in a pot experiment under natural conditions. The results showed that nitrogen stress significantly affected sugar metabolism and nitrogen metabolism, and affected carbon and nitrogen balance, and the effects of stress on maize leaves metabolism increased with the growth process. Metabolic pathways such as the TCA cycle and starch and sucrose metabolism were mainly affected at the seeding stage (V4). The stress response to nitrogen deficiency also showed significant upregulation of flavonoids such as luteolin and astragalin during the booting stage (V12) and anthesis-silking stage (R1). During R1 stage, the synthesis of tryptophan and phenylalanine and the degradation of lysine were significantly affected. Compared with nitrogen stress, the metabolic synthesis of key amino acids and jasmonic acid were intensified and the TCA cycle was promoted under nitrogen sufficiency conditions. This study initially revealed that the response mechanism of maize to nitrogen stress at the metabolic level.

Nitrogen Stress: !affects! Sugar Metabolism 
Nitrogen Stress: !affects! Nitrogen Metabolism 
Nitrogen Stress: !affects! Carbon and Nitrogen Balance 
TCA Cycle: !affected by! Nitrogen Stress at Seeding Stage 
Flavonoids: !upregulated by! Nitrogen Stress at Booting and Anthesis-Silking Stages 
Tryptophan/Phenylalanine: !degraded by! Nitrogen Stress at R1 Stage 
Key Amino Acids/Jasmonic Acid: !synthesized by! Nitrogen Sufficiency 
TCA Cycle: !promoted by! Nitrogen Sufficiency