The unequal (asymmetric) distribution of cell structures and proteins within a cell is designated as cell polarity. Cell polarity is a crucial prerequisite for morphogenetic processes such as oriented cell division and directed cell expansion. Rho-related plants (ROPs) are required for cellular morphogenesis through the reorganization of the cytoskeleton and vesicle transport in various tissues. Here, I review recent advances in ROP-dependent tip growth, vesicle transport, and tip architecture. I report on the regulatory mechanisms of ROP upstream regulators found in different cell types. It appears that these regulators assemble in nanodomains with specific lipid compositions and recruit ROPs for activation in a stimulus-dependent manner. Current models link mechanosensing/mechanotransduction to ROP polarity signaling involved in feedback mechanisms via the cytoskeleton. Finally, I discuss ROP signaling components that are upregulated by tissue-specific transcription factors and exhibit specific localization patterns during cell division, clearly suggesting ROP signaling in division plane alignment. Advances box: Progress has been made in the characterization of upstream regulators of ROPase signaling in diverse tissues, revealing a common theme of RopGEF phosphoregulation by diverse kinases initiating various ROP signaling cascadesNovel insights link mechanosensing/signal transduction pathways, ROP signaling, and cell wall-reinforcing feedback mechanismsIn response to different stimulants, ROP GTPases are recruited to distinct, pre-existing nanodomains composed of specific lipids and RopGEFs. Thus, one ROP GTPase may respond differently to different stimuliMaintenance of tip architecture in tip-growing cells requires secretory and endocytic trafficking, but the precise site of endocytosis may differ between cell types/speciesCell polarity signaling molecules locate at the cortical division site, or are particularly excluded from it; analysis of respective mutant phenotypes implicate the respective genes in division plane selection in different tissue contexts and diverse plant taxa, suggesting evolutionary conservation.

ROPs: !required for! cellular morphogenesis 
upstream regulators: !assemble in! nanodomains 
mechanosensing/mechanotransduction: !linked to! ROP polarity signaling 
tissue-specific transcription factors: !upregulate! ROP signaling components 
ROP GTPases: !recruited to! pre-existing nanodomains 
secretory and endocytic trafficking: !maintain! tip architecture 
cell polarity signaling molecules: !locate at! cortical division site