Expansins facilitate cell expansion by mediating pH-dependent cell wall (CW) loosening. However, the role of expansins in controlling CW biomechanical properties in specific tissues and organs remains elusive. We monitored hormonal responsiveness and spatial specificity of expression and localization of expansins predicted to be the direct targets of cytokinin signaling in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). We found EXPANSIN1 (EXPA1) homogenously distributed throughout the CW of columella/lateral root cap, while EXPA10 and EXPA14 localized predominantly at three-cell boundaries in the epidermis/cortex in various root zones. EXPA15 revealed cell type-specific combination of homogenous vs. three-cell boundaries localization. By comparing Brillouin frequency shift and AFM-measured Young's modulus, we demonstrated Brillouin light scattering (BLS) as a tool suitable for non-invasive in vivo quantitative assessment of CW viscoelasticity. Using both BLS and AFM, we showed that EXPA1 overexpression upregulated CW stiffness in the root transition zone. The dexamethasone-controlled EXPA1 overexpression induced fast changes in the transcription of numerous CW-associated genes, including several EXPAs and XYLOGLUCAN:XYLOGLUCOSYL TRANSFERASEs (XTHs), and associated with rapid pectin methylesterification determined by in situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy in the root transition zone. The EXPA1-induced CW remodeling associated with shortening of the root apical meristem, leading to root growth arrest. Based on our results, we propose that expansins control root growth by a delicate orchestration of CW biomechanical properties, possibly regulating both CW loosening and CW remodeling.

Expansins: !facilitate! Cell expansion 
EXPA1: !localizes to! Columella/lateral root cap 
EXPA10: !localizes to! Three-cell boundaries in epidermis/cortex 
EXPA15: !localizes to! Cell type-specific combination of homogenous vs. three-cell boundaries 
EXPA1: !enhances! CW stiffness 
EXPA1: !regulates! Transcription of numerous CW-associated genes 
EXPA1: !shortens! Root apical meristem 
Expansins: !orchestrate! CW biomechanical properties