Although root nodules are essential for biological nitrogen fixation in legumes, the cell types and molecular regulatory mechanisms contributing to nodule development and nitrogen fixation in determinate nodule legumes, such as soybean (Glycine max), remain incompletely understood. Here, we generated a single-nucleus resolution transcriptomic atlas of soybean roots and nodules at 14 days post inoculation (dpi) and annotated 17 major cell types, including six that are specific to nodules. We identified the specific cell types responsible for each step in the ureides synthesis pathway, which enables spatial compartmentalization of biochemical reactions during soybean nitrogen fixation. By utilizing RNA velocity analysis, we reconstructed the differentiation dynamics of soybean nodules, which is differed from those of indeterminate nodules in Medicago truncatula. Moreover, we identified several putative regulators of soybean nodulation and two of these genes, GmbHLH93 and GmSCL1, were as-of-yet uncharacterized in soybean. Overexpression of each gene in soybean hairy root systems validated their respective roles in nodulation. Notably, enrichment for cytokinin-related genes in soybean nodules led to identification of the cytokinin receptor, GmCRE1, as a prominent component of nodulation pathway. GmCRE1 knockout in soybean resulted in a striking nodule phenotype with decreased nitrogen fixation zone and markedly fewer symbionts, accompanied by downregulation of nodule-specific gene expression, as well as almost complete abrogation of biological nitrogen fixation. In summary, this study provides a comprehensive perspective of the cellular landscape during soybean nodulation, shedding light on the underlying metabolic and developmental mechanisms of soybean nodule formation. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

GmCRE1: !regulates! nodulation
GmHLH93: !promotes! nodulation
GmSCL1: !promotes! nodulation
cytokinin-related genes: !enriched in! soybean nodules
GmCRE1: !controls! nitrogen fixation
GmCRE1: !downregulates! nodule-specific gene expression