The floral volatile profile of Petunia x hybrida 'Mitchell diploid' (MD) is dominated by phenylpropanoids, many of which are derived from p-coumaric acid. However, the downstream processes involved in the production of caffeoyl-CoA and feruloyl-CoA from p-coumaric acid are complex, as the genes and biosynthesis steps are associated with flavonoids and lignin synthesis as well as floral volatiles benzenoid/phenylpropanoid (FVBP). Caffeoyl shikimate esterase (CSE) converts caffeoyl shikimate to caffeic acid and is considered one of the essential regulators in lignin production. Moreover, CSE in involved in phenylpropanoid production. To investigate the roles of CSE in FVBP biosynthesis, we used RNAi-mediated CSE down-regulated (ir-PhCSE) petunias. Lowered CSE transcript accumulation in ir-PhCSE plants resulted in reduced lignin layers in the stems and stunted growth, suggesting a positive correlation between lignin layers and lignin content. The altered CSE level influenced the expression of many FVBP genes, including elevated transcripts of p-coumarate-3-hydroxylase (C3H), hydroxycinnamoyl transferase (HCT), and 4-coumaric acid: CoA ligase (4CL). In particular, the expression of C4H in ir-PhCSE plants was more than twice the expression in MD plants. Moreover, the production of volatile compounds was alterend in ir-PhCSE plants. Most floral volatiles decreased, and the amounts of phenylalanine and caffeic acid were significantly lower. Reduced lignin layers in the stems and stunted growth in ir-PhCSE plants suggest that PhCSE is essential for lignin production and plant growth in petunia. The decreased CSE level influenced the expression of many FVBP genes, and interference of shikimate derivates altered volatile compound production. Significantly decreased caffeic acid, but not ferulic acid, in ir-PhCSE plants suggest that CSE is primarily involved in the reaction of caffeoyl shikimate. Higher C3H and C4H transcripts seem to alleviate accumulated p-coumaric acid resulting from altered CSE. Finally, alteration in C3H, HCT, and 4CL in CSE down-regulated plants suggests an interaction of the FVBP genes, leading to the regulation of floral volatiles of petunia.

CSE: !affects! lignin production
CSE: !influences! FVBP gene expression
CSE: !alters! volatile compound production
C3H: !elevates! transcripts
HCT: !elevates! transcripts
4CL: !elevates! transcripts
C3H: !alleviates! p-coumaric acid
HCT: !interacts with! C4H
4CL: !interacts with! C3H