AP2/ERF transcription factors (AP2/ERFs) are important regulators of plant physiological and biochemical metabolism. Evidence suggests that AP2/ERFs may be involved in the regulation of bud break in woody perennials. Green tea is economically vital in China, and its production value is significantly affected by the time of spring bud break of tea plant. However, the relationship between AP2/ERFs in tea plant and spring bud break remains largely unknown. A total of 178 AP2/ERF genes (CsAP2/ERFs) were identified in the genome of tea plant. Based on the phylogenetic analysis, these genes could be classified into five subfamilies. The analysis of gene duplication events demonstrated that whole genome duplication (WGD) or segmental duplication was the primary way of CsAP2/ERFs amplification. According to the result of the Ka/Ks value calculation, purification selection dominated the evolution of CsAP2/ERFs. Furthermore, gene composition and structure analyses of CsAP2/ERFs indicated that different subfamilies contained a variety of gene structures and conserved motifs, potentially resulting in functional differences among five subfamilies. The promoters of CsAP2/ERFs also contained various signal-sensing elements, such as abscisic acid responsive elements, light responsive elements and low temperature responsive elements. The evidence presented here offers a theoretical foundation for the diverse functions of CsAP2/ERFs. Additionally, the expressions of CsAP2/ERFs during spring bud break of tea plant were analyzed by RNA-seq and grouped into clusters A-F according to their expression patterns. The gene expression changes in clusters A and B were more synchronized with the spring bud break of tea plant. Moreover, several potential correlation genes, such as D-type cyclin genes, were screened out through weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA). Temperature and light treatment experiments individually identified nine candidate CsAP2/ERFs that may be related to the spring bud break of tea plant. This study provides new evidence for role of the CsAP2/ERFs in the spring bud break of tea plant, establishes a theoretical foundation for analyzing the molecular mechanism of the spring bud break of tea plant, and contributes to the improvement of tea cultivars.

AP2/ERF: !regulates! Plant physiological and biochemical metabolism
AP2/ERFs: !involved in! Regulation of bud break in woody perennials
CsAP2/ERFs: !amplified by! Whole genome duplication (WGD) or segmental duplication
CsAP2/ERFs: !evolved by! Purification selection
CsAP2/ERFs: !contain! Signal-sensing elements
CsAP2/ERFs: !clustered into! A-F according to expression patterns
CsAP2/ERFs: !correlated with! D-type cyclin genes
CsAP2/ERFs: !identified by! Temperature and light treatment experiments