Genes with valine glutamine (VQ) motifs play an essential role in plant growth, development, and resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses. However, little information on the VQ genes in sweetpotato and other Ipomoea species is available. This study identified 55, 58, 50 and 47 VQ genes from sweetpotato (I. batatas), I.triflida, I. triloba and I. nil, respectively. The phylogenetic analysis revealed that the VQ genes formed eight clades (I-VII), and the members in the same group exhibited similar exon-intron structure and conserved motifs distribution. The distribution of the VQ genes among the chromosomes of Ipomoea species was disproportional, with no VQ genes mapped on a few of each species' chromosomes. Duplication analysis suggested that segmental duplication significantly contributes to their expansion in sweetpotato, I.trifida, and I.triloba, while the segmental and tandem duplication contributions were comparable in I.nil. Cis-regulatory elements involved in stress responses, such as W-box, TGACG-motif, CGTCA-motif, ABRE, ARE, MBS, TCA-elements, LTR, and WUN-motif, were detected in the promoter regions of the VQ genes. A total of 30 orthologous groups were detected by syntenic analysis of the VQ genes. Based on the analysis of RNA-seq datasets, it was found that the VQ genes are expressed distinctly among different tissues and hormone or stress treatments. A total of 40 sweetpotato differentially expressed genes (DEGs) refer to biotic (sweetpotato stem nematodes and Ceratocystis fimbriata pathogen infection) or abiotic (cold, salt and drought) stress treatments were detected. Moreover, IbVQ8, IbVQ25 and IbVQ44 responded to the five stress treatments and were selected for quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis, and the results were consistent with the transcriptome analysis. Our study may provide new insights into the evolution of VQ genes in the four Ipomoea genomes and contribute to the future molecular breeding of sweetpotatoes.

VQ genes: !play essential role in! plant growth, development, and resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses 
VQ genes: !form! 8 clades 
VQ genes: !distributed among! chromosomes of Ipomoea species 
VQ genes: !expanded by! segmental and tandem duplication 
VQ genes: !contain! cis-regulatory elements involved in stress responses 
VQ genes: !orthologous groups detected by! syntenic analysis 
VQ genes: !expressed distinctly among! different tissues and hormone or stress treatments 
DEGs: !refer to! biotic or abiotic stress treatments 
IbVQ8, IbVQ25 and IbVQ44: !respond to! five stress treatments