['7773019', 'The phototropic response is an important component of seedling establishment in  higher plants because it orients the young seedlings for maximal photosynthetic  light capture. Despite their obvious importance, little is known about the  mechanisms underlying the perception and transduction of the light signals that  induce phototropic curvatures. Here, we report the isolation of eight mutants of  Arabidopsis that lack or have severely impaired phototropic responses. These nph  (for nonphototropic hypocotyl) mutants comprise four genetic loci: nph1, nph2,  nph3, and nph4. Physiological and biochemical characterization of the nph1 allele  series indicated that the NPH1 locus may encode the apoprotein for a  dual-chromophoric or multichromophoric holoprotein photoreceptor capable of  absorbing UV-A, blue, and green light and that this photoreceptor regulates all  the phototropic responses of Arabidopsis. It appears that the NPH1 protein is  most likely a 120-kD plasma membrane-associated phosphoprotein because all of the  nph1 mutations negatively affected the abundance of this protein. In addition,  the putative NPH1 photoreceptor protein is genetically and biochemically distinct  from the HY4 protein, which most likely acts as a photoreceptor for blue  light-mediated hypocotyl growth inhibition. Furthermore, the NPH1 and HY4  proteins are not functionally redundant because mutations in either gene alone  affect only one physiological response but not the other, thus providing strong  support for the hypothesis that more than one blue light photoreceptor is  required for the normal growth and development of a seedling.', '1995 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.7.4.473', 'Briggs']

NPH1: !encodes! photoreceptor 
photoreceptor: !regulates! phototropic responses 
NPH1 protein: !associated with! plasma membrane 
nph1 mutations: !affect! abundance of NPH1 protein 
HY4 protein: !acts as! photoreceptor for blue light-mediated hypocotyl growth inhibition 
NPH1 and HY4 proteins: !distinct from! each other 
NPH1 and HY4 proteins: !not functionally redundant!