['7773017', 'Phosphoribosylanthranilate isomerase (PAI) catalyzes the third step of the  tryptophan biosynthetic pathway. Arabidopsis PAI cDNAs were cloned from a cDNA  expression library by complementation of an Escherichia coli trpC- PAI deficiency  mutation. Genomic DNA blot hybridization analysis detected three nonallelic genes  encoding PAI in the Arabidopsis genome. DNA sequence analysis of cDNA and genomic  clones indicated that the PAI1 and PAI2. All three PAI polypeptides possess an  N-terminal putative plastid target sequence, suggesting that these enzymes all  function in plastids. The PAI1 gene is flanked by nearly identical direct repeats  of approximately 350 nucleotides. Our results indicate that, in contrast to most  microorganisms, the Arabidopsis PAI protein is not fused with  indole-3-glycerolphosphate synthase, which catalyzes the next step in the  pathway. Yeast artificial chromosome hybridization studies indicated that the  PAI2 gene is tightly linked to the anthranilate synthase alpha subunit 1 (ASA1)  gene on chromosome 5. PAI1 was mapped to the top of chromosome 1 using  recombinant inbred lines, and PAI3 is loosely linked to PAI1. cDNA restriction  mapping and sequencing and RNA gel blot hybridization analysis indicated that all  three genes are transcribed in wild-type plants. The expression of antisense PAI1  RNA significantly reduced the immunologically observable PAI protein and enzyme  activity in transgenic plants. The plants expressing antisense RNA also showed  two phenotypes consistent with a block early in the pathway: blue fluorescence  under UV light and resistance to the anthranilate analog 6-methylanthranilate.  The extreme nucleotide conservation between the unlinked PAI1 and PAI2 loci  suggests that this gene family is actively evolving.', '1995 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.7.4.447', 'Last']

PAI: !catalyzes! Third step of tryptophan biosynthetic pathway 
PAI: !localizes to! Plastids 
PAI1: !flanked by! Direct repeats 
PAI: !not fused with! Indole-3-glycerolphosphate synthase 
PAI2: !linked to! Anthranilate synthase alpha subunit 1 
PAI1: !mapped to! Top of chromosome 1 
PAI3: !loosely linked to! PAI1 
PAI: !transcribed in! Wild-type plants 
Antisense PAI1 RNA: !reduces! Immunologically observable PAI protein and enzyme activity 
Antisense PAI1 RNA: !causes! Blue fluorescence and resistance to 6-methylanthranilate 
PAI1 & PAI2: !extremely conserved! Unlinked loci