['7866029', 'The homeobox gene knotted1 (kn1) was first isolated by transposon tagging a  dominant leaf mutant in maize. Related maize genes, isolated by virtue of  sequence conservation within the homeobox, fall into two classes based on  sequence similarity and expression patterns. Here, we report the characterization  of two genes, KNAT1 and KNAT2 (for knotted-like from Arabidopsis thaliana) that  were cloned from Arabidopsis using the kn1 homeobox as a heterologous probe. The  homeodomains of KNAT1 and KNAT2 are very similar to the homeodomains of proteins  encoded by class 1 maize genes, ranging from 78 to 95% amino acid identity.  Overall, the deduced KNAT1 and KNAT2 proteins share amino acid identities of 53  and 40%, respectively, with the KN1 protein. Intron positions are also fairly  well conserved among KNAT1, KNAT2, and kn1. Based on in situ hybridization  analysis, the expression pattern of KNAT1 during vegetative development is  similar to that of class 1 maize genes. In the shoot apex, KNAT1 transcript is  localized primarily to the shoot apical meristem; down-regulation of expression  occurs as leaf primordia are initiated. In contrast to the expression of class 1  maize genes in floral and inflorescence meristems, the expression of KNAT1 in the  shoot meristem decreases during the floral transition and is restricted to the  cortex of the inflorescence stem. Transgenic Arabidopsis plants carrying the  KNAT1 cDNA and the kn1 cDNA fused to the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter  were generated. Misexpression of KNAT1 and kn1 resulted in highly abnormal leaf  morphology that included severely lobed leaves. The expression pattern of KNAT1  in the shoot meristem combined with the results of transgenic overexpression  experiments supports the hypothesis that class 1 kn1-like genes play a role in  morphogenesis.', '1994 Dec', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.6.12.1859', 'Hake']

kn1: !isolated by! transposon tagging 
KNAT1/2: !cloned from! Arabidopsis 
KNAT1/2: !similar to! class 1 maize genes 
KNAT1: !expressed in! shoot meristem 
KNAT1: !down-regulated in! leaf primordia 
KNAT1: !restricted to! inflorescence stem cortex 
KNAT1/kn1: !misexpressed in! transgenic plants 
KNAT1/kn1: !resulted in! abnormal leaf morphology 
class 1 kn1-like genes: !play a role in! morphogenesis