['7908550', '5-Aminolevulinic acid (ALA) is the universal precursor of tetrapyrroles, such as  chlorophyll and heme. The major control of chlorophyll biosynthesis is at the  step of ALA formation. In the chloroplasts of plants, as in Escherichia coli, ALA  is derived from the glutamate of Glu-tRNA via the two-step C5 pathway. The first  enzyme, Glu-tRNA reductase, catalyzes the reduction of Glu-tRNA to glutamate  1-semialdehyde with the release of intact tRNA. The second enzyme, glutamate  1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase, converts glutamate 1-semialdehyde to ALA. To  further examine ALA formation in plants, we isolated Arabidopsis genes that  encode the enzymes of the C5 pathway via functional complementation of mutations  in the corresponding genes of E. coli. The Glu-tRNA reductase gene was designated  HEMA and the glutamate 1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase gene, GSA1. Each gene  contains two short introns (149 and 241 nucleotides for HEMA, 153 and 86  nucleotides for GSA1). The deduced amino acid sequence of the HEMA protein  predicts a protein of 60 kD with substantial similarity (30 to 47% identity) to  sequences derived from the known hemA genes from microorganisms that make ALA by  the C5 pathway. Purified Arabidopsis HEMA protein has Glu-tRNA reductase  activity. The GSA1 gene encodes a 50-kD protein whose deduced amino acid sequence  shows extensive homology (55 to 78% identity) with glutamate 1-semialdehyde  2,1-aminomutase proteins from other species. RNA gel blot analyses indicated that  transcripts for both genes are found in root, leaf, stem, and flower tissues and  that their levels are dramatically elevated by light. Thus, light may regulate  ALA, and hence chlorophyll formation, by exerting coordinated transcriptional  control over both enzymes of the C5 pathway.', '1994 Feb', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.6.2.265', 'Soll']

Glu-tRNA reductase: !catalyzes! Glu-tRNA to glutamate 1-semialdehyde 
glutamate 1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase: !converts! glutamate 1-semialdehyde to ALA 
HEMA gene: !encodes! Glu-tRNA reductase protein 
GSA1 gene: !encodes! glutamate 1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase protein 
HEMA protein: !has! Glu-tRNA reductase activity 
GSA1 protein: !shows! homology with glutamate 1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase proteins 
transcripts: !found in! root, leaf, stem, and flower tissues 
light: !regulates! ALA formation