['8078458', 'Two cDNA clones, cATCDPK1 and cATCDPK2, encoding Ca(2+)-dependent,  calmodulin-independent protein kinases (CDPK) were cloned from Arabidopsis  thaliana and their nucleotide sequences were determined. Northern blot analysis  indicated that the mRNAs corresponding to the ATCDPK1 and ATCDPK2 genes are  rapidly induced by drought and high-salt stress but not by low-temperature stress  or heat stress. Treatment of Arabidopsis plants with exogenous abscisic acid  (ABA) had no effect on the induction of ATCDPK1 or ATCDPK2. These findings  suggest that a change in the osmotic potential of the environment can serve as a  trigger for the induction of ATCDPK1 and ATCDPK2. Putative proteins encoded by  ATCDPK1 and ATCDPK2 which contain open reading frames of 1479 and 1488 bp,  respectively, are designated ATCDPK1 and ATCDPK2 and show 52% identity at the  amino acid sequence level. ATCDPK1 and ATCDPK2 exhibit significant similarity to  a soybean CDPK (51% and 73%, respectively). Both proteins contain a catalytic  domain that is typical of serine/threonine protein kinases and a regulatory  domain that is homologous to the Ca(2+)-binding sites of calmodulin. Genomic  Southern blot analysis suggests the existence of a few additional genes that are  related to ATCDPK1 and ATCDPK2 in the Arabidopsis genome. The ATCDPK2 protein  expressed in Escherichia coli was found to phosphorylate casein and myelin basic  protein preferentially, relative to a histone substrate, and required Ca2+ for  activation.', '1994 Aug 15', 'Mol Gen Genet', '10.1007/BF00286684', 'Shinozaki']

ATCDPK1: !induced by! drought and high-salt stress 
ATCDPK2: !induced by! drought and high-salt stress 
ATCDPK1: !not induced by! low-temperature stress or heat stress 
ATCDPK2: !not induced by! low-temperature stress or heat stress 
ATCDPK1: !not affected by! exogenous abscisic acid 
ATCDPK2: !not affected by! exogenous abscisic acid 
ATCDPK1: !similar to! soybean CDPK 
ATCDPK2: !similar to! soybean CDPK 
ATCDPK1: !contains! catalytic domain 
ATCDPK2: !contains! catalytic domain 
ATCDPK1: !contains! regulatory domain 
ATCDPK2: !contains! regulatory domain 
ATCDPK2: !phosphorylates! casein and myelin basic protein 
ATCDPK2: !requires! Ca2+ for activation