['8314087', 'Light regulates the development of Arabidopsis seedlings in a variety of ways,  including inhibition of hypocotyl growth and promotion of leaf development,  chloroplast differentiation, and light-responsive gene expression. Mutations that  uncouple most or all of these responses from light control have been described,  for example, det1, det2, and cop1. To identify regulatory components that define  downstream branches in the light-regulated signal transduction pathway, mutants  specifically affected in only one light-regulated response were isolated. A  screen was designed to isolate mutants that overexpressed the CAB (photosystem II  type I chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins) genes in the dark, by use of transgenic  line containing a T-DNA construct with two CAB3 promoter-reporter fusions. Eight  mutants that showed aberrant expression of both CAB3 promoters were isolated and  were designated doc mutants (for dark overepression of CAB). All of the mutants  have normal etiolated morphology in the dark. Genetic and phenotypic analyses  indicate that most of the mutations are recessive and define at least three loci  (doc1, doc2, doc3). Unlike det1 and det2 mutants, which affect the expression of  CAB and RBCS (the small subunit of RuBP carboxylase) to approximately the same  extent, all three doc mutations are much more specific in derepressing the  expression of CAB. The phenotypes of doc mutants suggest that morphological  changes can be genetically separated from changes in CAB gene expression.  Moreover, the regulation of CAB gene expression can be separated further from the  regulation of RBCS gene expression. Epistasis studies suggest that DOC1 and DET3  act downstream from DET1 on two separate branches in the phototransduction  pathway. In contrast, DOC2 appears to act on a distinct pathway from DET1.  Mutations in doc1, doc2, or doc3 also impair plant growth under short-day  conditions.', '1994 Feb 1', 'Genes Dev', '10.1101/gad.8.3.339', 'Chory']

Light: !regulates! Development 
Mutations: !uncouple! Light control 
Screen: !isolates! Mutants 
CAB3 promoter-reporter fusions: !overexpress! CAB genes 
doc mutants: !derepress! CAB expression 
Morphology: !separated from! CAB gene expression 
DOC1: !downstream from! DET1 
DOC2: !distinct pathway from! DET1 
doc1, doc2, or doc3: !impair! Plant growth