['8350399', 'For the multiplication of RNA viruses, specific host factors are considered  essential, but as of yet little is known about this aspect of virus  multiplication. To identify such host factors, we previously isolated PD114, a  mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana, in which the accumulation of the coat protein of  tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) in uninoculated leaves of an infected plant was  reduced to low levels. The causal mutation, designated tom1, was single, nuclear,  and recessive. Here, we demonstrate that the tom1 mutation affects the  amplification of TMV-related RNAs in a single cell. When protoplasts were  inoculated with TMV RNA by electroporation, the percentage of TMV-positive  protoplasts (detected by indirect immunofluorescence staining with anti-TMV  antibodies) was lower (about 1/5 to 1/10) among PD114 protoplasts than among  wild-type protoplasts. In TMV-positive PD114 protoplasts, the amounts of the  positive-strand RNAs (the genomic RNA and subgenomic mRNAs) and coat protein  reached levels similar to, or slightly lower than, those reached in TMV-positive  wild-type protoplasts, but the accumulation of the positive-strand RNAs and coat  protein occurred more slowly than with the wild-type protoplasts. The parallel  decrease in the amounts of the coat protein and its mRNA suggests that the coat  protein is translated from its mRNA with normal efficiency. These observations  support the idea that the TOM1 gene encodes a host factor necessary for the  efficient amplification of TMV RNA in an infected cell. Furthermore, we show that  TMV multiplication in PD114 protoplasts is severely affected by the coinoculation  of cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) RNA. When PD114 protoplasts were inoculated with a  mixture of TMV and CMV RNAs by electroporation, the accumulation of TMV-related  molecules was approximately one-fifth of that in PD114 protoplasts inoculated  with TMV RNA alone. No such reduction in the accumulation of TMV-related  molecules was observed when wild-type protoplasts were inoculated with a mixture  of TMV and CMV RNAs or when wild-type and PD114 protoplasts were inoculated with  a mixture of TMV and turnip crinkle virus RNAs. These observations are compatible  with a hypothetical model in which a gene(s) that is distinct from the TOM1 gene  is involved in both TMV and CMV multiplication.', '1993 Sep', 'J Virol', '10.1128/JVI.67.9.5328-5338.1993', 'Ohno']

Gene: TOM1 !affects! Amplification of TMV-related RNAs 
Gene: TOM1 !represses! Accumulation of TMV coat protein 
Gene: TOM1 !interacts with! Gene(s) involved in TMV and CMV multiplication