['8356039', 'Amino acids are transported across the plasma membrane of plant cells by  proton-amino acid symports. We report here the successful cloning of a neutral  amino acid carrier by functional complementation. A histidine transport deletion  mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae was transformed with an Arabidopsis thaliana  cDNA library constructed in a yeast expression vector. Forty transformants, out  of 10(5), allowed growth on a histidine-limiting medium. The acquired ability to  grow on low histidine was shown to be strictly dependent on the protein encoded  by the expression plasmid. Histidine and alanine transport activity were 10- to  20-fold greater in the transformants. The transport kinetics, inhibitor  sensitivity, and substrate specificity match those of neutral system II, a  neutral amino acid carrier we previously described in plasma membrane vesicles  isolated from leaf tissue. The cDNA insert is 1.7 kb with an open reading frame  that codes for a protein containing 486 amino acids with a calculated molecular  mass of 52.9 kDa and three sites of potential N-linked glycosylation. Hydropathy  analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence suggests this is an integral membrane  protein with 10-12 membrane-spanning alpha-helices. Overall, the sequence of this  amino acid carrier is not closely related to any other protein sequences in the  GenBank data base. Interestingly, however, there are small regions of sequence  that exhibit significant levels of similarity with at least seven other integral  membrane proteins.', '1993 Aug 15', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.90.16.7441', 'Bush']

Amino acids: !transported by! proton-amino acid symports 
Histidine transport mutant: !transformed with! Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA library 
Transformants: !allowed growth on! histidine-limiting medium 
Protein: !encoded by! expression plasmid 
Histidine and alanine transport activity: !10- to 20-fold greater in! transformants 
Transport kinetics: !match those of! neutral system II 
cDNA insert: !codes for! protein 
Protein: !contains! 486 amino acids 
Deduced amino acid sequence: !suggests this is! integral membrane protein 
Sequence: !not closely related to! any other protein sequences in GenBank data base 
Sequence: !exhibits similarity with! at least seven other integral membrane proteins