['8400875', 'Suppressors of the blue fluorescence phenotype of the Arabidopsis trp1-100 mutant  can be used to identify mutations in genes involved in plant tryptophan  biosynthesis. Two recessive suppressor mutations define a new gene, TRP4. The  trp4 mutant and the trp1-100 mutant are morphologically normal and grow without  tryptophan, whereas the trp4; trp1-100 double mutant requires tryptophan for  growth. The trp4; trp1-100 double mutant does not segregate at expected  frequencies in genetic crosses because of a female-specific defect in  transmission of the double mutant genotype, suggesting a role for the tryptophan  pathway in female gametophyte development. Genetic and biochemical evidence shows  that trp4 mutants are defective in a gene encoding the beta subunit of  anthranilate synthase (AS). Arabidopsis AS beta subunit genes were isolated by  complementation of an Escherichia coli anthranilate synthase mutation. The trp4  mutation cosegregates with one of the genes, ASB1, located on chromosome 1.  Sequence analysis of the ASB1 gene from trp4-1 and trp4-2 plants revealed  different single base pair substitutions relative to the wild type. Anthranilate  synthase alpha and beta subunit genes are regulated coordinately in response to  bacterial pathogen infiltration.', '1993 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.5.9.1011', 'Keith']

trp1-100 mutant: !suppressed by! Suppressors 
Suppressors: !identify! Mutations 
Mutations: !define! TRP4 
TRP4: !requires! Tryptophan 
Tryptophan: !required for! Growth 
Growth: !impaired in! trp4; trp1-100 double mutant 
trp4; trp1-100 double mutant: !transmission impaired in! Females 
Females: !suggests role for! Tryptophan pathway 
Tryptophan pathway: !genetic and biochemical evidence shows! Defective gene encoding AS beta subunit 
AS beta subunit: !isolated by! Complementation of E. coli mutation 
Complementation: !located on! Chromosome 1 
Chromosome 1: !sequence analysis reveals! Single base pair substitutions 
Single base pair substitutions: !regulated coordinately in response to! Bacterial pathogen infiltration