['8589449', 'Yeast Sec12p, a type II transmembrane glycoprotein, is required for formation of  transport vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Biochemical and  morphological analyses have suggested that Sec12p is localized to the ER by two  mechanisms: static retention in the ER and dynamic retrieval from the early  region of the Golgi apparatus. The rer1 mutant we isolated in a previous study  mislocalizes the authentic Sec12p to the later compartments of the Golgi. To  understand the role of RER1 on Sec12p localization, we cloned the gene and  determined its reading frame. RER1 encodes a hydrophobic protein of 188 amino  acid residues containing four putative membrane spanning domains. The rer1 null  mutant is viable. Even in the rer1 disrupted cells, immunofluorescence of Sec12p  stains the ER, implying that the retention system is still operating in the  mutant. To determine the subcellular localization of Rer1p, an epitope derived  from the influenza hemagglutinin was added to the C-terminus of Rer1p and the  cells expressing this tagged but functional protein were observed by  immunofluorescence microscopy. The anti-HA monoclonal antibody stains the cells  in a punctate pattern that is typical for Golgi proteins and clearly distinct  from the ER staining. This punctate staining was in fact exaggerated in the sec7  mutant that accumulates the Golgi membranes at the restrictive temperature.  Furthermore, double staining of Rer1p and Ypt1p, a GTPase that is known to reside  in the Golgi apparatus, showed good colocalization. Subcellular fractionation  experiments indicated that the fractionation pattern of Rer1p was similar to that  of an early Golgi protein, Och1p. From these results, we suggest that Rer1p  functions in the Golgi membrane to return Sec12p that has escaped from the static  retention system of the ER.', '1995 Nov', 'Mol Biol Cell', '10.1091/mbc.6.11.1459', 'Nakano']

Sec12p: !localizes to! ER 
Rer1p: !localizes to! Golgi 
Rer1p: !interacts with! Ypt1p 
Rer1p: !enhances! Sec12p localization 
Rer1p: !synthesizes! Och1p