['8597656', 'The kinesin-like proteins (KLPs) are a large family of plus- or  minus-end-directed microtubule motors important in intracellular transport,  mitosis, meiosis, and development. However, relatively little is known about  plant KLPs. We prepared an antibody against two peptides in the microtubule  binding domain of an Arabidopsis KLP (KatAp) encoded by the KatA gene, one of a  family of genes encoding KLPs whose motor domain is located near the C terminus  of the polypeptide. Such KLPs typically move materials toward the minus end of  microtubules. An immunoreactive band (Mr of 140,000) corresponding to KatAp was  demonstrated with this antibody on immunoblots of Arabidopsis seedling extracts.  During immunofluorescence localizations, the antibody produced weak, variable  staining in the cytoplasm and nucleus of interphase Arabidopsis suspension cells  but much stronger staining of the mitotic apparatus during division. Staining was  concentrated near the midzone during metaphase and was retained there during  anaphase. The phragmoplast was also stained. Similar localization patterns were  seen in tobacco BY-2 cells. The antibody produced a single band (Mr of 130,000)  in murine brain fractions prepared according to procedures that enrich for KLPs  (binding to microtubules in the presence of AMP-PNP but not ATP). A similar  fraction from carrot suspension cells yielded a cross-reacting polypeptide of  similar apparent molecular mass. When dividing BY-2 cells were lysed in the  presence of taxol and ATP, antibody staining moved rapidly toward the poles,  supporting the presence of a minus-end motor. Movement did not occur without ATP,  with AMP-PNP, or with ATP plus antibody. Our results indicate that the protein  encoded by KatA, KatAp, is expressed in Arabidopsis and is specifically localized  to the midzone of the mitotic apparatus and phragmoplast. A similar protein is  also present in other species.', '1996 Jan', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.8.1.119', 'Palevitz']

KatA gene: !encodes! KatAp 
KatAp: !localizes to! midzone of mitotic apparatus and phragmoplast 
KatAp: !moves materials toward! minus end of microtubules 
KatAp: !binds to! microtubules in presence of AMP-PNP but not ATP 
KatAp: !moves rapidly toward! poles with taxol and ATP