['8624510', 'By screening suppressor mutants of the hy2 mutation of Arabidopsis thaliana, two  dominant photomorphogenic mutants, shy1-1D and shy2-1D, for two genetic loci  designated as SHY1 and SHY2 (suppressor of hy2 mutation) have been isolated. Both  of these non-allelic, extragenic suppressor mutations of hy2 are located on  chromosome 1 of the Arabidopsis genome. Both mutations suppress the elongated  hypocotyl phenotype of hy2 by light-independent inhibition of hypocotyl growth as  well as by increasing the effectiveness of light inhibition of hypocotyl  elongation. The shy1-1D mutation is partially photomorphogenic in darkness with  apical hook opening and reduced hypocotyl elongation. The shy2-1D mutant displays  highly photomorphogenic characteristics in darkness such as true leaf  development, cotyledon expansion and extremely reduced hypocotyl growth. In  regard to hypocotyl elongation, however, the shy2-1D mutation is still light  sensitive. Examination of red-far-red light responses shows that the shy1-1D  mutation suppresses the hypocotyl elongation of the hy2 mutation effectively in  red light but not effectively in far-red light. The shy2-1D suppresses hypocotyl  elongation of the hy2 mutation effectively in both red and far-red light. Both  mutations can also suppress the early-flowering phenotype of hy2 and have a  distinct pleiotropic effect on leaf development such as upward leaf rolling. The  data obtained suggest that SHY1 and SHY2 represent a novel class of components  involved in the photomorphogenic pathways of Arabidopsis. This is the first  report on the identification of dominant mutations in the light signal  transduction pathway of plants.', '1996 Apr', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.1996.09040441.x', 'Nam']

SHY1: !suppresses! hypocotyl elongation 
SHY2: !suppresses! hypocotyl elongation 
SHY1: !suppresses! early-flowering phenotype 
SHY2: !suppresses! early-flowering phenotype 
SHY1: !affects! leaf development 
SHY2: !affects! leaf development