['8636137', 'Calmodulin, a ubiquitous calcium-binding protein, regulates many diverse cellular  functions by modulating the activity of the proteins that interact with it. Here,  we report isolation of a cDNA encoding a novel kinesin-like calmodulin-binding  protein (KCBP) from Arabidopsis using biotinylated calmodulin as a probe.  Calcium-dependent binding of the cDNA-encoded protein to calmodulin is confirmed  by 35S-labeled calmodulin. Sequence analysis of a full-length cDNA indicates that  it codes for a protein of 1261 amino acids. The predicted amino acid sequence of  the KCBP has a domain of about 340 amino acids in the COOH terminus that shows  significant sequence similarity with the motor domain of kinesin heavy chains and  kinesin-like proteins and contains ATP and microtubule binding sites typical of  these proteins. Outside the motor domain, the KCBP has no sequence similarity  with any of the known kinesins, but contains a globular domain in the NH2  terminus and a putative coiled-coil region in the middle. By analyzing the  calmodulin binding activity of truncated proteins expressed in Escherichia coli,  the calmodulin binding region is mapped to a stretch of about 50 amino acid  residues in the COOH terminus region of the protein. Using a synthetic peptide,  the calmodulin binding domain is further narrowed down to a 23-amino acid  stretch. The synthetic peptide binds to calmodulin with high affinity in a  calcium-dependent manner as judged by electrophoretic mobility shift assay of  calmodulin-peptide complex. The KCBP is coded by a single gene and is highly  expressed in developing flowers and suspension cultured cells. Although many  kinesin heavy chains and kinesin-like proteins have been extensively  characterized at the biochemical and molecular level in evolutionarily distant  organisms, none of them is known to bind calmodulin. The plant kinesin-like  protein with a calmodulin binding domain and a unique amino-terminal region is a  new member of the kinesin superfamily. The presence of a calmodulin-binding motif  in a kinesin heavy chain-like protein suggests a role for calcium and calmodulin  in kinesin-driven motor function(s) in plants.', '1996 Mar 22', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.271.12.7052', 'Hu']

Calmodulin: !regulates! cellular functions 
KCBP: !binds to! calmodulin 
KCBP: !contains! motor domain 
KCBP: !has! globular domain 
KCBP: !has! coiled-coil region 
KCBP: !binds to! calmodulin via 50 amino acid residues 
KCBP: !binds to! calmodulin via 23 amino acid stretch 
KCBP: !coded by! single gene 
KCBP: !highly expressed in! developing flowers and suspension cultured cells 
KCBP: !suggests role for! calcium and calmodulin