['8637920', 'We have isolated an Arabidopsis thaliana gene that codes for a receptor related  to antifungal pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins. The PR5K gene codes for a  predicted 665-amino acid polypeptide that comprises an extracellular domain  related to the PR5 proteins, a central transmembrane-spanning domain, and an  intracellular protein-serine/threonine kinase. The extracellular domain of PR5K  (PR5-like receptor kinase) is most highly related to acidic PR5 proteins that  accumulate in the extracellular spaces of plants challenged with pathogenic  microorganisms. The kinase domain of PR5K is related to a family of  protein-serine/threonine kinases that are involved in the expression of  self-incompatibility and disease resistance. PR5K transcripts accumulate at low  levels in all tissues examined, although particularly high levels are present in  roots and inflorescence stems. Treatments that induce authentic PR5 proteins had  no effect on the level of PR5K transcripts, suggesting that the receptor forms  part of a preexisting surveillance system. When the kinase domain of PR5K was  expressed in Escherichia coli, the resulting polypeptide underwent  autophosphorylation, consistent with its predicted enzyme activity. These results  are consistent with PR5K encoding a functional receptor kinase. Moreover, the  structural similarity between the extracellular domain of PR5K and the  antimicrobial PR5- proteins suggests a possible interaction with common or  related microbial targets.', '1996 Mar 19', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.93.6.2598', 'Lawton']

PR5K: !codes for! receptor 
receptor: !comprises! extracellular domain 
extracellular domain: !related to! PR5 proteins 
receptor: !contains! transmembrane-spanning domain 
transmembrane-spanning domain: !related to! protein-serine/threonine kinase 
PR5K: !accumulates in! all tissues 
treatments: !induce! authentic PR5 proteins 
PR5K: !undergoes! autophosphorylation 
PR5K: !suggests! interaction with microbial targets