['8676856', 'Small GTP-binding proteins belonging to the rab/YPT family play key roles at  various steps in intracellular transport pathways in yeast and mammalian cells.  Many members of rab/YPT family have been isolated from plants to date. However,  detailed information about the localization and function of the gene products  remains limited, even though intracellular transport is likely to be involved in  important phenomena such as cell elongation, transport of storage proteins,  determination and maintenance of cell polarity and intercellular signal  transduction. We have attempted to establish transgenic Arabidopsis plants that  overexpress ARA-4, a rab/YPT homologue in order to analyze the function and the  localization of the gene product. For overexpression and also for regulation of  the expression of this gene, the promoter of the gene for HSP81-1 was employed to  drive the transcription of ARA-4 in transgenic plants. The response of the  introduced genes to heat shock was analyzed. Upon heat-shock treatment, the ARA-4  gene was efficiently transcribed and translated. The induction of ARA-4 by heat  shock was transient, and at least two distinct forms of this protein were found  in membrane and cytosolic fractions from transgenic plants. Prolonged incubation  after heat shock reduced the amount of the cytosolic form of the induced protein,  and the cytosolic form of the protein thus probably represents the unprocessed  precursor. Using transgenic plants, we determined the subcellular localization of  the product of ARA-4. The protein was predominantly localized on Golgi-derived  vesicles, Golgi cisternae and the trans-Golgi network.', '1996 Mar 20', 'Mol Gen Genet', '10.1007/BF02174441', 'Uchimiya']

Small GTP-binding proteins: !belong to! rab/YPT family 
rab/YPT family: !play key roles in! intracellular transport pathways 
ARA-4: !overexpressed in! transgenic Arabidopsis plants 
HSP81-1 promoter: !drives transcription of! ARA-4 
heat shock: !induces! ARA-4 
ARA-4: !localized on! Golgi-derived vesicles, Golgi cisternae, trans-Golgi network