['8754681', 'C6-aldehydes are synthesized via lipoxygenase/hydroperoxide lyase action on  polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) substrates in plant leaves. The source pools  and subcellular location of the processes are unknown. A close relationship is  found between the composition of PUFA and the composition of C6-aldehydes. In the  current study, this relationship was tested using the Arabidopsis PUFA mutant  lines act1, fad2, fad3, fad5, fad6, and fad7. The results indicate that  C6-aldehyde formation is influenced by the alteration of C18 PUFA levels. Mutants  act1 and fad5, which are deficient in C16 unsaturated fatty acids, had wild-type  levels of C6-aldehyde production. Mutants deficient in the chloroplast  hexadecenoic acid/oleic acid desaturase (fad6) or hexadecadienoic acid/linoleic  acid desaturase (fad7) had altered C6-aldehyde formation in a pattern similar to  the changes in the PUFA. Mutations that impair phosphatidylcholine desaturase  activity, such as fad2 and fad3, however, resulted in increased E-2-hexenal  formation. The enzymes involved in C6-aldehyde production were partially  characterized, including measurement of pH optima. The differences in C6-aldehyde  formation among the fatty acid mutants of Arabidopsis appeared not to result from  alteration of lipoxygenase/hydroperoxide lyase pathway enzymes. Investigation of  the fatty acid composition in leaf phospholipids, glycolipids, and neutral lipids  and analysis of the fatty acid composition of chloroplast and extrachloroplast  lipids indicate that chloroplasts and glycolipids of chloroplasts may be the  source or major source of C6-aldehyde formation in Arabidopsis leaves.', '1996 Jul', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.111.3.805', 'Hildebrand']

C6-aldehydes: !synthesized by! lipoxygenase/hydroperoxide lyase 
PUFA: !influences! C6-aldehyde formation 
act1, fad2, fad3, fad5, fad6, and fad7 mutants: !alter! C6-aldehyde production 
fad6 and fad7 mutants: !change! C6-aldehyde formation 
fad2 and fad3 mutants: !increase! E-2-hexenal formation 
lipoxygenase/hydroperoxide lyase pathway enzymes: !partially characterized! 
leaf phospholipids, glycolipids, and neutral lipids: !investigated! 
chloroplast and extrachloroplast lipids: !analyzed! 
chloroplasts and glycolipids of chloroplasts: !may be source! of C6-aldehyde formation