['8768370', 'The nonpathogenic bacteria Pseudomonas fluorescens and Escherichia coli can  elicit a genotype-specific hypersensitive response (HR) in plants if they express  both the HR and pathogenesis (Hrp) protein secretion system and the HrpZ harpin  from P. syringae pv syringae 61 and a P. syringae avirulence (avr) gene whose  presence is recognized by a corresponding disease resistance gene in the plant.  We have found that the recognition event appears to require transfer of the Avr  protein into the plant cell. Elicitation of a genotype-specific HR was observed  with avrB+ P. fluorescens in soybean and Arabidopsis plants carrying resistance  genes RPG1 and RPM1, respectively, and with avrPto+ E. coll in tomato plants  carrying resistance gene PTO, but only if the Hrp secretion system, HrpZ, and the  appropriate Avr proteins were produced in the same bacterial cell. The failure of  avrB hyperexpression and exogenous AvrB or HrpZ to alleviate these requirements  in soybean and Arabidopsis suggests that the site of AvrB action is not in the  bacterial cell or plant apoplast. An Arabidopsis rps3 (rpm1) glabrous1 mutant was  transformed with constructs expressing avrB and was crossed with an Arabidopsis  ecotype Columbia (RPM1 GLABROUS1) plant. F1 seedlings (identified by their  kanamycin-resistant, pubescent phenotype) exhibited extensive necrosis on  cotyledon leaves 10 days postgermination. Ecotype Columbia and rps3-1 leaves  biolistically cobombarded with plasmids expressing the beta-glucuronidase (GUS)  gene and avrB failed to produce GUS activity (indicative of cell death) only when  RPM1 and avrB were present in the leaf. Thus, both stable and transient  expression of avrB in Arabidopsis resulted in RPM1-dependent necrosis, and the  only demonstrable site of action for AvrB was inside plant cells.', '1996 Jul', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.8.7.1095', 'Collmer']

P. fluorescens: !elicits! HR 
HR: !requires! HrpZ 
HrpZ: !recognized by! resistance gene 
Avr protein: !transferred to! plant cell 
avrB+ P. fluorescens: !elicits! genotype-specific HR 
avrB: !action in! plant cell 
RPM1: !dependent on! necrosis