['8837513', 'Lutein, a dihydroxy beta, epsilon-carotenoid, is the predominant carotenoid in  photosynthetic plant tissue and plays a critical role in light-harvesting complex  assembly and function. To further understand lutein synthesis and function, we  isolated four lutein-deficient mutants of Arabidopsis that define two loci, lut1  and lut2 (for lutein deficient). These loci are required for lutein biosynthesis  but not for the biosynthesis of beta, beta-carotenoids. The lut1 mutations are  recessive, accumulate high levels of zeinoxanthin, which is the immediate  precursor of lutein, and define lut1 as a disruption in epsilon ring  hydroxylation. The lut2 mutations are semidominant, and their biochemical  phenotype is consistent with a disruption of epsilon ring cyclization. The lut2  locus cosegregates with the recently isolated epsilon cyclase gene, thus,  providing additional evidence that the lut2 alleles are mutations in the epsilon  cyclase gene. It appears likely that the epsilon cyclase is a key step in  regulating lutein levels and the ratio of lutein to beta,beta-carotenoids.  Surprisingly, despite the absence of lutein, neither the lut1 nor lut2 mutation  causes a visible deleterious phenotype or altered chlorophyll content, but both  mutants have significantly higher levels of beta, beta-carotenoids. In  particular, there is a stable increase in the xanthophyll cycle pigments  (violaxanthin, antheraxanthin, and zeaxanthin) in both lut1 and lut2 mutants as  well as an increase in zeinoxanthin in lut1 and beta-carotene in lut2. The  accumulation of specific carotenoids is discussed as it pertains to the  regulation of carotenoid biosynthesis and incorporation into the photosynthetic  apparatus. Presumably, particular beta, beta-carotenoids are able to compensate  functionally and structurally for lutein in the photosystems of Arabidopsis.', '1996 Sep', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.8.9.1627', 'DellaPenna']

Lut1: !disrupts! epsilon ring hydroxylation 
Lut2: !disrupts! epsilon ring cyclization 
Lut2: !cosegregates with! epsilon cyclase gene 
Epsilon cyclase: !regulates! lutein levels 
Lut1/Lut2: !increases! xanthophyll cycle pigments 
Lut1: !increases! zeinoxanthin 
Lut2: !increases! beta-carotene