['8870272', 'The interaction between Arabidopsis and the nepovirus tobacco ringspot virus  (TRSV) was characterized. Of 97 Arabidopsis lines tested, all were susceptible  when inoculated with TRSV grape strain. Even though there was systemic spread of  the virs, there was a large degree of variation in symptoms as the most sensitive  lines died 10 days after inoculation, while the most tolerant lines either were  symptomless or developed only mild symptoms. Four lines were selected for further  study based on their differential reactions to TRSV. Infected plants of line  Col-0 and Col-0 gl1 flowered and produced seeds like noninfected plants, while  those of lines Estland and H55 died before producing seeds. Symptoms appeared on  sensitive plants approximately 5 to 6 days after inoculation. Serological studies  indicated that in mechanically inoculated seedlings, the virus, as measured by  coat protein accumulation, developed at essentially the same rates and to the  same levels in each of the four lines, demonstrating that differences in symptom  development were not due to a suppression of virus accumulation. Two additional  TRSV strains gave similar results when inoculated on the four lines. Genetic  studies with these four Arabidopsis lines revealed segregation of a single  incompletely dominant locus controlling tolerance to TRSV grape strain. We have  designated this locus TTR1. By using SSLP and CAPS markers, TTR1 was mapped to  chromosome V near the nga129 marker. Seed transmission frequency of TRSV for  Col-0 and Col-0 gl1 was over 95% and their progeny from crosses all had seed  transmission frequencies of over 83%, which made it possible to evaluate the  segregation of TTR1 in F2 progeny from infected F1 plants without inoculating F2  plants. Seed transmission of TRSV will be further exploited to streamline  selection of individuals for fine mapping the TTR1 gene. The identification of  tolerant and sensitive interactions between TRSV and A. thaliana lines provides a  model system for genetic and molecular analysis of plant tolerance to virus  infection.', '1996 Nov', 'Mol Plant Microbe Interact', '10.1094/mpmi-9-0729', 'Bent']

Arabidopsis: !interacts with! TRSV 
TRSV: !causes! differential reactions 
Col-0: !tolerates! TRSV 
Estland: !dies before! producing seeds 
H55: !dies before! producing seeds 
TTR1: !controls! tolerance to TRSV 
TTR1: !maps to! chromosome V 
F2 progeny: !evaluates! segregation of TTR1