['8883393', 'More than 11 different P-type H(+)-ATPases have been identified in Arabidopsis by  DNA cloning. The subcellular localization for individual members of this proton  pump family has not been previously determined. We show by membrane fractionation  and immunocytology that a subfamily of immunologically related P-type  H(+)-ATPases, including isoforms AHA2 and AHA3, are primarily localized to the  plasma membrane. To verify that AHA2 and AHA3 are both targeted to the plasma  membrane, we added epitope tags to their C-terminal ends and expressed them in  transgenic plants. Both tagged isoforms localized to the plasma membrane, as  indicated by aqueous two-phase partitioning and sucrose density gradients. In  contrast, a truncated AHA2 (residues 1-193) did not, indicating that the first  two transmembrane domains alone are not sufficient for plasma membrane  localization. Two epitope tags were evaluated: c-myc, a short, 11-amino acid  sequence, and beta-glucuronidase (GUS), a 68-kD protein. The c-myc tag is  recommended for its sensitivity and specific immunodetection. GUS worked well as  an epitope tag when transgenes were expressed at relatively high levels (e.g.  with AHA2-GUS944); however, evidence suggests that GUS activity may be inhibited  when a GUS domain is tethered to an H(+)-ATPase complex. Nevertheless, the  apparent ability to localize a GUS protein to the plasma membrane indicates that  a P-type H(+)-ATPase can be used as a delivery vehicle to target large, soluble  proteins to the plasma membrane.', '1996 Oct', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.112.2.833', 'Harper']

AHA2: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
AHA3: !localizes to! plasma membrane 
truncated AHA2: !does not localize to! plasma membrane 
c-myc tag: !recommended for! sensitivity and specific immunodetection 
GUS tag: !works well with! high transgene expression 
GUS tag: !may be inhibited when! tethered to H(+)-ATPase complex 
P-type H(+)-ATPase: !can be used as! delivery vehicle to target proteins to plasma membrane