['8914526', 'Glutathione is essential for protecting plants from a range of environmental  stresses, including heavy metals where it acts as a precursor for the synthesis  of phytochelatins. A 1658 bp cDNA clone for glutathione synthetase (gsh2) was  isolated from Arabidopsis thaliana plants that were actively synthesizing  glutathione upon exposure to cadmium. The sequence of the clone revealed a  protein with an estimated molecular mass of 53858 Da that was very similar to the  protein from higher eukaryotes, was less similar to the gene from the fission  yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and shared only a small region of similarity  with the Escherichia coli protein. A 4.3 kb SstI fragment containing the genomic  clone for glutathione synthetase was also isolated and sequenced. A comparison of  the cDNA and genomic sequences revealed that the gene was composed of twelve  exons. When the Arabidopsis cDNA cloned in a special shuttle vector was expressed  in a S. pombe mutant deficient in glutathione synthetase activity, the plant cDNA  was able to complement the yeast mutation. Glutathione synthetase activity was  measurable in wild-type yeast cells, below detectable levels in the gsh2- mutant,  and restored to substantial levels by the expression of the Arabidopsis cDNA. The  S. pombe mutant expressing the plant cDNA had near wild type levels of total  cellular thiols, 109Cd2+ binding activity, and cadmium resistance. Since the  Arabidopsis cDNA was under control of a thiamine-repressible promoter, growth of  the transformed yeast on thiamine-free medium increased expression of the cDNA  resulting in increases in cadmium resistance.', '1996 Sep', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1007/BF00040827', 'Oliver']

gsh2: !synthesizes! Glutathione 
Arabidopsis cDNA: !complements! S. pombe mutant 
Arabidopsis cDNA: !restores! Glutathione synthetase activity 
Thiamine-repressible promoter: !controls! Expression of Arabidopsis cDNA 
Expression of Arabidopsis cDNA: !increases! Cadmium resistance