['9002272', 'Salicylic acid (SA) plays an important signaling role in the resistance of many  plants to pathogen invasion. Increases in endogenous SA levels have been  associated with the hypersensitive response as well as systemic acquired  resistance (SAR). SA also induces the expression of a subset of the  pathogenesis-related (PR) genes. However, relatively little is known about the  events occurring subsequent to SA accumulation during a resistance response. In  order to identify mutations in components of the SA signal transduction pathway,  we have developed a genetic screen in Arabidopsis thaliana that utilizes the  Agrobacterium tumefaciens tms2 gene as a counter-selectable marker. SA-inducible  expression of the tms2 gene from the tobacco PR-1a promoter confers sensitivity  to alpha-naphthalene acetamide (alpha-NAM), resulting in inhibition of root  growth in germinating transgenic Arabidopsis seedlings. Mutants in which root  growth is insensitive to alpha-NAM have been selected from this PR-1a:tms2  transgenic line with the expectation that a subset will lack a regulatory  component downstream of SA. The sail mutant so identified expressed neither the  PR-1a:tms2 transgene nor the endogenous Arabidopsis PR-1, PR-2, and PR-5 genes in  response to SA. These genes also were not induced in sai1 by  2,6-dichloroisonicotinic acid (INA) or benzothiadiazole (BTH), two chemical  inducers of SAR. As expected of a mutation acting downstream of SA, sai1 plants  accumulate SA and its glucoside in response to infection with an avirulent  pathogen and are more susceptible to this avirulent pathogen than the wild-type  parent. sai1 is allelic to npr1, a previously identified SA-noninducible  mutation. The recessive nature of the noninducible sai1 mutation suggests that  the wild-type SAI1 gene acts as a positive regulator in the SA signal  transduction pathway.', '1997 Jan', 'Mol Plant Microbe Interact', '10.1094/MPMI.1997.10.1.69', 'Klessig']

Salicylic acid: !induces! expression of pathogenesis-related genes 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens tms2 gene: !used as! counter-selectable marker 
SA-inducible expression: !confers sensitivity to! alpha-naphthalene acetamide 
Mutants: !insensitive to! alpha-NAM 
sai1 plants: !accumulate! SA and its glucoside 
sai1: !allelic to! npr1 
wild-type SAI1 gene: !acts as! positive regulator