['9025305', 'Ran, a small soluble GTP-binding protein, has been shown to be essential for the  nuclear translocation of proteins and it is also thought to be involved in  regulating cell cycle progression in mammalian and yeast cells. Genes encoding  Ran-like proteins have been isolated from different higher plant species.  Overexpression of plant Ran cDNAs, similarly to their mammalian/yeast homologues,  suppresses the phenotype of the pim46-1 cell cycle mutant in yeast cells. The  mammalian/yeast Ran proteins have been shown to interact with a battery of  Ran-binding proteins, including the guanidine nucleotide exchange factor RCC1,  the GTPase-activating Ran-GAP, nucleoporins and other Ran-binding proteins  (RanBPs) specific for Ran-GTP. Here, the characterization of the first  Ran-binding proteins from higher plants is reported. The yeast two-hybrid system  was used to isolate cDNA clones encoding proteins of approximately 28 kDa  (At-RanBP1a, At-RanBP1b) that interact with the GTP-bound forms of the Ran1, Ran2  and Ran3 proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana. The deduced amino acid sequences of  the At-RanBP1s display high similarity (60%) to mammalian/yeast RanBP1 proteins  and contain the characteristic Ran-binding domains. Furthermore, interaction of  the plant Ran and RanBP1 proteins, is shown to require the acidic C-terminal  domain (-DEDDDL) of Ran proteins in addition to the presence of an intact  Ran-binding domain. In whole cell extracts, the GST-RanBP1a fusion protein binds  specifically to GTP-Ran and will not interact with Rab/Ypt-type small GTP-binding  proteins. Finally, in good agreement with their proposed biological function, the  At-Ran and the At-RanBP genes are expressed coordinately and show the highest  level of expression in meristematic tissues.', '1997 Jan', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.1997.11010093.x', 'Nagy']

Ran: !interacts with! Ran-binding proteins 
Ran-binding proteins: !interact with! GTP-bound forms of Ran1, Ran2 and Ran3 proteins 
At-RanBP1s: !display similarity to! mammalian/yeast RanBP1 proteins 
At-RanBP1s: !contain! Ran-binding domains 
At-Ran and At-RanBP genes: !are expressed coordinately!