['9050909', 'GDP-L-fucose is the activated nucleotide sugar form of L-fucose, which is a  constituent of many structural polysaccharides and glycoproteins in various  organisms. The de novo synthesis of GDP-L-fucose from GDP-D-mannose encompasses  three catalytic steps, a 4,6-dehydration, a 3,5-epimerization, and a 4-reduction.  The mur1 mutant of Arabidopsis is deficient in L-fucose in the shoot and is  rescued by growth in the presence of exogenously supplied L-fucose. Biochemical  assays of the de novo pathway for the synthesis of GDP-L-fucose indicated that  mur1 was blocked in the first nucleotide sugar interconversion step, a  GDP-D-mannose-4,6-dehydratase. An expressed sequence tag was identified that  showed significant sequence similarity to proposed bacterial  GDP-D-mannose-4,6-dehydratases and was tightly linked to the mur1 locus. A  full-length clone was isolated from a cDNA library, and its coding region was  expressed in Escherichia coli. The recombinant protein exhibited  GDP-D-mannose-4,6-dehydratase activity in vitro and was able to complement mur1  extracts in vitro to complete the pathway for the synthesis of GDP-L-fucose. All  seven mur1 alleles investigated showed single point mutations in the coding  region for the 4,6-dehydratase, confirming that it represents the MUR1 gene.', '1997 Mar 4', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.94.5.2085', 'Reiter']

GDP-D-mannose: !converted to! GDP-L-fucose 
mur1 mutant: !deficient in! L-fucose 
GDP-D-mannose-4,6-dehydratase: !catalyzes! 4,6-dehydration 
mur1: !blocked in! first nucleotide sugar interconversion step 
expressed sequence tag: !similar to! bacterial GDP-D-mannose-4,6-dehydratases 
expressed sequence tag: !tightly linked to! mur1 locus 
recombinant protein: !exhibited! GDP-D-mannose-4,6-dehydratase activity 
recombinant protein: !able to complement! mur1 extracts 
seven mur1 alleles: !showed single point mutations in! coding region for 4,6-dehydratase 
MUR1 gene: !represents! 4,6-dehydratase