['9144963', 'The expression of the Arabidopsis plastocyanin (PC) gene is developmentally  controlled and regulated by light. During seedling development, PC gene  expression is transiently induced, and this induction can be repressed by  sucrose. In transgenic seedlings carrying a PC promoter-luciferase fusion gene,  the luciferase-induced in vivo luminescence was similarly repressed by sucrose.  From a mutagenized population of such transgenic seedlings, we selected for  mutant seedlings that displayed a high luminescence level when grown on a medium  with 3% sucrose. This screening of mutants resulted in the isolation of several  sucrose-uncoupled (sun) mutants showing reduced repression of luminescence by  sucrose. Analysis of the sun mutants revealed that the accumulation of PC and  chlorophyll a/b binding protein (CAB) mRNA was also sucrose uncoupled, although  the extent of uncoupling varied. The effect of sucrose on far-red light  high-irradiance responses was studied in wild-type, sun1, sun6, and sun7  seedlings. In wild-type seedlings, sucrose repressed the far-red light-induced  cotyledon opening and inhibition of hypocotyl elongation. sun7 seedlings showed  reduced repression of these responses. Sucrose also repressed the far-red  light-induced block of greening in wild-type seedlings, and both sun6 and sun7  were affected in this response. The results provide evidence for a close  interaction between sucrose and light signaling pathways. Moreover, the sun6 and  sun7 mutants genetically identify separate branches of phytochrome A-dependent  signal transduction pathways.', '1997 Apr', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.9.4.583', 'Smeekens']

PC gene: !expression is! developmentally controlled 
PC gene: !induced by! light 
PC gene: !repressed by! sucrose 
sucrose: !represses! luminescence 
mutants: !selected for! reduced repression of luminescence 
sucrose: !uncouples! PC and CAB mRNA accumulation 
sucrose: !represses! far-red light-induced cotyledon opening 
sucrose: !represses! far-red light-induced block of greening 
sun6/7 mutants: !identify! separate branches of phytochrome A-dependent signal transduction pathways