['9159947', 'Abscisic acid (ABA)-deficient mutants in a variety of species have been  identified by screening for precocious germination and a wilty phenotype. Mutants  at two new loci, aba2 and aba3, have recently been isolated in Arabidopsis  thaliana (L.) Hynh. (K.M. Leon-Kloosterziel, M. Alvarez-Gil, G.J. Ruijs, S.E.  Jacobsen, N.E. Olszewski, S.H. Schwartz, J.A.D. Zeevaart, M. Koornneef [1996]  Plant J 10: 655-661), and the biochemical characterization of these mutants is  presented here. Protein extracts from aba2 and aba3 plants displayed a greatly  reduced ability to convert xanthoxin to ABA relative to the wild type. The next  putative intermediate in ABA synthesis, ABA-aldehyde, was efficiently converted  to ABA by extracts from aba2 but not by extracts from aba3 plants. This indicates  that the aba2 mutant is blocked in the conversion of xanthoxin to ABA-aldehyde  and that aba3 is impaired in the conversion of ABA-aldehyde to ABA. Extracts from  the aba3 mutant also lacked additional activities that require a molybdenum  cofactor (Moco). Nitrate reductase utilizes a Moco but its activity was  unaffected in extracts from aba3 plants. Moco hydroxylases in animals require a  desulfo moiety of the cofactor. A sulfido ligand can be added to the Moco by  treatment with Na2S and dithionite. Treatment of aba3 extracts with Na2S restored  ABA-aldehyde oxidase activity. Therefore, the genetic lesion in aba3 appears to  be in the introduction of S into the Moco.', '1997 May', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.114.1.161', 'Zeevaart']

ABA-deficient mutants: !identified by! screening 
mutants: !isolated in! Arabidopsis thaliana 
protein extracts: !convert! xanthoxin to ABA 
aba2 mutant: !blocked in! conversion of xanthoxin to ABA-aldehyde 
aba3 mutant: !impaired in! conversion of ABA-aldehyde to ABA 
aba3 mutant: !lacks! additional activities requiring Moco 
nitrate reductase: !unaffected in! aba3 extracts 
Moco hydroxylases: !require! desulfo moiety of cofactor 
treatment with Na2S: !restores! ABA-aldehyde oxidase activity 
aba3 genetic lesion: !in! introduction of S into Moco