['9165747', 'Recessive mutations at three loci cause the collapse of mature xylem cells in  inflorescence stems of Arabidopsis. These irregular xylem (irx) mutations were  identified by screening plants from a mutagenized population by microscopic  examination of stem sections. The xylem cell defect was associated with an up to  eightfold reduction in the total amount of cellulose in mature inflorescence  stems. The amounts of cell wall-associated phenolics and polysaccharides were  unaffected by the mutations. Examination of the cell walls by using electron  microscopy demonstrated that the decreases in cellulose content of irx lines  resulted in an alteration of the spatial organization of cell wall material. This  suggests that a normal pattern of cellulose deposition may be required for  assembly of lignin or polysaccharides. The reduced cellulose content of the stems  also resulted in a decrease in stiffness of the stem material. This is consistent  with the irregular xylem phenotype and suggests that the walls of irx plants are  not resistant to compressive forces. Because lignin was implicated previously as  a major factor in resistance to compressive forces, these results suggest either  that cellulose has a direct role in providing resistance to compressive forces or  that it is required for the development of normal lignin structure. The irx  plants had a slight reduction in growth rate and stature but were otherwise  normal in appearance. The mutations should be useful in facilitating the  identification of factors that control the synthesis and deposition of cellulose  and other cell wall components.', '1997 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.9.5.689', 'Somerville']

Recessive mutations: !cause! collapse of mature xylem cells 
Cellulose: !reduced in! irx lines 
Cell wall material: !altered spatial organization of! in irx lines 
Cellulose: !required for! assembly of lignin or polysaccharides 
Cellulose: !implicated in! resistance to compressive forces 
Mutations: !useful in! identifying factors controlling cellulose synthesis