['9165751', 'Polar auxin transport plays a key role in the regulation of plant growth and  development. To identify genes involved in this process, we have developed a  genetic procedure to screen for mutants of Arabidopsis that are altered in their  response to auxin transport inhibitors. We recovered a total of 16 independent  mutants that defined seven genes, called TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE (TIR)  genes. Recessive mutations in one of these genes, TIR3, result in altered  responses to transport inhibitors, a reduction in polar auxin transport, and a  variety of morphological defects that can be ascribed to changes in  indole-3-acetic acid distribution. Most dramatically, tir3 seedlings are strongly  deficient in lateral root production, a process that is known to depend on polar  auxin transport from the shoot into the root. In addition, tir3 plants display a  reduction in apical dominance as well as decreased elongation of siliques,  pedicels, roots, and the inflorescence. Biochemical studies indicate that tir3  plants have a reduced number of N-1-naphthylphthalamic (NPA) binding sites,  suggesting that the TIR3 gene is required for expression, localization, or  stabilization of the NPA binding protein (NBP). Alternatively, the TIR3 gene may  encode the NBP. Because the tir3 mutants have a substantial defect in NPA  binding, their phenotype provides genetic evidence for a role for the NBP in  plant growth and development.', '1997 May', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.9.5.745', 'Estelle']

Polar auxin transport: !regulates! Plant growth and development 
TIR3 gene: !alters response to! Transport inhibitors 
TIR3 gene: !reduces! Polar auxin transport 
TIR3 gene: !causes! Morphological defects 
TIR3 gene: !decreases! Lateral root production 
TIR3 gene: !reduces! Apical dominance 
TIR3 gene: !decreases! Elongation of siliques, pedicels, roots, and inflorescence 
TIR3 gene: !reduces! NPA binding sites 
NBP: !required for expression, localization, or stabilization of! NPA binding protein