['9188482', 'The proteins of the primary cell walls of suspension cultured cells of five plant  species, Arabidopsis, carrot, French bean, tomato, and tobacco, have been  compared. The approach that has been adopted is differential extraction followed  by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), rather than two-dimensional gel  analysis, to facilitate protein sequencing. Whole cells were washed sequentially  with the following aqueous solutions, CaCl2, CDTA (cyclohexane diaminotetraacetic  acid, DTT (dithiothreitol), NaCl, and borate. SDS-PAGE analysis showed consistent  differences between species. From the 233 proteins that were selected for  sequencing, 63% gave N-terminal data. This analysis shows that (i) patterns of  proteins revealed by SDS-PAGE are strikingly different for all five species, (ii)  a large number of these proteins cannot be identified by data base searches  indicating that a significant proportion of wall proteins have not been  previously described, (iii) the major proteins that can be identified belong to  very different classes of proteins, (iv) the majority of proteins found in the  extracellular growth media are absent from their respective cell wall extracts,  and (v) the results of the extraction process are indicative of higher order  structure. It appears that aspects of speciation reside in the complement of  extracellular wall proteins. The data represent a protein resource for cell wall  studies complementary to EST (expressed sequence tag) and DNA sequencing  strategies.', '1997 Jun 20', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.272.25.15841', 'Slabas']

CaCl2: !extracts! proteins 
CDTA: !extracts! proteins 
DTT: !extracts! proteins 
NaCl: !extracts! proteins 
borate: !extracts! proteins 
SDS-PAGE: !reveals! differences 
sequencing: !identifies! proteins 
database searches: !identifies! proteins 
proteins: !belong to! different classes 
growth media: !absent from! cell wall extracts 
extraction process: !indicative of! higher order structure 
complement of extracellular wall proteins: !indicative of! speciation