['9193065', 'The maize transposable element Ac is highly active in the heterologous hosts  tobacco and tomato, but shows very much reduced levels of activity in  Arabidopsis. A mutagenesis experiment was undertaken with the aim of identifying  Arabidopsis host factors responsible for the observed low levels of Ac activity.  Seed from a line carrying a single copy of the Ac element inserted into the  streptomycin phosphotransferase (SPT) reporter fusion, and which displayed  typically low levels of Ac activity, were mutagenized using gamma rays. Nineteen  mutants displaying high levels of somatic Ac activity, as judged by their highly  variegated phenotypes, were isolated after screening the M2 generation on  streptomycin-containing medium. The mutations fall into two complementation  groups, iae1 and iae2, are unlinked to the SPT::Ac locus and segregate in a  Mendelian fashion. The iae1 mutation is recessive and the iae2 mutation is  semi-dominant. The iae1 and iae2 mutants show 550- and 70-fold increases,  respectively, in the average number of Ac excision sectors per cotyledon. The  IAE1 locus maps to chromosome 2, whereas the SPT::Ac reporter maps to chromosome  3. A molecular study of Ac activity in the iae1 mutant confirmed the very high  levels of Ac excision predicted using the phenotypic assay, but revealed only low  levels of Ac re-insertion. Analyses of germinal transposition in the iae1 mutant  demonstrated an average germinal excision frequency of 3% and a frequency of  independent Ac re-insertions following germinal excision of 22%. The iae mutants  represents a possible means of improving the efficiency of Ac/Ds transposon  tagging systems in Arabidopsis, and will enable the dissection of host  involvement in Ac transposition and the mechanisms employed for controlling  transposable element activity.', '1997 May', 'Plant J', None, 'Dean']

Ac: !highly active in! tobacco, tomato 
mutagenesis experiment: !undertaken to identify! Arabidopsis host factors 
M2 generation: !screened on! streptomycin-containing medium 
mutations: !fall into! two complementation groups 
IAE1 locus: !maps to! chromosome 2 
SPT::Ac reporter: !maps to! chromosome 3 
IAE1 mutant: !shows! 550-fold increase in Ac excision sectors 
germinal transposition: !demonstrates! 3% excision frequency 
IAE mutants: !possible means of improving! Ac/Ds transposon tagging systems