['9225852', 'The TGA genes encode a family of basic domain-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription  factors that are conserved in higher plants. We have continued to unravel the  complexity of this gene family by using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based  approach. Taking advantage of the conserved amino acid sequence in the bZIP  domain found in all members of this gene family, two degenerate oligonucleotides  were synthesized based on the sequence of this region in order to amplify by PCR  the analogous genomic fragments from the various TGA loci in Arabidopsis. This  approach has led us to the finding of a new member of the TGA gene family, and  subsequently the isolation of a gene designated as TGA6. Further characterization  of the TGA6 locus confirmed our prediction that the gene structure of this family  is remarkably conserved. Genomic Southern blot analysis revealed that TGA6 is a  single-copy gene in Arabidopsis. Based on the genomic sequence information,  gene-specific primers were synthesized for isolating the cDNA that corresponds to  the coding region. Subsequently, the cDNA for TGA6 was cloned and sequenced. Gel  mobility shift assays with in vitro translated TGA6 protein showed that TGA6 is  more like TGA5 in terms of its in vitro DNA-binding properties. The expression of  TGA6 in different tissues was estimated by using reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR  and further analyzed in transgenic Arabidopsis lines expressing a TGA6  promoter-GUS fusion. TGA6 promoter activity is found primarily in roots of young  seedlings. As seedlings develop, TGA6 is expressed in aging cotyledons, mesophyll  cells of hydathodes on leaf margins, vascular tissue and trichomes of senescing  rosette leaves, but is very low in primary roots of mature plants. High levels of  expression persist in young lateral roots and in regions of the primary root  where lateral roots are emerging. In flowers, the activity is localized  predominantly to mature pollen grains. The expression pattern of TGA6 reported  here is strikingly similar to that of an Arabidopsis acidic chitinase gene.  Possible biological significance of TGA6 in cellular defense against pathogens  and abiotic stress is discussed.', '1997 Jun', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/a:1005873500238', 'Lam']

TGA genes: !encode! basic domain-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors 
TGA6: !synthesizes! cDNA 
TGA6: !binds to! DNA 
TGA6: !expressed in! roots, cotyledons, mesophyll cells, vascular tissue, trichomes, pollen grains 
TGA6: !possible role in! cellular defense against pathogens and abiotic stress