['9307438', 'To elucidate the kinetic properties of the Arabidopsis H+/sucrose cotransporter,  SUC1, with respect to transmembrane voltage and ligand concentrations, the  transport system was heterologously expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes.  Steady-state plasma membrane currents associated with transport of sucrose were  measured with two-electrode voltage clamp over the voltage range -180 to +40 mV  as a function of extracellular pH and sugar concentrations. At any given voltage,  currents exhibited hyperbolic kinetics with respect to extracellular H+ and sugar  concentrations, and this enabled determination of values for the maximum currents  in the presence of each ligand (iHmax, iSmax for H+ and sucrose) and of the  ligand concentrations eliciting half-maximal currents (KHm, KSm). The iHmax and  iSmax exhibited marked and statistically significant increases as a function of  increasingly negative membrane potential. However, the KHm and KSm decreased with  increasingly negative membrane potential. Furthermore, at any given voltage,  iSmax increased and KSm decreased as a function of the external H+ concentration.  Eight six-state carrier models-which comprised the four possible permutations of  intracellular and extracellular ligand binding order, each with charge  translocation on the sugar-loaded or -unloaded forms of the carrier-were analyzed  algebraically with respect to their competence to account for the ensemble of  kinetic observations. Of these, two models (first-on, first-off and last-on,  first-off with respect to sucrose binding as it passes from outside to inside the  cell and with charge translocation on the loaded form of the carrier) exhibit  sufficient kinetic flexibility to describe the observations. Combining these two,  a single model emerges in which the binding on the external side can be random,  but it can only be ordered on the inside, with the sugar dissociating before the  proton.', '1997 Sep 15', 'J Membr Biol', '10.1007/s002329900275', 'Miller']

SUC1: !heterologously expressed in! Xenopus laevis oocytes
SUC1: !exhibits hyperbolic kinetics with respect to! extracellular H+ and sugar concentrations
SUC1: !maximum currents increase! as a function of increasingly negative membrane potential
SUC1: !ligand concentrations decrease! as a function of increasingly negative membrane potential
SUC1: !iSmax increases! as a function of external H+ concentration
SUC1: !KSm decreases! as a function of external H+ concentration
SUC1: !binding on external side can be random! but ordered on the inside