['9374550', 'Amino acids are the predominant form of nitrogen available to the heterotrophic  tissues of plants. These essential organic nutrients are transported across the  plasma membrane of plant cells by proton-amino acid symporters. Our lab has  cloned an amino acid transporter from Arabidopsis, NAT2/AAP1, that represents the  first example of a new class of membrane transporters. We are investigating the  structure and function of this porter because it is a member of a large gene  family in plants and because its wide expression pattern suggests it plays a  central role in resource allocation. In the results reported here, we  investigated the topology of NAT2 by engineering a c-myc epitope on either the N  or C terminus of the protein. We then used in vitro translation, partial  digestion with proteinase K, and immunoprecipitation to identify a group of  oriented peptide fragments. We modeled the topology of NAT2 based on the lengths  of the peptide fragments that allowed us to estimate the location of protease  accessible cleavage sites. We independently identified the location of the N and  C termini using immunofluorescence microscopy of NAT2 expressed in COS-1 cells.  We also investigated the glycosylation status of several sites of potential  N-linked glycosylation. Based on the combined data, we propose a novel 11  transmembrane domain model with the N terminus in the cytoplasm and C terminus  facing outside the cell. This model of protein topology anchors our complementary  investigations of porter structure and function using site-directed and random  mutagenesis.', '1997 Nov 28', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.272.48.30552', 'Bush']

NAT2/AAP1: !transports! Amino Acids 
NAT2/AAP1: !localizes to! Plasma Membrane 
NAT2/AAP1: !engineered with! c-myc Epitope 
NAT2/AAP1: !modeled based on! Peptide Fragments 
NAT2/AAP1: !identified using! Immunofluorescence Microscopy 
NAT2/AAP1: !investigated for! Glycosylation Status 
NAT2/AAP1: !proposed with! 11 Transmembrane Domains