['9414546', 'A gene family encoding xyloglucan endotransglycosylase (XET)-related proteins  exists in Arabidopsis. TCH4, a member of this family, is strongly up-regulated by  environmental stimuli and encodes an XET capable of modifying cell wall  xyloglucans. To investigate XET localization we generated antibodies against the  TCH4 carboxyl terminus. The antibodies recognized TCH4 and possibly other  XET-related proteins. These data indicate that XETs accumulate in expanding cell,  at the sites of intercellular airspace formation, and at the bases of leaves,  cotyledons, and hypocotyls. XETs also accumulated in vascular tissue, where cell  wall modifications lead to the formation of tracheary elements and sieve tubes.  Thus, XETs may function in modifying cell walls to allow growth, airspace  formation, the development of vasculature, and reinforcement of regions under  mechanical strain. Following wind stimulation, overall XET levels appeared to  decrease in the leaves of wind-stimulated plants. However, consistent with an  increase in TCH4 mRNA levels following wind, there were regions that showed  increased immunoreaction, including sites around cells of the pith parenchyma,  between the vascular elements, and within the epidermis. These results indicate  that TCH4 may contribute to the adaptive changes in morphogenesis that occur in  Arabidopsis following exposure to mechanical stimuli.', '1997 Dec', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.115.4.1319', 'Braam']

TCH4: !encodes! XET 
XET: !modifies! cell wall xyloglucans 
XET: !accumulates in! expanding cells 
XET: !accumulates in! intercellular airspace formation 
XET: !accumulates in! bases of leaves, cotyledons, and hypocotyls 
XET: !accumulates in! vascular tissue 
XET: !functions in! modifying cell walls to allow growth 
XET: !functions in! airspace formation 
XET: !functions in! development of vasculature 
XET: !functions in! reinforcement of regions under mechanical strain 
wind stimulation: !causes! overall XET levels to decrease 
wind stimulation: !increases! TCH4 mRNA levels 
TCH4: !contributes to! adaptive changes in morphogenesis