['9442033', 'The 26 S proteasome is a multisubunit proteolytic complex responsible for  degrading eukaryotic proteins targeted by ubiquitin modification. Substrate  recognition by the complex is presumed to be mediated by one or more common  receptor(s) with affinity for multiubiquitin chains, especially those internally  linked through lysine 48. We have identified previously a candidate for one such  receptor from diverse species, designated here as Mcb1 for Multiubiquitin  chain-binding protein, based on its ability to bind Lys48-linked multiubiquitin  chains and its location within the 26 S proteasome complex. Even though Mcb1 is  likely not the only receptor in yeast, it is necessary for conferring resistance  to amino acid analogs and for degrading a subset of ubiquitin pathway substrates  such as ubiquitin-Pro-beta-galactosidase (Ub-Pro-beta-gal) (van Nocker, S.,  Sadis, S., Rubin, D.M., Glickman, M., Fu, H., Coux, O., Wefes, I., Finley, D.,  and Vierstra, R. D. (1996) Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 6020-28). To further define the  role of Mcb1 in substrate recognition by the 26 S proteasome, a  structure/function analysis of various deletion and site-directed mutants of  yeast and Arabidopsis Mcb1 was performed. From these studies, we identified a  single stretch of conserved hydrophobic amino acids (LAM/LALRL/V (ScMcb1 228-234  and At-Mcb1 226-232)) within the C-terminal half of each polypeptide that is  necessary for interaction with Lys48-linked multiubiquitin chains. Unexpectedly,  this domain was not essential for either Ub-Pro-beta-gal degradation or  conferring resistance to amino acid analogs. The domain responsible for these two  activities was mapped to a conserved region near the N terminus. Yeast and  Arabidopsis Mcb1 derivatives containing an intact multiubiquitin-binding site but  missing the N-terminal region failed to promote Ub-Pro-beta-gal degradation and  even accentuated the sensitivity of the yeast delta mcb1 strain to amino acid  analogs. This hypersensitivity was not caused by a gross defect in 26 S  proteasome assembly as mutants missing either the N-terminal domain or the  multiubiquitin chain-binding site could still associate with 26 S proteasome and  generate a complex indistinguishable in size from that present in wild-type  yeast. Together, these data indicate that residues near the N terminus, and not  the multiubiquitin chain-binding site, are most critical for Mcb1 function in  vivo.', '1998 Jan 23', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.273.4.1970', 'Vierstra']

Mcb1: !binds! Lys48-linked multiubiquitin chains 
Mcb1: !confer resistance to! amino acid analogs 
Mcb1: !degrades! Ub-Pro-beta-gal 
LAM/LALRL/V: !necessary for! interaction with Lys48-linked multiubiquitin chains 
N-terminal region: !critical for! Mcb1 function in vivo