['9502732', "Fruit morphogenesis is a process unique to flowering plants, and yet little is  known about its developmental control. Following fertilization, fruits typically  undergo a dramatic enlargement that is accompanied by differentiation of numerous  distinct cell types. We have identified a mutation in Arabidopsis called  fruitfull (ful-1), which abolishes elongation of the silique after fertilization.  The ful-1 mutation is caused by the insertion of a DsE transposable enhancer trap  element into the 5' untranslated leader of the AGL8 MADS-box gene.  beta-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene expression in the enhancer trap line is  observed specifically in all cell layers of the valve tissue, but not in the  replum, the septum or the seeds, and faithfully mimics RNA in situ hybridization  data reported previously. The lack of coordinated growth of the fruit tissues  leads to crowded seeds, a failure of dehiscence and, frequently, the premature  rupture of the carpel valves. The primary defect of ful-1 fruits is within the  valves, whose cells fail to elongate and differentiate. Stomata, which are  frequent along the epidermis of wild-type valves, are completely eliminated in  the ful mutant valves. In addition to the effect on fruit development, ful  cauline leaves are broader than those of wild type and show a reduction in the  number of internal cell layers. These data suggest that AGL8/FUL regulates the  transcription of genes required for cellular differentiation during fruit and  leaf development.", '1998 Apr', 'Development', '10.1242/dev.125.8.1509', 'Martienssen']

AGL8/FUL: !regulates! transcription of genes 
transcription of genes: !required for! cellular differentiation 
cellular differentiation: !during! fruit and leaf development 
DsE transposable enhancer trap element: !inserted into! 5' untranslated leader of AGL8 MADS-box gene 
beta-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene expression: !observed in! all cell layers of valve tissue 
ful-1 mutation: !causes! failure of elongation of silique after fertilization 
stomata: !frequent along! epidermis of wild-type valves 
stomata: !eliminated in! ful mutant valves 
ful cauline leaves: !broader than! wild type