['9653199', "5'-Adenylylsulfate (APS) reductase (EC 1.8.99.-) catalyzes the reduction of  activated sulfate to sulfite in plants. The evidence presented here shows that a  domain of the enzyme is a glutathione (GSH)-dependent reductase that functions  similarly to the redox cofactor glutaredoxin. The APR1 cDNA encoding APS  reductase from Arabidopsis thaliana is able to complement the cysteine auxotrophy  of an Escherichia coli cysH [3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS)  reductase] mutant, only if the E. coli strain produces glutathione. The purified  recombinant enzyme (APR1p) can use GSH efficiently as a hydrogen donor in vitro,  showing aKm[GSH] approximately of 0.6 mM. Gene dissection was used to express  separately the regions of APR1p from amino acids 73-327 (the R domain),  homologous with microbial PAPS reductase, and from amino acids 328-465 (the C  domain), homologous with thioredoxin. The R and C domains alone are inactive in  APS reduction, but the activity is partially restored by mixing the two domains.  The C domain shows a number of activities that are typical of E. coli  glutaredoxin rather than thioredoxin. Both the C domain and APR1p are highly  active in GSH-dependent reduction of hydroxyethyldisulfide, cystine, and  dehydroascorbate, showing a Km[GSH] in these assays of approximately 1 mM. The R  domain does not show these activities. The C domain is active in GSH-dependent  reduction of insulin disulfides and ribonucleotide reductase, whereas APR1p and R  domain are inactive. The C domain can substitute for glutaredoxin in vivo as  demonstrated by complementation of an E. coli mutant, underscoring the functional  similarity between the two enzymes.", '1998 Jul 7', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.95.14.8404', 'Leustek']

APS reductase: !catalyzes! reduction of activated sulfate to sulfite 
APR1 cDNA: !complements! cysteine auxotrophy of E. coli mutant 
APR1p: !uses! GSH efficiently as hydrogen donor 
R domain: !homologous with! microbial PAPS reductase 
C domain: !homologous with! thioredoxin 
R domain: !inactive in! APS reduction 
C domain: !partially restores! activity when mixed with R domain 
C domain: !shows activities! typical of E. coli glutaredoxin 
C domain: !highly active in! GSH-dependent reduction of hydroxyethyldisulfide, cystine, and dehydroascorbate 
R domain: !does not show! these activities 
C domain: !substitutes for! glutaredoxin in vivo