['9684354', "Seven new male-sterile mutants (ms7-ms13) of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh.  (ecotype columbia) are described that show a postmeiotic defect of microspore  development. In ms9 mutants, microspores recently released from the tetrad appear  irregular in shape and are often without exines. The earliest evidence of  abnormality in ms12 mutants is degeneration of microspores that lack normal exine  sculpturing, suggesting that the MS12 product is important in the formation of  pollen exine. Teratomes (abnormally enlarged microsporocytes) are also  occasionally present and each has a poorly developed exine. In ms7 mutant plants,  the tapetal cytoplasm disintegrates at the late vacuolate microspore stage,  apparently causing the degeneration of microspores and pollen grains. With ms8  mutants, the exine of the microspores appears similar to that of the wild type.  However, intine development appears impaired and pollen grains rupture prior to  maturity. In ms11 mutants, the first detectable abnormality appears at the mid to  late vacuolate stage. The absence of fluorescence in the microspores and tapetal  cells after staining with 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and the occasional  presence of teratomes indicate degradation of DNA. Viable pollen from ms10 mutant  plants is dehisced from anthers but appears to have surface abnormalities  affecting interaction with the stigma. Pollen only germinates in high-humidity  conditions or during in-vitro germination experiments. Mutant plants also have  bright-green stems, suggesting that ms10 belongs to the eceriferum (cer) class of  mutants. However, ms10 and cer6 are non-allelic. The ms13 mutant has a similar  phenotype to ms10, suggesting is also an eceriferum mutation. Each of these seven  mutants had a greater number of flowers than congenic male-fertile plants. The  non-allelic nature of these mutants and their different developmental end-points  indicate that seven different genes important for the later stages of pollen  development have been identified.", '1998 Aug', 'Planta', '10.1007/s004250050348', 'Chaudhury']

ms7: !disintegrates! tapetal cytoplasm 
ms8: !impairs! intine development 
ms9: !irregularizes! microspore shape 
ms10: !affects! interaction with stigma 
ms11: !degrades! DNA 
ms12: !important for! formation of pollen exine 
ms13: !similar to! ms10