['9707551', 'We report here that the inward-rectifying potassium channels KAT1 and AKT2 were  functionally expressed in K+ uptake-deficient Escherichia coli. Immunological  assays showed that KAT1 was translocated into the cell membrane of E. coli.  Functional assays suggested that KAT1 was inserted topologically correctly into  the cell membrane. In control experiments, the inactive point mutation in KAT1,  T256R, did not complement for K+ uptake in E. coli. The inward-rectifying K+  channels of plants share a common hydrophobic domain comprising at least six  membrane-spanning segments (S1-S6). The finding that a K+ channel can be  expressed in bacteria was further exploited to determine the KAT1 membrane  topology by a gene fusion approach using the bacterial reporter enzymes, alkaline  phosphatase, which is active only in the periplasm, and beta-galactosidase. The  enzyme activity from the alkaline phosphatase and beta-galactosidase fusion  plasmid showed that the widely predicted S1, S2, S5, and S6 segments were  inserted into the membrane. Although the S3 segment in the alkaline phosphatase  fusion protein could not function as an export signal, the replacement of a  negatively charged residue inside S3 with a neutral amino acid resulted in an  increase in alkaline phosphatase activity, which indicates that the alkaline  phosphatase was translocated into the periplasm. For membrane translocation of  S3, the neutralization of a negatively charged residue in S3 may be required  presumably because of pairing with a positively charged residue of S4. These  results revealed that KAT1 has the common six transmembrane-spanning membrane  topology that has been predicted for the Shaker superfamily of voltage-dependent  K+ channels. Furthermore, the functional complementation of a bacterial K+ uptake  mutant in this study is shown to be an alternative expression system for plant K+  channel proteins and a potent tool for their topological analysis.', '1998 Aug 18', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.95.17.9773', 'Muto']

KAT1: !translocated to! cell membrane 
KAT1: !topology determined by! gene fusion approach 
KAT1: !membrane topology! six transmembrane-spanning segments 
KAT1: !neutralization of! negatively charged residue in S3 
KAT1: !functional complementation of! bacterial K+ uptake mutant