['9707537', 'Plant growth is greatly affected by drought and low temperature. Expression of a  number of genes is induced by both drought and low temperature, although these  stresses are quite different. Previous experiments have established that a  cis-acting element named DRE (for dehydration-responsive element) plays an  important role in both dehydration- and low-temperature-induced gene expression  in Arabidopsis. Two cDNA clones that encode DRE binding proteins, DREB1A and  DREB2A, were isolated by using the yeast one-hybrid screening technique. The two  cDNA libraries were prepared from dehydrated and cold-treated rosette plants,  respectively. The deduced amino acid sequences of DREB1A and DREB2A showed no  significant sequence similarity, except in the conserved DNA binding domains  found in the EREBP and APETALA2 proteins that function in ethylene-responsive  expression and floral morphogenesis, respectively. Both the DREB1A and DREB2A  proteins specifically bound to the DRE sequence in vitro and activated the  transcription of the b-glucuronidase reporter gene driven by the DRE sequence in  Arabidopsis leaf protoplasts. Expression of the DREB1A gene and its two homologs  was induced by low-temperature stress, whereas expression of the DREB2A gene and  its single homolog was induced by dehydration. Overexpression of the DREB1A cDNA  in transgenic Arabidopsis plants not only induced strong expression of the target  genes under unstressed conditions but also caused dwarfed phenotypes in the  transgenic plants. These transgenic plants also revealed freezing and dehydration  tolerance. In contrast, overexpression of the DREB2A cDNA induced weak expression  of the target genes under unstressed conditions and caused growth retardation of  the transgenic plants. These results indicate that two independent families of  DREB proteins, DREB1 and DREB2, function as trans-acting factors in two separate  signal transduction pathways under low-temperature and dehydration conditions,  respectively.', '1998 Aug', 'Plant Cell', '10.1105/tpc.10.8.1391', 'Shinozaki']

DRE: !binds to! DREB1A/DREB2A 
DREB1A/DREB2A: !activates! b-glucuronidase reporter gene 
DREB1A/DREB2A: !induces! expression of target genes 
DREB1A: !induces! low-temperature stress 
DREB2A: !induces! dehydration 
DREB1A: !causes! freezing/dehydration tolerance 
DREB2A: !causes! growth retardation