['9712908', 'Pleckstrin homology (PH) domains are found in many proteins involved in signal  transduction, including the family of large molecular mass phosphatidylinositol  (PI) 4-kinases. Although the exact function of these newly discovered domains is  unknown, it is recognized that they may influence enzyme regulation by binding  different ligands. In this study, the recombinant PI 4-kinase PH domain was  explored for its ability to bind to different phospholipids. First, we isolated  partial cDNAs of the >7-kilobase transcripts of PI 4-kinases from carrot  (DcPI4Kalpha) and Arabidopsis (AtPI4Kalpha). The deduced primary sequences were  41% identical and 68% similar to rat and human PI 4-kinases and contained the  telltale lipid kinase unique domain, PH domain, and catalytic domain. Antibodies  raised against the expressed lipid kinase unique, PH, and catalytic domains  identified a polypeptide of 205 kDa in Arabidopsis microsomes and an  F-actin-enriched fraction from carrot cells. The 205-kDa immunoaffinity-purified  Arabidopsis protein had PI 4-kinase activity. We have used the expressed PH  domain to characterize lipid binding properties. The recombinant PH domain  selectively bound to phosphatidylinositol 4-monophosphate (PI-4-P),  phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI-4,5-P2), and phosphatidic acid and did  not bind to the 3-phosphoinositides. The PH domain had the highest affinity for  PI-4-P, the product of the reaction. Consideration is given to the potential  impact that this has on cytoskeletal organization and the PI signaling pathway in  cells that have a high PI-4-P/PI-4,5-P2 ratio.', '1998 Aug 28', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.273.35.22761', 'Boss']

Pleckstrin homology (PH) domain: !found in! signal transduction proteins 
PH domain: !binds to! phospholipids 
PH domain: !has highest affinity for! PI-4-P 
PI-4-P: !product of! reaction 
PH domain: !influences! enzyme regulation 
PI-4-P/PI-4,5-P2 ratio: !potential impact on! cytoskeletal organization and PI signaling pathway