['9758709', "The female gametophyte (embryo sac or megagametophyte) plays a critical role in  sexual reproduction of angiosperms. It is the structure that produces the egg  cell and central cell which, following fertilization, give rise to the seed's  embryo and endosperm, respectively. In addition, the female gametophyte mediates  a host of reproductive processes including pollen tube guidance, fertilization,  and the induction of seed development. Several major events occur during  megagametogenesis, including syncitial nuclear divisions, cellularization,  nuclear migration and fusion, and cell death. While these events have been  described morphologically, the molecules regulating them in the female  gametophyte are largely unknown. We discuss a genetic screen based on reduced  seed set and segregation distortion to identify mutations affecting  megagametogenesis and female gametophyte function. We report on the isolation of  four mutants (fem1, fem2, fem3, and fem4) and show that the four mutations map to  different locations within the genome. Additionally, we show that the fem1 and  fem2 mutations affect only the female gametophyte, while the fem3 and fem4  mutations affect both the female and male gametophyte. We analyzed female  gametophyte development in these four mutants as well as in the gfa2, gfa3, gfa4,  gfa5, and gfa7 mutants. We found that the fem2, fem3, gfa4, and gfa5 mutants  abort development at the one-nucleate stage, while the fem1, fem4, gfa2, gfa3,  and gfa7 mutants are affected in processes later in development such as polar  nuclei fusion and cellularization. The establishment of a genetic screen to  identify mutants and the development of a rapid procedure for analyzing mutant  phenotypes represent a first step in the isolation of molecules that regulate  female gametophyte development and function.", '1998 Oct 1', 'Dev Biol', '10.1006/dbio.1998.8980', 'Drews']

female gametophyte: !produces! egg cell and central cell 
fem1, fem2, fem3, fem4 mutations: !map to! different locations in genome 
fem1, fem2 mutations: !affect! female gametophyte 
fem3, fem4 mutations: !affect! both female and male gametophyte 
fem2, fem3, gfa4, gfa5 mutants: !abort development at! one-nucleate stage 
fem1, fem4, gfa2, gfa3, gfa7 mutants: !affected in! processes later in development