['9778849', 'The analysis of allene oxide synthase (AOS) mRNA levels, of AOS polypeptide  levels and specific enzymatic activities, as well as the quantitative  determination of the levels of the octadecanoids cis-12-oxophytodienoic acid  (cis-OPDA) and JA following a number of treatments, has shown that AOS is a  regulatory site in octadecanoid biosynthesis in A. thaliana. AOS activity, mRNA  and polypeptide levels are increased in wounded leaves locally and systemically.  The methyl esters of OPDA or JA (OPDAME, JAME) and coronatine, are strong  inducers of AOS mRNA, polypeptide and enzymatic activity. Ethephon also induces  AOS activity. Salicylic acid (SA) was an inducer of AOS activity while abscisic  acid (ABA) had no effect. At the level of the octadecanoids, the consequences of  induction of AOS by the different inducers were distinctly different, depending  on the nature of the inducer. Wounding led to a strong, bi-phasic accumulation of  JA in wounded leaves and to a less pronounced increase in JA-levels in systemic  leaves. Levels of OPDA changed very little in wounded leaves and remained  constant or even declined in systemic leaves. Ethephon treatment resulted in a  strong, transient increase in JA-levels kinetically coinciding with the second,  more pronounced peak in wound-induced JA. In SA-treated leaves, the level of  cis-OPDA increased throughout the experimental period while there was no effect  on JA levels during the first 24 h following treatment and only a slight  accumulation after 48 h. Clearly, mechanisms in addition to regulating substrate  (LA) availability and the regulation of AOS accumulation control the output of  the octadecanoid pathway.', '1998 Sep', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.1998.00245.x', 'Weiler']

AOS: !affects! octadecanoid biosynthesis 
wounding: !induces! AOS activity 
Ethephon: !induces! AOS activity 
Salicylic acid: !induces! AOS activity 
ABA: !has no effect on! AOS activity 
wounding: !increases! JA levels 
Ethephon: !increases! JA levels 
Salicylic acid: !increases! cis-OPDA levels