['9808724', 'We searched for new components that are involved in the positive regulation of  nuclear gene expression by light by extending a screen for Arabidopsis cue  (chlorophyll a/b-binding [CAB] protein-underexpressed) mutants (H.-M. Li, K.  Culligan, R.A. Dixon, J. Chory [1995] Plant Cell 7: 1599-1610). cue mutants  display reduced expression of the CAB3 gene, which encodes light-harvesting  chlorophyll protein, the main chloroplast antenna. The new mutants can be divided  into (a) phytochrome-deficient mutants (hy1 and phyB), (b) virescent or  delayed-greening mutants (cue3, cue6, and cue8), and (c) uniformly pale mutants  (cue4 and cue9). For each of the mutants, the reduction in CAB expression  correlates with the visible phenotype, defective chloroplast development, and  reduced abundance of the light-harvesting chlorophyll protein. Levels of  protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (POR) were reduced to varying degrees in  etiolated mutant seedlings. In the dark, whereas the virescent mutants displayed  reduced CAB expression and the lowest levels of POR protein, the other mutants  expressed CAB and accumulated POR at near wild-type levels. All of the mutants,  with the exception of cue6, were compromised in their ability to derepress CAB  expression in response to phytochrome activation. Based on these results, we  propose that the previously postulated plastid-derived signal is closely involved  in the pathway through which phytochrome regulates the expression of nuclear  genes encoding plastid proteins.', '1998 Nov', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.118.3.803', 'Chory']

cue mutants: !display reduced expression of! CAB3 gene 
phytochrome-deficient mutants: !have reduced levels of! POR protein 
virescent mutants: !have lowest levels of! POR protein 
uniformly pale mutants: !express CAB and accumulate! POR at near wild-type levels 
all mutants: !are compromised in their ability to derepress! CAB expression 
plastid-derived signal: !is closely involved in the pathway through which! phytochrome regulates nuclear gene expression