['9811909', 'PII is a protein allosteric effector in Escherichia coli and other bacteria that  indirectly regulates glutamine synthetase at the transcriptional and  post-translational levels in response to nitrogen availability. Data supporting  the notion that plants have a nitrogen regulatory system(s) includes previous  studies showing that the levels of mRNA for plant nitrogen assimilatory genes  such as glutamine synthetase (GLN) and asparagine synthetase (ASN) are modulated  by carbon and organic nitrogen metabolites. Here, we have characterized a PII  homolog (GLB1) in two higher plants, Arabidopsis thaliana and Ricinus communis  (Castor bean). Each plant PII-like protein has high overall identity to E. coli  PII (50%). Western blot analyses reveal that the plant PII-like protein is a  nuclear-encoded chloroplast protein. The PII-like protein of plants appears to be  regulated at the transcriptional level in that levels of GLB1 mRNA are affected  by light and metabolites. To initiate studies of the in vivo function of the  Arabidopsis PII-like protein, we have constructed transgenic lines in which PII  expression is uncoupled from its native regulation. Analyses of these transgenic  plants support the notion that the plant PII-like protein may serve as part of a  complex signal transduction network involved in perceiving the status of carbon  and organic nitrogen. Thus, the PII protein found in archaea, bacteria, and now  in higher eukaryotes (plants) is one of the most widespread regulatory proteins  known, providing evidence for an ancestral metabolic regulatory mechanism that  may have existed before the divergence of these three domains of life.', '1998 Nov 10', 'Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A', '10.1073/pnas.95.23.13965', 'Coruzzi']

PII: !indirectly regulates! glutamine synthetase 
GLB1: !localizes to! chloroplast 
Light/metabolites: !affects! GLB1 mRNA levels 
Arabidopsis PII-like protein: !serves as part of! signal transduction network 
PII: !exists in! archaea, bacteria, higher eukaryotes