['9862498', 'The yeast C-8,7 sterol isomerase contains a polyvalent high-affinity drug binding  site similar to mammalian sigma receptors. Exogenously supplied sigma ligands  inhibit sterol biosynthesis in yeast, demonstrating a pharmacological  relationship between sigma ligand-binding and C-8,7 sterol isomerase activity. We  report the isolation of an Arabidopsis thaliana C-8,7 sterol isomerase by  functional complementation of the corresponding sterol mutant in yeast and its  characterization by exposure to sigma ligands. The yeast erg2 mutant, which lacks  the C-8,7 sterol isomerase gene and activity, was transformed with an Arabidopsis  cDNA yeast expression library. Transformed colonies were selected for restoration  of C-8,7 sterol isomerase activity (i.e. wild-type ergosterol production) by  enhanced resistance to the antibiotic cycloheximide. Sterols produced in  complemented lines were characterized by gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy  (GC-MS). The full-length A. thaliana cDNA (pA.t.SI1) that complemented the erg2  mutation contains an open reading frame encoding a 21 kDa protein that shares 68%  similarity and 35% amino acid identity to the recently isolated mouse C-8,7  sterol isomerase. The sigma ligands, haloperidol, ifenprodil and verapamil  inhibited the production of ergosterol in wild-type Saccharomyces cerevisiae and  in the erg2 mutant complemented with pA.t.SI1. Structural and biochemical  similarities between the A. thaliana C-8,7 sterol isomerase and the mammalian  emopamil-binding protein (EBP) are discussed.', '1998 Nov', 'Plant Mol Biol', '10.1023/a:1006028623875', 'Della']

C-8,7 sterol isomerase: !inhibits! sterol biosynthesis 
sigma ligands: !inhibit! C-8,7 sterol isomerase activity 
Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA: !complements! erg2 mutation 
pA.t.SI1: !encodes! 21 kDa protein 
haloperidol, ifenprodil, verapamil: !inhibit! ergosterol production 
A. thaliana C-8,7 sterol isomerase: !shares similarity with! mammalian emopamil-binding protein