['9874227', 'Holocarboxylase synthetases (HCSs) are key enzymes in biotin utilisation in both  prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In a previous study, we demonstrated that, in plants,  HCS activity is localised in cytosol, chloroplasts and mitochondria. We also  described the cloning and sequencing of a full-length cDNA encoding an  Arabidopsis thaliana HCS isoform with a putative organelle-transit peptide. In  the study reported here, this cDNA was used to construct an overproducing  Escherichia coli strain. The recombinant enzyme was isolated using an efficient  three-step purification procedure. Polyclonal antibodies raised against pure HCS  were produced to elucidate the subcellular localisation of this protein.  Immunodetection carried out by Western blotting of isolated pea leaf subcellular  compartments specifically revealed a single polypeptide that was ascribed to the  chloroplast compartment. Immunocytochemistry of thin-cut sections from tobacco  leaves, transformed by the complete coding sequence of A. thaliana HCS cDNA via  Agrobacterium tumefaciens, confirmed that the enzyme encoded by this cDNA is the  chloroplastic isoform. Moreover, physicochemical, biochemical and kinetic  properties of the pure recombinant HCS were determined. The native recombinant  enzyme is a 37-kDa monomer. In contrast to the major part of HCS activity  measured in leaf extracts, the recombinant chloroplastic enzyme did not require  addition of Mg2+ to be fully active, but was substantially inhibited by EDTA.  This suggested that the chloroplastic HCS may contain a tightly-bound divalent  cation required for enzyme activity. The recombinant enzyme was able to  biotinylate efficiently apo-biotin carboxyl carrier protein (BCCP) from E. coli  and apo-methylcrotonoyl-CoA carboxylase (MCCase) from A. thaliana. Apparent Km  values for the enzyme substrates D-biotin, ATP and apo-MCCase were found to be  130 nM, 4.4 microM and 32 microM, respectively. Steady-state kinetic analyses of  the HCS-catalysed reaction were investigated with respect to reaction mechanism  and inhibition by AMP, one of the end-products of the enzyme-catalysed reaction.  Substrate interaction and product inhibition patterns indicated that ATP and  D-biotin bind sequentially, in an ordered manner, to the enzyme and that ATP or  D-biotin and apo-BCCP bind in ping-pong fashion.', '1998 Dec 1', 'Eur J Biochem', '10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2580586.x', 'Alban']

HCS: !localizes to! chloroplasts 
HCS: !synthesizes! BCCP 
HCS: !synthesizes! MCCase 
HCS: !interacts with! ATP 
HCS: !interacts with! D-biotin 
HCS: !enhances! enzyme activity 
HCS: !represses! EDTA