['9874205', 'The SEC14 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae codes for a  phosphatidylinositol-transfer protein (Sec14p(sc)) which is capable of  transferring both phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylcholine between membranes  in vitro. Genetic and biochemical studies conducted in S. cerevisiae have shown  that this protein acts as an inhibitor of phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis via  the so-called Kennedy pathway only. This inhibition is controlled by the binding  of phospholipids to the Sec14p(sc) protein. Here we describe the isolation of a  cDNA from Arabidopsis thaliana by functional complementation of a sec14(ts)  mutant of S. cerevisiae. This cDNA, designated AtSEC14, is capable of restoring  the growth of the sec14(ts) mutant at the restrictive temperature of 37 degrees  C. Extracellular invertase measurements indicated that the cDNA can partly  restore protein secretion. In addition, the phosphatidylinositol-transfer  activity measured in protein extracts is greatly enhanced in the complemented  mutant strain when compared with the sec14(ts) mutant. The best sequence  similarity at the amino acid level is found with the Sec14p protein of S.  cerevisiae (36.5% similarity), and most of the amino acids that are thought to be  involved in the binding of phospholipids in the yeast protein are conserved in  the AtSEC14 gene product. Southern analysis suggests the presence of a single  gene in the Arabidopsis genome, although the existence of distantly related  sequences cannot be excluded. This gene is expressed in roots, leaves, flowers  and siliques of Arabidopsis.', '1998 Dec 1', 'Eur J Biochem', '10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2580402.x', 'Arondel']

SEC14 gene: !codes for! phosphatidylinositol-transfer protein 
phosphatidylinositol-transfer protein: !transfers! phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylcholine 
phosphatidylinositol-transfer protein: !inhibits! phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis 
phospholipids: !bind to! phosphatidylinositol-transfer protein 
AtSEC14 cDNA: !restores! growth of sec14(ts) mutant 
AtSEC14 cDNA: !partly restores! protein secretion 
AtSEC14 cDNA: !enhances! phosphatidylinositol-transfer activity 
AtSEC14 gene product: !similar to! Sec14p protein of S. cerevisiae 
AtSEC14 gene: !expressed in! roots, leaves, flowers and siliques of Arabidopsis