['9881161', 'Phytochrome A (PhyA) mediates most, if not all, various plant responses to  far-red (FR) light. Here, we report a novel genetic mutation that impairs a  variety of responses in the PhyA-signaling pathway of Arabidopsis thaliana. The  mutation was isolated by screening seedlings that show reduced sensitivity to  continuous far-red (FRc) light irradiation, but not to continuous red (Rc) light  irradiation. The mutation named fin2-1 is not allelic to a PHYA mutation.  Furthermore, immunoblot analysis indicated that the amount of the phytochrome A  apoprotein in the fin2-1 mutant was comparable to that in wild type. Seedling of  the fin2-1 mutant showed defects in hypocotyl growth inhibition and apical hook  and cotyledon opening in FRc light but not in Rc light. The results showed that  the mutation occurred in a downstream signaling component potentially specific to  PhyA. Other PhyA-mediated responses such as FR-preconditioned blocking of  greening, anthocyanin accumulation, reduction of gravitropic response, and  expression of the CAB and CHS genes were impaired by the fin2-1 mutation: the  degree of the mutant effect on the responses was variable. However, FR  light-mediated seed germination and photoperiodic flowering responses were not  affected significantly in the mutant. These results showed that FIN2 defines an  upstream branch point in the PhyA signaling pathway.', '1998 Nov', 'Plant J', '10.1046/j.1365-313x.1998.00307.x', 'Nam']

PhyA: !mediates! Plant responses 
fin2-1: !impairs! PhyA-signaling pathway 
fin2-1: !not allelic to! PHYA mutation 
fin2-1: !affects! Hypocotyl growth inhibition 
fin2-1: !affects! Apical hook and cotyledon opening 
fin2-1: !affects! FR-preconditioned blocking of greening 
fin2-1: !affects! Anthocyanin accumulation 
fin2-1: !affects! Reduction of gravitropic response 
fin2-1: !affects! Expression of CAB and CHS genes 
fin2-1: !does not affect! Seed germination 
fin2-1: !does not affect! Photoperiodic flowering responses 
FIN2: !defines! Upstream branch point in PhyA signaling pathway