['9933598', 'The nuclear psbY gene (formerly ycf32) encodes two distinct single-spanning  chloroplast thylakoid membrane proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana. After import  into the chloroplast, the precursor protein is processed to a polyprotein in  which each "mature" protein is preceded by an additional hydrophobic region; we  show that these regions function as signal peptides that are cleaved after  insertion into the thylakoid membrane. Inhibition of the first or second signal  cleavage reaction by enlargement of the -1 residues leads in each case to the  accumulation of a thylakoid-integrated intermediate containing three hydrophobic  regions after import into chloroplasts; a double mutant is converted to a protein  containing all four hydrophobic regions. We propose that the overall insertion  process involves (i) insertion as a double-loop structure, (ii) two cleavages by  the thylakoidal processing peptidase on the lumenal face of the membrane, and  (iii) cleavage by an unknown peptidase on the stromal face on the membrane  between the first mature protein and the second signal peptide. We also show that  this polyprotein can insert into the thylakoid membrane in the absence of stromal  factors, nucleoside triphosphates, or a functional Sec apparatus; this  effectively shows for the first time that a multispanning protein can insert  posttranslationally without the aid of signal recognition particle, SecA, or the  membrane-bound Sec machinery.', '1999 Feb 12', 'J Biol Chem', '10.1074/jbc.274.7.4059', 'Mant']

psbY gene: !encodes! two distinct single-spanning chloroplast thylakoid membrane proteins 
precursor protein: !processed to! polyprotein 
hydrophobic regions: !function as! signal peptides 
signal cleavage reaction: !inhibited by! enlargement of -1 residues 
insertion process: !involves! insertion as double-loop structure 
thylakoidal processing peptidase: !cleaves! lumenal face of membrane 
unknown peptidase: !cleaves! stromal face of membrane 
multispanning protein: !inserts posttranslationally without aid of! signal recognition particle, SecA, or membrane-bound Sec machinery