['9952448', 'The Arabidopsis mutants eto1 (ethylene overproducer) and eto3 produce elevated  levels of ethylene as etiolated seedlings. Ethylene production in these seedlings  peaks at 60 to 96 h, and then declines back to almost wild-type levels. Ethylene  overproduction in eto1 and eto3 is limited mainly to etiolated seedlings;  light-grown seedlings and various adult tissues produce close to wild-type  amounts of ethylene. Several compounds that induce ethylene biosynthesis in  wild-type, etiolated seedlings through distinct 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic  acid (ACC) synthase (ACS) isoforms were found to act synergistically with eto1  and eto3, as did the ethylene-insensitive mutation etr1 (ethylene resistant),  which blocks feedback inhibition of biosynthesis. ACS activity, the rate-limiting  step of ethylene biosynthesis, was highly elevated in both eto1 and eto3 mutant  seedlings, even though RNA gel-blot analysis demonstrated that the steady-state  level of ACS mRNA was not increased, including that of a novel Arabidopsis ACS  gene that was identified. Measurements of the conversion of ACC to ethylene by  intact seedlings indicated that the mutations did not affect conjugation of ACC  or the activity of ACC oxidase, the final step of ethylene biosynthesis. Taken  together, these data suggest that the eto1 and eto3 mutations elevate ethylene  biosynthesis by affecting the posttranscriptional regulation of ACS.', '1999 Feb', 'Plant Physiol', '10.1104/pp.119.2.521', 'Kieber']

eto1: !elevates! ethylene biosynthesis 
eto3: !elevates! ethylene biosynthesis 
etiolated seedlings: !produce! elevated levels of ethylene 
light-grown seedlings: !produce! close to wild-type amounts of ethylene 
compounds: !induce! ethylene biosynthesis 
etr1: !blocks! feedback inhibition of biosynthesis 
ACS activity: !highly elevated in! eto1 and eto3 mutants 
ACS mRNA: !not increased in! eto1 and eto3 mutants 
Arabidopsis ACS gene: !identified! 
ACC: !converted to! ethylene by intact seedlings 
ACC oxidase: !activity not affected by! mutations